This article is about the genus. For other uses, see Pig (disambiguation).


Pig
Temporal range: Early Pleistocene to recent





Bornean bearded pig at the London Zoo.


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Animalia


Phylum:
Chordata


Class:
Mammalia


Order:
Artiodactyla


Family:
Suidae


Subfamily:
Suinae


Genus:
Sus
Linnaeus, 1758


Species




See text




A pig is any of the animals in the genus Sus, within the even-toed ungulate family Suidae. Pigs include the domestic pig and its ancestor, the common Eurasian wild boar (Sus scrofa), along with other species; related creatures outside the genus include the peccary, the babirusa, and the warthog. Pigs, like all suids, are native to the Eurasian and African continents. Juvenile pigs are known as piglets.[1] Pigs are highly social and intelligent animals.[2]
With around 1 billion individuals alive at any time, the domestic pig is among the most populous large mammals in the world.[3][4] Pigs are omnivores and can consume a wide range of food.[5] Biologically, pigs are very similar to humans, thus frequently used for human medical research.[6]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Description and behaviour
3 Distribution and evolution
4 Habitat and reproduction
5 Diet and foraging
6 Relationship with humans
7 Species
8 Domestic pigs
9 Cultural and religious reference to pigs

9.1 In folklore, folkways, and mythology
9.2 In religion


10 Environmental impacts
11 Health issues
12 Use in human health care
13 See also
14 References
15 External links



Etymology
The Online Etymology Dictionary provides anecdotal evidence as well as linguistic, saying that the term derives

probably from Old English *picg, found in compounds, ultimate origin unknown. Originally "young pig" (the word for adults was swine). Apparently related to Low German bigge, Dutch big ("but the phonology is difficult" -- OED). ... Another Old English word for "pig" was fearh, related to furh "furrow," from PIE *perk- "dig, furrow" (source also of Latin porc-us "pig," see pork). "This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical attributes or activities" [Roger Lass]. Synonyms grunter, oinker are from sailors' and fishermen's euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of the Gadarene swine, who drowned.[7]

The Online Etymology Dictionary also traces the evolution of sow, the term for a female pig, through various historical languages:

Old English sugu, su "female of the swine," from Proto-Germanic *su- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German su, German Sau, Dutch zeug, Old Norse syr), from PIE root *su- (cognates: Sanskrit sukarah "wild boar, swine;" Avestan hu "wild boar;" Greek hys "swine;" Latin sus "swine", suinus "pertaining to swine"; Old Church Slavonic svinija "swine;" Lettish sivens "young pig;" Welsh hucc, Irish suig "swine; Old Irish socc "snout, plowshare"), possibly imitative of pig noise; note that Sanskrit sukharah means "maker of (the sound) su.[7]

It is entirely likely that the word to call pigs, "soo-ie," is similarly derived.
Description and behaviour




Skull of domestic pig.
(Sus scrofa domesticus).


A typical pig has a large head with a long snout that is strengthened by a special prenasal bone and by a disk of cartilage at the tip.[8] The snout is used to dig into the soil to find food and is a very acute sense organ. There are four hoofed toes on each foot, with the two larger central toes bearing most of the weight, but the outer two also being used in soft ground.[9]
The dental formula of adult pigs is 3.1.4.33.1.4.3, giving a total of 44 teeth. The rear teeth are adapted for crushing. In the male, the canine teeth form tusks, which grow continuously and are sharpened by constantly being ground against each other.[8]
Occasionally, captive mother pigs may savage their own piglets, often if they become severely stressed.[10] Some attacks on newborn piglets are non-fatal. Others may cause the death of the piglets and sometimes, the mother may eat the piglets. It is estimated that 50% of piglet fatalities are due to the mother attacking, or unintentionally crushing, the newborn pre-weaned animals.[11]
Distribution and evolution














With around 1 billion individuals alive at any time, the domestic pig is one of the most numerous large mammals on the planet.[3][4]
The ancestor of the domestic pig is the wild boar, which is one of the most numerous and widespread large mammals. Its many subspecies are native to all but the harshest climates of continental Eurasia and its islands and Africa as well, from Ireland and India to Japan and north to Siberia.
Long isolated from other pigs on the many islands of Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines, pigs have evolved into many different species, including wild boar, bearded pigs, and warty pigs. Humans have introduced pigs into Australia, North and South America, and numerous islands, either accidentally as escaped domestic pigs which have gone feral, or as wild boar.
Habitat and reproduction
The wild pig (Sus scrofa) can take advantage of any forage resources. Therefore, it can live in virtually any productive habitat that can provide enough water to sustain large mammals such as pigs. If there is increased foraging of wild pigs in certain areas, it can cause a nutritional shortage which can cause the pig population to decrease. If the nutritional state returns to normal, the pig population will most likely rise due to the pigs' naturally increased reproduction rate.[12]
Diet and foraging
Pigs are omnivores, which means that they consume both plants and animals. In the wild, they are foraging animals, primarily eating leaves, roots, fruits, and flowers, in addition to some insects and fish. As livestock, pigs are fed mostly corn and soybean meal[13] with a mixture of vitamins and minerals added to the diet. Traditionally, they were raised on dairy farms and called "mortgage lifters", due to their ability to use the excess milk as well as whey from cheese and butter making combined with pasture.[14] Older pigs will consume three to five gallons of water per day.[15] When kept as pets, the optimal healthy diet consists mainly of a balanced diet of raw vegetables, although some handlers may give their pigs conventional mini pig pellet feed.[16]
Relationship with humans




A pig trained to find truffles.


Domesticated pigs, especially miniature breeds, are commonly kept as pets,[17] and are known to be one of the most intelligent domesticated animal species in the world.[18] Domestic pigs are raised commercially as livestock; materials that are garnered include their meat (known as pork), leather, and their bristly hairs which are used to make brushes. Because of their foraging abilities and excellent sense of smell, they are used to find truffles in many European countries. Both wild and feral pigs are commonly hunted.
The relatively short, stiff, coarse hairs of the pig are called bristles, and were once so commonly used in paintbrushes that in 1946 the Australian Government launched Operation Pig Bristle. In May 1946, in response to a shortage of pig bristles for paintbrushes to paint houses in the post-World War II construction boom, the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) flew in 28 short tons of pig bristles from China, their only commercially available source at the time.[19]
Species









Pig 'oink'





Oink!






Problems playing this file? See media help.






Bearded pigs (Sus barbatus)






Skeleton of foot.


The genus Sus is currently thought to contain ten living species. A number of extinct species (†) are known from fossils.

Sus ahoenobarbus Huet, 1888 – Palawan bearded pig
†Sus australis Han, 1987 – Early Pleistocene of China
Sus barbatus Müller, 1838 – Bornean bearded pig
†Sus bijiashanensis Han et al., 1975 – Early Pleistocene of China
Sus bucculentus Heude, 1892 – Heude's pig or Indo-Chinese (or Vietnam) warty pig
Sus cebifrons Heude, 1888 – Visayan warty pig
Sus celebensis Müller & Schlegel, 1843 – Celebes warty pig or Sulawesi warty pig
†Sus falconeri – Pleistocene of the Siwalik region, India
†Sus houi Qi et al., 1999 – Pleistocene of China
†Sus hysudricus
†Sus jiaoshanensis Zhao, 1980 – Early Pleistocene of China
†Sus liuchengensis Han, 1987 – Early Pleistocene of China
†Sus lydekkeri Zdansky, 1928 – Pleistocene of China
†Sus offecinalis Koenigswald, 1933 – China
Sus oliveri Groves, 1997 – Oliver's warty pig or Mindoro warty pig
†Sus peii Han, 1987 – Early Pleistocene of China
Sus philippensis Nehring, 1886 – Philippine warty pig
Sus scrofa – Wild boar Linnaeus, 1758

Sus scrofa domestica Erxleben, 1777 – Domestic pig (sometimes treated as a full species)


†Sus subtriquetra Xue, 1981
†Sus strozzi
Sus verrucosus Boie, 1832 – Javan warty pig
†Sus xiaozhu Han et al., 1975 – Early Pleistocene of China

The pygmy hog, formerly Sus salvanius is now placed in the monotypic genus Porcula.[20]
Domestic pigs




Swedish pig farmer with piglet. Early 20th century






Green glazed toilet with pigsty model. China, Eastern Han dynasty 25–220 CE


Main article: Domestic pig
Pigs have been domesticated since ancient times in the Old World. Archaeological evidence suggests that pigs were being managed in the wild in a way similar to the way they are managed by some modern New Guineans from wild boar as early as 13,000–12,700 BP in the Near East in the Tigris Basin,[21] Çayönü, Cafer Höyük, Nevalı Çori.[22] Remains of pigs have been dated to earlier than 11,400 BP in Cyprus that must have been introduced from the mainland which suggests domestication in the adjacent mainland by then.[23] A separate domestication also occurred in China.[24]
In India, pigs have been domesticated for a long time mostly in Goa and some rural areas for pig toilets. This was also done in China. Though ecologically logical as well as economical, pig toilets are waning in popularity as use of septic tanks and/or sewerage systems is increasing in rural areas.
Pigs were brought to southeastern North America from Europe by Hernando de Soto and other early Spanish explorers. Pigs are particularly valued in China and on certain oceanic islands, where their self-sufficiency allows them to be turned loose, although the practice is not without its drawbacks (see environmental impact).
The domestic pig (Sus scrofa domesticus) is usually given the scientific name Sus scrofa, although some authors call it S. domesticus, reserving S. scrofa for the wild boar. It was domesticated approximately 5,000 to 7,000 years ago. Their coats are coarse and bristly. They are born brownish coloured and tend to turn more grayish coloured with age. The upper canines form sharp distinctive tusks that curve outward and upward. Compared to other artiodactyles, their head is relatively long, pointed, and free of warts. Their head and body length ranges from 0.9 to 1.8 m (35 to 71 in) and they can weigh between 50 and 350 kg (110 and 770 lb).
In November 2012, scientists managed to sequence the genome of the domestic pig. The similarities between the pig and human genomes mean that the new data may have wide applications in the study and treatment of human genetic diseases.[25][26]
In August 2015, a study looked at over 100 pig genome sequences to ascertain their process of domestication. The process of domestication was assumed to have been initiated by humans, involved few individuals and relied on reproductive isolation between wild and domestic forms. The study found that the assumption of reproductive isolation with population bottlenecks was not supported. The study indicated that pigs were domesticated separately in Western Asia and China, with Western Asian pigs introduced into Europe where they crossed with wild boar. A model that fitted the data included admixture with a now extinct ghost population of wild pigs during the Pleistocene. The study also found that despite back-crossing with wild pigs, the genomes of domestic pigs have strong signatures of selection at DNA loci that affect behavior and morphology. The study concluded that human selection for domestic traits likely counteracted the homogenizing effect of gene flow from wild boars and created domestication islands in the genome. The same process may also apply to other domesticated animals.[27] [28]
Domestic pigs are highly intelligent.[29][30] Recently, they have enjoyed a measure of popularity as house pets, particularly the dwarf breeds.
Cultural and religious reference to pigs
See also: Pigs in popular culture
Pigs appear in the traditional and popular arts, media, and cultures of many societies, where they sometimes carry religious symbolism. In Asia the wild boar is one of 12 animal images comprising the Chinese zodiac, while in Europe the boar represents a standard charge in heraldry. In Islam and Judaism pigs and those who handle them are viewed negatively, and the consumption of pork is forbidden. Pigs are frequently alluded to in folk art, idioms, metaphors, and proverbs, and also occasionally in parables (e.g. Parable of the Prodigal Son).
In folklore, folkways, and mythology




Pig at a German new year event, 1965.








This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




In European folklore, there is a widespread belief that pigs are intensely frightened by mirrors.[citation needed]
In many European countries, a feast has formed around slaughtering a pig.
In Germany, pigs are known as a symbol for good luck. Marzipan pigs are a popular confectionery, especially as a gift on New Year's Eve.
Superstitious sailors consider pigs to be unlucky because they have cloven hooves like the Devil and are terrified of water.[31] Pigs would not be carried on boats. Fishermen once regarded pigs as harbingers of bad luck: a fisherman seeing a pig on his way to work would rather turn round and go home. This even extended to a prohibition of the word "pig" on board a vessel. This is why the animals were referred to, across North East England, as "gissies".

In religion

In ancient Egypt, pigs were associated with Set, the rival to the sun god Horus. When Set fell into disfavor with the Egyptians, swineherds were forbidden to enter temples. According to Herodotus, swineherds were a kind of separate sect or caste, which only married among themselves. Egyptians regarded pigs as unworthy sacrifices to their gods other than the Moon and Dionysus, to whom pigs were offered on the day of the full Moon. Herodotus states that, though he knew the reason why Egyptians abominated swine at their other feasts but they sacrificed them at this one; however, it was to him "not a seemly one for me to tell".[32]
In ancient Greece, a sow was an appropriate sacrifice to Demeter and had been her favorite animal since archaic times. Initiates at the Eleusinian Mysteries began by sacrificing a pig. Pig were also sacrificed to Aphrodite.
The ancient Romans practiced a sacrifice called the suovetaurilia, in which a pig, a ram, and a bull were sacrificed, as one of the most solemn acts of the Roman religion.
In Buddhism the deity Marici is often depicted riding in a carriage hauled by several pigs.
The Celts had a god of swine called Moccus, who under Roman occupation was identified with Mercury. In Celtic mythology, a cauldron overflowing with cooked pork was one of the attributes of The Dagda.
In the Chinese zodiac, the Pig is one of the 12-year cycle of animals. Believers in Chinese astrology associate each animal with certain personality traits (see: Pig (zodiac)).
In Christianity the book of Mark, in an event referred to as the exorcism of the Gerasene demoniac Jesus casts the demons Legion (demon) possessing a swine herder from Gerasene; into 2000 of the swine herders pigs.[33]
In Haitian Vodou, Ezili Dantor, the lwa of motherhood, is associated with the black Creole Pig of Haiti, her favorite animal sacrifice.
In Hinduism the god Vishnu took the form of a four-armed humanoid with the head of a boar named Varaha in order to save the Earth from a demon who had dragged it to the bottom of the sea.
In Islam the eating of pork is also sinful (see Haraam). The Qur'an prohibits the consumption of pork in no less than 4 different places. It is prohibited in 2:173, 5:3, 6:145 and 16:115. "Forbidden to you (for food) are: dead meat, blood, the flesh of swine, and that on which hath been invoked the name of other than Allah." [Al-Qur'an 5:3] Islam treats pigs as inedible animals par excellence, the animal that is central to the concepts of haram.
The dietary laws of Judaism (Kashrut) forbid, among other kinds of meat, the eating of pork in any form, considering the pig to be an unclean animal as food (see taboo food and drink). Pork is as forbidden as the meat of any other unclean animal, but probably due to extensive use of pork in modern days, abhorrence of pork is far stronger and emotional in traditional Jewish culture than that of other forbidden foods. Many Ancient Jews also held the prohibition on pigs above other taboos. In De Specialibus Legibus, Philo of Alexandria, a first-century Jewish writer, relates that pigs were lazy scavengers, the embodiment of vice. Philo also argued that since pigs will eat the flesh of human corpses, that men should abstain from eating them so as not to be contaminated.[34]
In Nordic Mythology, "Gold-Bristle" or "Gold-Mane" was Freyr's golden boar, created by the dwarves Brokk and Sindri as part of a challenge. His shining fur is said to fill the sky, trees, and sea with light.
Among Seventh-day Adventists and some other denominations[who?], the eating of pork is prohibited. Most Christians believe that the eating of pork is not prohibited, according to the teachings of the New Testament. In Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and other, older Christian groups, pigs are associated with Saint Anthony the Great, who is known as the patron saint of swineherds.

Environmental impacts
Domestic pigs that have escaped from urban areas or were allowed to forage in the wild, and in some cases wild boars which were introduced as prey for hunting, have given rise to large populations of feral pigs in North and South America, Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, and other areas where pigs are not native. Accidental or deliberate releases of pigs into countries or environments where they are an alien species have caused extensive environmental change. Their omnivorous diet, aggressive behaviour, and their feeding method of rooting in the ground all combine to severely alter ecosystems unused to pigs. Pigs will even eat small animals and destroy nests of ground nesting birds.[8] The Invasive Species Specialist Group lists feral pigs on the list of the world's 100 worst invasive species and says:[35]




Feral pigs (razorbacks) in Florida



Feral pigs like other introduced mammals are major drivers of extinction and ecosystem change. They have been introduced into many parts of the world, and will damage crops and home gardens as well as potentially spreading disease. They uproot large areas of land, eliminating native vegetation and spreading weeds. This results in habitat alteration, a change in plant succession and composition and a decrease in native fauna dependent on the original habitat.

Health issues
Because of the biological similarities between each other, pigs can harbour a range of parasites and diseases that can be transmitted to humans. These include trichinosis, Taenia solium, cysticercosis, and brucellosis. Pigs are also known to host large concentrations of parasitic ascarid worms in their digestive tract.[36]
Pigs have health issues of their own. Domestic pigs have small lungs in relation to their body size, and are thus more susceptible than other domesticated animals to fatal bronchitis and pneumonia.[37] Some strains of influenza are endemic in pigs (see swine influenza). Pigs also can acquire human influenza.
Use in human health care
Main article: Domestic pig § In human healthcare
In addition to providing use in biomedical research[38] and for drug testing,[39] genetic advances in human health care have provided a pathway for domestic pigs to become xenotransplantation candidates for humans.[40]
See also


Animals portal
Mammals portal




Wild boar
Domestic pig
Miniature pig
Peccary (domestication)
Truffle hog
Pot-bellied pig
Babirusa
Red river hog
Bushpig
Fetal pig
Hog-baiting
List of fictional pigs
List of pigs
Pig Olympics
Enviropig
Pig Beach


References



^ "Piglet - Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. 31 August 2012. Retrieved 15 September 2013. 
^ Angier, Natalie (10 November 2009). "Pigs Prove to Be Smart, if Not Vain". The New York Times. 
^ a b "PSD Online - Custom Query". usda.gov. 
^ a b Swine Summary Selected Countries Archived 2012-03-29 at the Wayback Machine., United States Department of Agriculture, Foreign Agricultural Service, (total number is Production (Pig Crop) plus Total Beginning Stocks)
^ "Pig And Human Digestive System". prezi.com. Retrieved 15 April 2016. 
^ Loren Grush. "Why pigs are so valuable for medical research". Fox News. Retrieved 15 April 2016. 
^ a b Harper, Daniel (n.d.). "Sow". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved December 4, 2015. 
^ a b c "ADW: Sus scrofa: INFORMATION". Animal Diversity Web. 
^ Kim Lockhart. "American Wild Game / Feral Pigs / Hogs / Pigs / Wild Boar:". gunnersden.com. 
^ Harris, M., Bergeron, R., Li1, Y. and Gonyou, H. (2001). "Savaging of piglets: A puzzle of maternal behaviour" (PDF). Retrieved July 31, 2013. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ North Carolina Pork Conference Archived 2007-08-20 at the Wayback Machine. – Management Tips to Reduce Pre-Weaning Mortality. 2002. North Carolina State University.
^ John J. Mayer and I. Lehr Brisbin, Jr., "Wild Pigs Biology, Damage, Control Techniques and Management", Savannah River National Laboratory Aiken, South Carolina, 2009
^ "Diet and Nutrition on Modern Pig Farms - Pork Cares". Pork Cares. Retrieved 2017-10-17. 
^ "farmdoc - Marketing&Outlook: WILL HOGS RECLAIM "MORTGAGE LIFTER" STATUS?". illinois.edu. 
^ "How Much Water Do Pigs Need?". ncsu.edu. 
^ http://americanminipigassociation.com/mini-pig-education/mini-pig-nutrition/ Mini Pig Nutrition
^ http://americanminipigassociation.com American Mini Pig Association
^ https://healthypets.mercola.com/sites/healthypets/archive/2015/08/22/10-most-intelligent-animals.aspx 10 Most Smartest Animals in the World
^ "29 May 1946 - PIG BRISTLES FOR PAINT BRUSHES - Trove". Trove. Retrieved 15 April 2016. 
^ Funk, Stephan M.; Kumar Verma, Sunil; Larson, Greger; Prasad, Kasturi; Singh, Lalji; Narayan, Goutam; Fa, John E. (2007). "The pygmy hog is a unique genus: 19th century taxonomists got it right first time round". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 45 (2): 427–436. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2007.08.007. PMID 17905601. 
^ Rosenberg, M; Nesbitt, R; Redding, RW; Peasnall, BL (1998). "Hallan Cemi, pig husbandry, and post-Pleistocene adaptations along the Taurus-Zagros Arc (Turkey)"". Paleorient. 24 (1): 25–41. 
^ "our data suggest a narrative that begins with the domestication of pigs in Southwest Asia, at Upper Tigris sites including Çayönü Tepesi (Ervynck et al. 2001) and possibly Upper Euphrates sites including Cafer Höyük (Helmer 2008) and Nevali Çori (Peters et al. 2005);
from google (Çayönü pig ancestor) result 2; 'Çayönü Tepesi' in wiki (Cattle)". 
^ Vigne, JD; Zazzo, A; Saliège, JF; Poplin, F; Guilaine, J; Simmons, A (2009). "Pre-Neolithic wild boar management and introduction to Cyprus more than 11,400 years ago". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 106 (38): 16135–16138. Bibcode:2009PNAS..10616135V. doi:10.1073/pnas.0905015106. PMC 2752532 . PMID 19706455. 
^ Giuffra, E; Kijas, J. M.; Amarger, V; Carlborg, O; Jeon, J. T.; Andersson, L (April 2000). "The origin of the domestic pig: independent domestication and subsequent introgression". Genetics. 154 (4): 1785–91. PMC 1461048 . PMID 10747069. 
^ (Medical Daily) (Business Standard)
^ Groenen, Martien A. M.; Archibald, Alan L.; Uenishi, Hirohide; Tuggle, Christopher K.; Takeuchi, Yasuhiro; Rothschild, Max F.; Rogel-Gaillard, Claire; Park, Chankyu; Milan, Denis; Megens, Hendrik-Jan; Li, Shengting; Larkin, Denis M.; Kim, Heebal; Frantz, Laurent A. F.; Caccamo, Mario; Ahn, Hyeonju; Aken, Bronwen L.; Anselmo, Anna; Anthon, Christian; Auvil, Loretta; Badaoui, Bouabid; Beattie, Craig W.; Bendixen, Christian; Berman, Daniel; Blecha, Frank; Blomberg, Jonas; Bolund, Lars; Bosse, Mirte; Botti, Sara; et al. (2012). "Analyses of pig genomes provide insight into porcine demography and evolution". Nature. 491 (7424): 393–8. Bibcode:2012Natur.491..393G. doi:10.1038/nature11622. PMC 3566564 . PMID 23151582. 
^ Frantz, L (2015). "Evidence of long-term gene flow and selection during domestication from analyses of Eurasian wild and domestic pig genomes". Nat. Genet. 47: 1141–8. doi:10.1038/ng.3394. PMID 26323058. 
^ Pennisi, E (2015). "The taming of the pig took some wild turns". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aad1692. 
^ Broom, Donald M.; Hilana Sena; Kiera L. Moynihan (November 2009). "Pigs learn what a mirror image represents and use it to obtain information". Animal Behaviour. 78 (5): 1037–1041. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2009.07.027. ISSN 0003-3472. Retrieved 28 July 2010. Mirror usage has been taken to indicate some degree of awareness in animals. ... When put in a pen with a mirror in it, young pigs made movements while apparently looking at their image. After 5 h spent with a mirror, the pigs were shown a familiar food bowl, visible in the mirror but hidden behind a solid barrier. Seven out of eight pigs found the food bowl in a mean of 23 s by going away from the mirror and around the barrier. ... To use information from a mirror and find a food bowl, each pig must have observed features of its surroundings, remembered these and its own actions, deduced relationships among observed and remembered features and acted accordingly. This ability indicates assessment awareness in pigs. The results may have some effects on the design of housing conditions for pigs and may lead to better pig welfare. [permanent dead link]
^ Angier, Natalie (9 November 2009). "Pigs Prove to Be Smart, if Not Vain". The New York Times. New York, New York, US: The New York Times Company. Retrieved 28 July 2010. They’ve found that pigs are among the quickest of animals to learn a new routine, and pigs can do a circus’s worth of tricks: jump hoops, bow and stand, spin and make wordlike sounds on command, roll out rugs, herd sheep, close and open cages, play videogames with joysticks, and more. 
^ Eyers, Jonathan (2011). Don't Shoot the Albatross!: Nautical Myths and Superstitions. London, UK: A&C Black. ISBN 978-1-4081-3131-2. 
^ Sacrifice Goats, female or male.
^ Mark 5:1-20
^ Philo of Alexandria, De specialibus legibus, lib. 4, ch. 17-18
^ "issg Database: Ecology of Sus scrofa". issg.org. 
^ "Pig Health". The Pig Site. 
^ "Pros and Cons of Potbellied Pigs". Archived from the original on 17 March 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2017. 
^ "British MoD surgeons practise operations on drugged pigs which are strung-up and shot by marksmen to simulate warzone first aid". Daily Mail. 
^ "Swine as Models in Biomedical Research and Toxicology Testing". Sage Journal. 
^ "Pig to Human transplants". The Guardian. 



External links

Find more aboutPigat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Taxonomy from Wikispecies



Pig genome resources
Swine breeds, with pictures







v
t
e


Pigs






Kingdom Animalia
Phylum Chordata
Class Mammalia
Order Artiodactyla
Suborder Suina
Family Suidae
Subfamily Suinae
Genus Sus





Domestic



Breeding
Shows


Farming
Intensive farming
Sty
Pannage
Toilet
Hog oiler
Gestation crate
Cross-fostering
Swineherd


As food
Bacon
Ham
Lard
Pork
Scalder
Slaughter
Suckling
Blood
Religious restrictions
Scottish pork taboo


Cuts
Back bacon
Boston butt
Fatback
Ham hock
Pig's trotters
Pork belly
Pork chop
Pork jowl
Loin
Tenderloin
Ribs
Spare ribs
Pork rind
Pork steak
Ear
Tail


Other uses
Bladder
Racing
War
Wrestling
Truffling








Wild and Feral



Wild boar

Heraldry
Hunting


In the Philippines
Razorback





Pigs in culture



Iron Age pig
Flitch of bacon custom
Miss Piggy

Pigs in Space


Porky Pig
Piglet
"The Three Little Pigs"
Animal Farm

Old Major
Napoleon
Snowball
Squealer


Babe
Babe: Pig in the City
Bad Piggies
My Brother the Pig
Charlotte's Web
The Sheep-Pig
Peppa Pig
Super Pig
Fair, then Partly Piggy
Jakers! The Adventures of Piggley Winks
Olivia (character
TV series)
Pink Floyd pigs
Pinky and Perky
Preston Pig
Rasher
Spider-Ham
Spider pig
The Tale of Little Pig Robinson
The Tale of Pigling Bland
"This Little Piggy"
Huxley Pig
Wibbly Pig
Zhu Bajie





Other



List of pigs
List of fictional pigs
Piganino
Pigasus (politics)
"When pigs fly"












v
t
e


Extant Artiodactyla species






Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Chordata
Class: Mammalia
Infraclass: Eutheria
Superorder: Laurasiatheria










Suborder Ruminantia







Antilocapridae




Antilocapra



Pronghorn (A. americana)








Giraffidae




Okapia



Okapi (O. johnstoni)





Giraffa



Northern giraffe (G. camelopardalis)
Southern giraffe (G. giraffa)
Reticulated giraffe (G. reticulata)
Masai giraffe (G. tippelskirchi)








Moschidae




Moschus



Anhui musk deer (M. anhuiensis)
Dwarf musk deer (M. berezovskii)
Alpine musk deer (M. chrysogaster)
Kashmir musk deer (M. cupreus)
Black musk deer (M. fuscus)
Himalayan musk deer (M. leucogaster)
Siberian musk deer (M. moschiferus)








Tragulidae




Hyemoschus



Water chevrotain (H. aquaticus)





Moschiola



Indian spotted chevrotain (M. indica)
Yellow-striped chevrotain (M. kathygre)
Sri Lankan spotted chevrotain (M. meminna)





Tragulus



Java mouse-deer (T. javanicus)
Lesser mouse-deer (T. kanchil)
Greater mouse-deer (T. napu)
Philippine mouse-deer (T. nigricans)
Vietnam mouse-deer (T. versicolor)
Williamson's mouse-deer (T. williamsoni)








Cervidae

Large family listed below



Bovidae

Large family listed below














Family Cervidae







Cervinae




Muntiacus



Indian muntjac (M. muntjak)
Reeves's muntjac (M. reevesi)
Hairy-fronted muntjac (M. crinifrons)
Fea's muntjac (M. feae)
Bornean yellow muntjac (M. atherodes)
Roosevelt's muntjac (M. rooseveltorum)
Gongshan muntjac (M. gongshanensis)
Giant muntjac (M. vuquangensis)
Truong Son muntjac (M. truongsonensis)
Leaf muntjac (M. putaoensis)
Sumatran muntjac (M. montanus)
Pu Hoat muntjac (M. puhoatensis)





Elaphodus



Tufted deer (E. cephalophus)





Dama



Fallow deer (D. dama)
Persian fallow deer (D. mesopotamica)





Axis



Chital (A. axis)





Rucervus



Barasingha (R. duvaucelii)





Panolia



Eld's deer (P. eldii)





Elaphurus



Père David's deer (E. davidianus)





Hyelaphus



Hog deer (H. porcinus)
Calamian deer (H. calamianensis)
Bawean deer (H. kuhlii)





Rusa



Sambar deer (R. unicolor)
Rusa deer (R. timorensis)
Philippine sambar (R. mariannus)
Philippine spotted deer (R. alfredi)





Cervus



Red deer (C. elaphus)
Elk (C. canadensis)
Thorold's deer (C. albirostris)
Sika deer (C. nippon)








Capreolinae




Alces



Moose (A. alces)





Hydropotes



Water deer (H. inermis)





Capreolus



Roe deer (C. capreolus)
Siberian roe deer (C. pygargus)





Rangifer



Reindeer (R. tarandus)





Hippocamelus



Taruca (H. antisensis)
South Andean deer (H. bisulcus)





Mazama



Red brocket (M. americana)
Small red brocket (M. bororo)
Merida brocket (M. bricenii)
Dwarf brocket (M. chunyi)
Gray brocket (M. gouazoubira)
Pygmy brocket (M. nana)
Amazonian brown brocket (M. nemorivaga)
Yucatan brown brocket (M. pandora)
Little red brocket (M. rufina)
Central American red brocket (M. temama)





Ozotoceros



Pampas deer (O. bezoarticus)





Blastocerus



Marsh deer (B. dichotomus)





Pudu



Northern pudú (P. mephistophiles)
Southern pudú (P. pudu)





Odocoileus



White-tailed deer (O. virginianus)
Mule deer (O. hemionus)



















Family Bovidae







Cephalophinae




Cephalophus



Abbott's duiker (C. spadix)
Aders's duiker (C. adersi)
Bay duiker (C. dorsalis)
Black duiker (C. niger)
Black-fronted duiker (C. nigrifrons)
Brooke's duiker (C. brookei)
Harvey's duiker (C. harveyi)
Jentink's duiker (C. jentinki)
Ogilby's duiker (C. ogilbyi)
Peters's duiker (C. callipygus)
Red-flanked duiker (C. rufilatus)
Red forest duiker (C. natalensis)
Ruwenzori duiker (C. rubidis)
Weyns's duiker (C. weynsi)
White-bellied duiker (C. leucogaster)
White-legged duiker (C. crusalbum)
Yellow-backed duiker (C. Sylvicultor)
Zebra duiker (C. zebra)





Philantomba



Blue duiker (P. monticola)
Maxwell's duiker (P. maxwellii)
Walter's duiker (P. walteri)





Sylvicapra



Common duiker (S. grimmia)








Hippotraginae




Hippotragus



Roan antelope (H. equinus)
Sable antelope (H. niger)





Oryx



East African oryx (O. beisa)
Scimitar oryx (O. dammah)
Gemsbok (O. gazella)
Arabian oryx (O. leucoryx)





Addax



Addax (A. nasomaculatus)








Reduncinae




Kobus



Upemba lechwe (K. anselli)
Waterbuck (K. ellipsiprymnus)
Kob (K. kob)
Lechwe (K. leche)
Nile lechwe (K. megaceros)
Puku (K. vardonii)





Redunca



Southern reedbuck (R. arundinum)
Mountain reedbuck (R. fulvorufula)
Bohor reedbuck (R. redunca)








Aepycerotinae




Aepyceros



Impala (A. melampus)








Peleinae




Pelea



Grey rhebok (P. capreolus)








Alcelaphinae




Beatragus



Hirola (B. hunteri)





Damaliscus



Topi (D. korrigum)
Common tsessebe (D. lunatus)
Bontebok (D. pygargus)
Bangweulu tsessebe (D. superstes)





Alcelaphus



Hartebeest (A. buselaphus)
Red hartebeest (A. caama)
Lichtenstein's hartebeest (A. lichtensteinii)





Connochaetes



Black wildebeest (C. gnou)
Blue wildebeest (C. taurinus)








Pantholopinae




Pantholops



Tibetan antelope (P. hodgsonii)








Caprinae

Large subfamily listed below



Bovinae

Large subfamily listed below



Antilopinae

Large subfamily listed below














Family Bovidae (subfamily Caprinae)







Ammotragus



Barbary sheep (A. lervia)





Budorcas



Takin (B. taxicolor)





Capra



Wild goat (C. aegagrus)
Domestic goat (C. aegagrus hircus)
West Caucasian tur (C. caucasia)
East Caucasian tur (C. cylindricornis)
Markhor (C. falconeri)
Alpine ibex (C. ibex)
Nubian ibex (C. nubiana)
Spanish ibex (C. pyrenaica)
Siberian ibex (C. sibirica)
Walia ibex (C. walie)





Capricornis



Japanese serow (C. crispus)
Taiwan serow (C. swinhoei)
Sumatran serow (C. sumatraensis)
Mainland serow (C. milneedwardsii)
Red serow (C. rubidusi)
Himalayan serow (C. thar)





Hemitragus



Nilgiri tahr (H. hylocrius)
Arabian tahr (H. jayakari)
Himalayan tahr (H. jemlahicus)





Naemorhedus



Red goral (N. baileyi)
Long-tailed goral (N. caudatus)
Himalayan goral (N. goral)
Chinese goral (N. griseus)





Oreamnos



Mountain goat (O. americanus)





Ovibos



Muskox (O. moschatus)





Ovis



Argali (O. ammon)
Domestic sheep (O. aries)
Bighorn sheep (O. canadensis)
Dall sheep (O. dalli)
Mouflon (O. musimon)
Snow sheep (O. nivicola)
Urial (O. orientalis)





Pseudois



Bharal (P. nayaur)
Dwarf blue sheep (P. schaeferi)





Rupicapra



Pyrenean chamois (R. pyrenaica)
Chamois (R. rupicapra)
















Family Bovidae (subfamily Bovinae)







Boselaphini




Tetracerus



Four-horned antelope (T. quadricornis)





Boselaphus



Nilgai (B. tragocamelus)








Bovini




Bubalus



Water buffalo (B. bubalis)
Wild Water Buffalo (B. arnee)
Lowland anoa (B. depressicornis)
Mountain anoa (B. quarlesi)
Tamaraw (B. mindorensis)





Bos



Banteng (B. javanicus)
Gaur (B. gaurus)
Gayal (B. frontalis)
Domestic yak (B. grunniens)
Wild yak (B. mutus)
Cattle (B. taurus)
Kouprey (B. sauveli)





Pseudonovibos



Kting voar (P. spiralis)





Pseudoryx



Saola (P. nghetinhensis)





Syncerus



African buffalo (S. caffer)





Bison



American bison (B. bison)
European bison (B. bonasus)








Tragelaphini




Tragelaphus
(including kudus)



Sitatunga (T. spekeii)
Nyala (T. angasii)
Kéwel (T. scriptus)
Cape bushbuck (T. sylvaticus)
Mountain nyala (T. buxtoni)
Lesser kudu (T. imberbis)
Greater kudu (T. strepsiceros)
Bongo (T. eurycerus)





Taurotragus



Common eland (T. oryx)
Giant eland (T. derbianus)



















Family Bovidae (subfamily Antilopinae)







Antilopini




Ammodorcas



Dibatag (A. clarkei)





Antidorcas



Springbok (A. marsupialis)





Antilope



Blackbuck (A. cervicapra)





Eudorcas



Mongalla gazelle (E. albonotata)
Red-fronted gazelle (E. rufifrons)
Thomson's gazelle (E. thomsonii)





Gazella



Mountain gazelle (G. gazella)
Neumann's gazelle (G. erlangeri)
Speke's gazelle (G. spekei)
Dorcas gazelle (G. dorcas)
Chinkara (G. bennettii)
Cuvier's gazelle (G. cuvieri)
Rhim gazelle (G. leptoceros)
Goitered gazelle (G. subgutturosa)





Litocranius



Gerenuk (L. walleri)





Nanger



Dama gazelle (N. dama)
Grant's gazelle (N. granti)
Soemmerring's gazelle (N. soemmerringii)





Procapra



Mongolian gazelle (P. gutturosa)
Goa (P. picticaudata)
Przewalski's gazelle (P. przewalskii)








Saigini




Pantholops



Tibetan antelope (P. hodgsonii)





Saiga



Saiga antelope (S. tatarica)








Neotragini




Dorcatragus



Beira (D. megalotis)





Madoqua



Günther's dik-dik (M. guentheri)
Kirk's dik-dik (M. kirkii)
Silver dik-dik (M. piacentinii)
Salt's dik-dik (M. saltiana)





Neotragus



Bates's pygmy antelope (N. batesi)
Suni (N. moschatus)
Royal antelope (N. pygmaeus)





Oreotragus



Klipspringer (O. oreotragus)





Ourebia



Oribi (O. ourebi)





Raphicerus



Steenbok (R. campestris)
Cape grysbok (R. melanotis)
Sharpe's grysbok (R. sharpei)



















Suborder Suina







Suidae




Babyrousa



Buru babirusa (B. babyrussa)
North Sulawesi babirusa (B. celebensis)
Togian babirusa (B. togeanensis)





Hylochoerus



Giant forest hog (H. meinertzhageni)





Phacochoerus



Desert warthog (P. aethiopicus)
Common warthog (P. africanus)





Porcula



Pygmy hog (P. salvania)





Potamochoerus



Bushpig (P. larvatus)
Red river hog (P. porcus)





Sus
(Pigs)



Palawan bearded pig (S. ahoenobarbus)
Bornean bearded pig (S. barbatus)
Indo-chinese warty pig (S. bucculentus)
Visayan warty pig (S. cebifrons)
Celebes warty pig (S. celebensis)
Flores warty pig (S. heureni)
Oliver's warty pig (S. oliveri)
Philippine warty pig (S. philippensis)
Wild boar (S. scrofa)
Timor warty pig (S. timoriensis)
Javan warty pig (S. verrucosus)








Tayassuidae




Tayassu



White-lipped peccary (T. pecari)





Catagonus



Chacoan peccary (C. wagneri)





Pecari



Collared peccary (P. tajacu)
Giant peccary (P. maximus)



















Suborder Tylopoda







Camelidae




Lama



Llama (L. glama)
Guanaco (L. guanicoe)





Vicugna



Vicuña (V. vicugna)
Alpaca (V. pacos)





Camelus



Dromedary (C. dromedarius)
Bactrian camel (C. bactrianus)
Wild Bactrian camel (C. ferus)



















Whippomorpha (unranked clade)







Hippopotamidae




Hippopotamus



Hippopotamus (H. amphibius)





Choeropsis



Pygmy hippopotamus (C. liberiensis)




















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pig&oldid=818495864"					Categories: PigsCoprophagous animalsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles with 'species' microformatsArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles needing additional references from February 2010All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2007All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2011