

Part of a series on


Economic systems




By ideology


Anarchist
Capitalist
Christian
Communalist
Communist
Corporatist
Democratic
Dirigist
Distributist
Fascist
Feminist
Feudalism
Georgist
Green
Islamic
Laissez-faire
Market socialist
Mercantilist
Mutualist
Neo-mercantilist
Participatory
Protectionist
Socialist
State capitalist
Syndicalist








By coordination


Closed (autarky)
Decentralized
Digital
Dual
Gift
Informal
Market
Mixed
Natural
Open
Planned
Robinson Crusoe
Subsistence
Underground
Vertical archipelago
Virtual
Welfare








By regional model


Asian

East Asian
Chinese
Singaporean


European

Anglo-Saxon
German
Nordic
Rhenish
Soviet










Sectors


Common property
Private
Public
Voluntary








Transition


Collectivization
Communization
Corporatization
Demutualization
Deregulation
Expropriation
Financialization
Liberalization
Marketization
Municipalization
Mutualization
Nationalization
Privatization
Socialization








Coordination


Barter
Cybernetics
Democratic
Free market
In kind
Indicative planning
Market
Material balancing
Planned
Peer-to-peer
Price
Regulated market
Self-managed
Shared
Access economy








Other types


Corporate capitalism
Expeditionary
Hunter-gatherer
Inclusive Democracy
Information
Islamic economics
Manorialism
Newly industrialized
Palace
Plantation
Plutonomy
Post-capitalist
Post-industrial
Post-scarcity
Resource-based
Social market
Socialist market
State monopoly capitalist
Token
Traditional
Transition
World








 Business and economics portal







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Socialism







Development


History of socialism
Socialist calculation debate
Socialist economics








Ideas


Calculation in kind
Collective ownership
Cooperative
Common ownership
Economic democracy
Economic planning
Equal opportunity
Free association
Industrial democracy
Input–output model
Internationalism
Labour voucher
Material balance planning
Peer‑to‑peer economics
(Sharing economy)
Production for use
Social dividend
Social ownership
Socialism in One Country
Socialist mode of production
State ownership

To each according
to his contribution / needs

Workplace democracy
Workers' self-management








Models



Decentralized planning
Participatory economics


Market socialism


Economic democracy




Lange model
Mutualism
Ricardian socialism





Planned economy
Soviet-type
Project Cybersyn


Socialist market economy
Socialist-oriented market









Variants



African
Arab
Agrarian
Anarchist
Anarcho-communism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Authoritarian
Blanquism
Communism
Democratic
Ethical
Ecological
Feminist
Gandhian
Guild
Impossibilism
Leninism
Liberal
Libertarian
Market
Marhaenism
Marxism
Maoism
Municipal
Owenism
Platformism
Reformism
Religious
Revisionism
Revolutionary
Ricardian
Scientific
Social democracy
Socialist nationalism
State
Syndicalism
Technocracy
Third World
Trotskyism
Utopian
with Chinese characteristics
Zionist
21st-century









History by country



Australia
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
Estonia
Hong Kong
India
Iran
Netherlands
New Zealand
Pakistan
Tunisia
United Kingdom
United States









People



Charles Hall
Henri de Saint-Simon
François-Noël Babeuf
Robert Owen
Charles Fourier
William Thompson
Thomas Hodgskin
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Louis Blanc
Mikhail Bakunin
Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels
Ferdinand Lassalle
William Morris
Mary Harris Jones
Peter Kropotkin
Eduard Bernstein
Errico Malatesta
Fred M. Taylor
Eugene Debs
Georgi Plekhanov
John Dewey
Enrico Barone
W. E. B. Du Bois
Emma Goldman
Rosa Luxemburg
Léon Blum
Antonie Pannekoek
Bertrand Russell
Luis Emilio Recabarren
Albert Einstein
Clement Attlee
Karl Polanyi
Nestor Makhno
G. D. H. Cole
Imre Nagy
Einar Gerhardsen
George Orwell
Léopold Sédar Senghor
Salvador Allende
François Mitterrand
Nelson Mandela
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Murray Bookchin
Alexander Dubček
Howard Zinn
Noam Chomsky
Martin Luther King Jr.
Mikhail Gorbachev
Bernie Sanders
Tariq Ali
Abdullah Öcalan
Slavoj Žižek
Jeremy Corbyn
Cornel West
Jack Layton
Hugo Chávez
Chris Hedges
Yanis Varoufakis
Pablo Iglesias









Organizations



First International
(International Workingmen's Association)

Second International

Third International
(Comintern)

Fourth International
Fifth International
Labour and Socialist International
Socialist International

World Federation of
Democratic Youth


International Union of
Socialist Youth

World Socialist Movement

International Committee
of the Fourth International

Progressive Alliance








Related topics



Anarchism
Capitalism
Communist society
Criticism of capitalism
Economic system
French Left
List of socialist economists
Nanosocialism
Progressivism
Right-wing socialism
Socialism and LGBT rights
Socialist Party
Socialist state









Socialism portal
Economics portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





A planned economy is a type of economic system where investment and the allocation of capital goods is performed through economy-wide economic and production plans. A planned economy may be based on centralized, decentralized or participatory forms of economic planning.[1][2] A command economy or administrative command economy refers to the nominally-planned economies of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc, highlighting the central role of hierarchical administration in guiding the allocation of resources in these economic systems as opposed to planned coordination.[3][4]
Planned economies are usually associated with Soviet-type central planning, which involves centralized state planning and administrative decision making.[5] In command economies, important allocation decisions are made by government authorities and are imposed by law.[6] Planned economies are held in contrast to unplanned economies, specifically market economies, where production, distribution, pricing and investment decisions are made by autonomous firms operating in markets. Market economies that use indicative planning are sometimes referred to as “planned market economies”.
The traditional conception of socialism involves the integration of socially-owned economic enterprises via some form of planning with direct calculation substituting factor markets. As such the concept of a planned economy is often associated with socialism and socialist planning. [7][8][9] More recent approaches to socialist planning and allocation have come from some economists and computer scientists proposing planning mechanisms based on advances in computer science and information technology.[10]



Contents


1 Planned versus command economies
2 Advantages of economic planning
3 Disadvantages of economic planning

3.1 Inefficient resource distribution: surplus and shortage
3.2 Suppression of economic democracy and self-management
3.3 Economic instability


4 Relationship with socialism
5 Fictional portrayals of planned economies
6 See also
7 Notes
8 Further reading
9 External links



Planned versus command economies[edit]
Main article: Economic planning
Planned economies are held in contrast with command economies, where a planned economy is "an economic system in which the government controls and regulates production, distribution, prices, etc."[11] but a command economy, while also having this type of regulation, necessarily has substantial public ownership of industry.[12] Therefore, command economies are planned economies, but not necessarily the reverse.
Whereas most of the economy is organized in a top-down administrative model by a central authority, where decisions regarding investment and production output requirements are decided upon at the top in the chain of command, with little input from lower levels. Advocates of economic planning have sometimes been staunch critics of these command economies. For example, Leon Trotsky believed that those at the top of the chain of command, regardless of their intellectual capacity, operated without the input and participation of the millions of people who participate in the economy and understand/respond to local conditions and changes in the economy, and therefore would be unable to effectively coordinate all economic activity.[13]
Although planned economies have historically been associated with Marxist-Leninist states and the Soviet economic model, some argue that the Soviet economic model did not actually constitute a planned economy in that a comprehensive and binding plan did not guide production and investment; therefore the further distinction of an administrative command economy emerged as a more accurate designation for the economic system that existed in the former Soviet Union and Eastern bloc, highlighting the role of centralized hierarchical decision-making in the absence of popular control over the economy.[14] The possibility of a digital planned economy was explored by Chile with the creation of Project Cybersyn and Alexander Kharkevich head of the Department of technical physics in Kiev in 1962.[15][16]
Another key difference is that command economies are usually authoritarian in nature, whereas economic planning in general can be either participatory and democratic or authoritarian. Indicative planning is a form of planning in market economies that directs the economy through incentive-based methods. Economic planning can be practiced in a decentralized manner through different government authorities. For example, in some predominately market-oriented and mixed economies, the state utilizes economic planning in strategic industries such as the aerospace industry. Mixed economies usually employ macroeconomic planning, while micro-economic affairs are left to the market and price system.
Another example of this is the utilization of dirigisme, or government direction of the economy through non coercive means, both of which were practiced in France and Great Britain after the Second World War. Swedish public housing models were planned by the government in a similar fashion as urban planning in a project called Million Programme.
Advantages of economic planning[edit]
The government can harness land, labours, and capital to serve the economic objectives of the state. Consumer demand can be restrained in favor of greater capital investment for economic development in a desired pattern. In international comparisons, state-socialist nations compared favorably with capitalist nations in health indicators such as infant mortality and life expectancy, although the statistics concerning infant mortality are self-reported and based on varying standards.[17] The state can begin building a heavy industry at once in an underdeveloped economy without waiting years for capital to accumulate through the expansion of light industry, and without reliance on external financing. This is what happened in the Soviet Union during the 1930s when the government forced the share of GNP dedicated to private consumption from eighty percent to fifty percent.[18] As a result, the Soviet Union experienced massive growth in heavy industry, with a concurrent massive contraction of its agricultural sector, in both relative and absolute terms.
Disadvantages of economic planning[edit]
Inefficient resource distribution: surplus and shortage[edit]
Critics of planned economies argue that planners cannot detect consumer preferences, shortages, and surpluses with sufficient accuracy and therefore cannot efficiently co-ordinate production (in a market economy, a free price system is intended to serve this purpose). This difficulty was notably written about by economists Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek, who referred to subtly distinct aspects of the problem as the "economic calculation problem" and "local knowledge problem" respectively. These opponents of central planning argue that the only way to satisfy individuals who have a constantly changing hierarchy of needs, and are the only ones to possess their particular individual's circumstances, is by allowing those with the most knowledge of their needs to have it in their power to use their resources in a competing marketplace to meet the needs of the most consumers, most efficiently. This phenomenon is recognized as spontaneous order. Additionally, misallocation of resources would naturally ensue by redirecting capital away from individuals with direct knowledge and circumventing it into markets where a coercive monopoly influences behavior, ignoring market signals. According to Tibor R. Machan, "Without a market in which allocations can be made in obedience to the law of supply and demand, it is difficult or impossible to funnel resources with respect to actual human preferences and goals."[19]
Suppression of economic democracy and self-management[edit]
Economist Robin Hahnel notes that, even if central planning overcame its inherent inhibitions of incentives and innovation, it would nevertheless be unable to maximize economic democracy and self-management, which he believes are concepts that are more intellectually coherent, consistent and just than mainstream notions of economic freedom.[20]
Says Hahnel, "Combined with a more democratic political system, and redone to closer approximate a best case version, centrally planned economies no doubt would have performed better. But they could never have delivered economic self-management, they would always have been slow to innovate as apathy and frustration took their inevitable toll, and they would always have been susceptible to growing inequities and inefficiencies as the effects of differential economic power grew. Under central planning neither planners, managers, nor workers had incentives to promote the social economic interest. Nor did impeding markets for final goods to the planning system enfranchise consumers in meaningful ways. But central planning would have been incompatible with economic democracy even if it had overcome its information and incentive liabilities. And the truth is that it survived as long as it did only because it was propped up by unprecedented totalitarian political power."[20]
Economic instability[edit]
Studies of Eastern European planned economies in the 1950s and 1960s by both American and Eastern European economists found that, contrary to the expectations of both groups, they showed greater fluctuations in output than market economies during the same period.[21]
Relationship with socialism[edit]
Main article: Socialism
While socialism is not equivalent to economic planning or to the concept of a planned economy, an influential conception of socialism involves the replacement of capital markets with some form of economic planning in order to achieve ex-ante coordination of the economy. The goal of such an economic system would be to achieve conscious control over the economy by the population, specifically, so that the use of the surplus product is controlled by the producers.[22] The specific forms of planning proposed for socialism and their feasibility are subjects of the socialist calculation debate.
Fictional portrayals of planned economies[edit]
The 1888 novel Looking Backward by Edward Bellamy depicts a fictional planned economy in a United States around the year 2000 which has become a socialist utopia.
The World State in Aldous Huxley's Brave New World and Airstrip One in George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty Four are both fictional examples of command economies, albeit with diametrically opposed aims: The former is a consumer economy designed to engender productivity while the latter is a shortage economy designed as an agent of totalitarian social control. Airstrip One is organised by the euphemistically named Ministry of Plenty.
Other literary portrayals of planned economies were Yevgeny Zamyatin's We, which was an influence on Orwell's work. Like Nineteen Eighty Four, Ayn Rand's dystopian story Anthem was also an artistic portrayal of a command economy that was influenced by We. The difference is that it was a primitivist planned economy, as opposed to the advanced technology of We or Brave New World.
See also[edit]


Calculation in kind
Communist state
Communist economy
Dirigisme
Distributed economy
Economic democracy
Economic equilibrium
Economic calculation problem
Economic planning
Horizontalidad
Inclusive democracy
Indicative planning
Industrial democracy
Input-output model
Material balance planning
Market economy
Marxism-Leninism
Mixed economy
Participatory economics
Production for use
Project Cybersyn
Public ownership
Peer-to-Peer economy
Socialist calculation debate
Socialist economy
State capitalism
Technocracy
Self-managed economy



Case studies (Soviet-type economies)


Analysis of Soviet-type economic planning
Five-Year Plans in the Soviet Union
Five-year plans of China
OGAS, a plan for creating a computer network to supervise the Soviet economy
Project Cybersyn, a project for a computer network controlling the economy of Chile under Salvador Allende.
Eastern Bloc economies


Case studies (Mixed-market economies)


Indicative planning in France
First Malaysia Plan
Five-year plans of Argentina
Five-Year Plans of South Korea
Economy of Singapore
Economy of India

Notes[edit]


^ Alec Nove (1987), "Planned Economy," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 3, p. 879.
^ Devine, Pat (July 26, 2010). Democracy and Economic Planning. Polity. ISBN 978-0745634791. 
^ Wilhelm, John Howard (1985). "The Soviet Union Has an Administered, Not a Planned, Economy". Soviet Studies. 37 (1): 118–30. doi:10.1080/09668138508411571. 
^ Ellman, Michael (2007). "The Rise and Fall of Socialist Planning". In Estrin, Saul; Kołodko, Grzegorz W.; Uvalić, Milica. Transition and Beyond: Essays in Honour of Mario Nuti. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 22. ISBN 0-230-54697-8. In the USSR in the late 1980s the system was normally referred to as the ‘administrative-command’ economy. What was fundamental to this system was not the plan but the role of administrative hierarchies at all levels of decision making; the absence of control over decision making by the population... 
^ Zimbalist, Sherman and Brown, Andrew, Howard J. and Stuart (October 1988). Comparing Economic Systems: A Political-Economic Approach. Harcourt College Pub. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-15-512403-5. Almost all industry in the Soviet Union is government owned and all production is directed, in theory, by a central plan (though in practice much is left for local discretion and much happens that is unplanned or not under government control). 
^ Rosser, Mariana V.; Rosser, J Barkley (23 July 2003). Comparative Economics in a Transforming World Economy. MIT Press. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-262-18234-8. In a command economy the most important allocation decisions are made by government authorities and are imposed by law. 
^ Prychito, David L. (July 31, 2002). Markets, Planning, and Democracy: Essays After the Collapse of Communism. Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 72. ISBN 978-1840645194. Traditional socialism strives to plan all economic activities comprehensively, both within and between enterprises. As such, it seeks to integrate the economic activities of society (the coordination of socially owned property) into a single coherent plan, rather than to rely upon the spontaneous or anarchic ordering of the market system to coordinate plans. 
^ Mandel, Ernest (1986). "In Defence of Socialist Planning" (PDF). New Left Review. 159: 5–37. Planning is not equivalent to 'perfect' allocation of resources, nor 'scientific' allocation, nor even ‘more humane’ allocation. It simply means ‘direct’ allocation, ex ante. As such, it is the opposite of market allocation, which is ex post. 
^ Ellman, Michael (March 31, 1989). Socialist Planning. Cambridge University Press. p. 327. ISBN 978-0521358668. ‘socialist planning’, in the original sense of a national economy which replaced market relationships by direct calculation and direct product exchange, has nowhere been established… 
^ Allin Cottrell & W.Paul Cockshott, Towards a new socialism (Nottingham, England: Spokesman, 1993). Retrieved: 28 February 2017.
^ planned economy. Dictionary.com Unabridged (v 1.1). Random House, Inc. (accessed: May 11, 2008).
^ command economy. In Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary (2008) (accessed May 11, 2008).
^ Trotsky, Leon. Writings 1932–33. p. 96. 
^ Ellman, Michael (2007). "The Rise and Fall of Socialist Planning". In Estrin, Saul; Kołodko, Grzegorz W.; Uvalić, Milica. Transition and Beyond: Essays in Honour of Mario Nuti. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 22. ISBN 0-230-54697-8. Realization of these facts led in the 1970s and 1980s to the development of new terms to describe what had previously been (and still were in United Nations publications) referred to as the ‘centrally planned economies’. In the USSR in the late 1980s the system was normally referred to as the ‘administrative-command’ economy. What was fundamental to this system was not the plan but the role of administrative hierarchies at all levels of decision making; the absence of control over decision making by the population... 
^ http://csef.ru/en/politica-i-geopolitica/223/mashiny-kommunizma-pochemu-v-sssr-tak-i-ne-sozdali-svoj-internet-6983
^ Kharkevich, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (1973). Theory of information. The identification of the images. Selected works in three volumes. Volume 3. Information and technology: Moscow: Publishing House "Nauka", 1973. - Academy of Sciences of the USSR. Institute of information transmission problems. p. 524. 
^ Michael Ellman (2014). Socialist Planning. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 1107427320 p. 372.
^ Kennedy, Paul (1987). The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers. New York: Random House. pp. 322–3. ISBN 0-394-54674-1. 
^ Machan, R. Tibor (2002). "Some Skeptical Reflections on Research and Development". Liberty and Research and Development: Science Funding in a Free Society (PDF). Hoover Press. ISBN 0-8179-2942-8. 
^ a b Hahnel, Robin (2002). The ABC's of Political Economy. London: Pluto Press. p. 262. ISBN 0-7453-1858-4. 
^ Zielinski, J. G. (1973). Economic Reforms in Polish Industry. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-215323-4. 
^ Feinstein, C.H. (1975). Socialism, Capitalism and Economic Growth: Essays Presented to Maurice Dobb. Cambridge University Press. p. 174. ISBN 0-521-29007-4. We have presented the view that planning and market mechanisms are instruments that can be used both in socialist and non-socialist societies...It was important to explode the primitive identification of central planning and socialism and to stress the instrumental character of planning. 


Further reading[edit]

Michael Ellman (2014). Socialist Planning. Cambridge University Press; 3 edition. ISBN 1107427320
Gregory Grossman (1987): "Command economy," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 1, pp. 494–95.
Carl Landauer (1947): Theory of National Economic Planning. University of California Press. Berkeley and Los Angeles, Second edition.
Alec Nove (1987): "Planned economy," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 3, pp. 879–85.
Myant, Martin; Drahokoupil, Jan (2010), Transition Economies: Political Economy in Russia, Eastern Europe, and Central Asia, Wiley-Blackwell, ISBN 978-0-470-59619-7 
Cox, Robin 2005, "The Economic Calculation controversy: unravelling of a myth" [1]'
Devine, Pat.'Democracy and Economic Planning. Polity. 2010. ISBN 978-0745634791
Mandel, Ernest. In Defence of Socialist Planning. New Left Review, Issue 159. 1986.

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Planned Economy



An article against "The myth of the permanent arms economy"
An article "Economic planning in India"
The Stalin Model for the Control and Coordination of Enterprises in a Socialist Economy




Authority control



GND: 4046242-0
NDL: 00565342











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Planned_economy&oldid=818284350"					Categories: CommunismSocialismEconomic systemsFormer communist economiesEconomic planningSocialist calculationSchools of economic thoughtEconomic ideologiesHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers