



Close-up of a flower of Schlumbergera (Christmas or Holiday Cactus), showing part of the gynoecium (the stigma and part of the style is visible) and the stamens that surround it


Plant reproductive morphology is the study of the physical form and structure (the morphology) of those parts of plants directly or indirectly concerned with sexual reproduction.
Among all living organisms, flowers, which are the reproductive structures of angiosperms, are the most varied physically and show a correspondingly great diversity in methods of reproduction.[1] Plants that are not flowering plants (green algae, mosses, liverworts, hornworts, ferns and gymnosperms such as conifers) also have complex interplays between morphological adaptation and environmental factors in their sexual reproduction. The breeding system, or how the sperm from one plant fertilizes the ovum of another, depends on the reproductive morphology, and is the single most important determinant of the genetic structure of nonclonal plant populations. Christian Konrad Sprengel (1793) studied the reproduction of flowering plants and for the first time it was understood that the pollination process involved both biotic and abiotic interactions. Charles Darwin's theories of natural selection utilized this work to build his theory of evolution, which includes analysis of the coevolution of flowers and their insect pollinators.



Contents


1 Use of sexual terminology
2 Flowering plants

2.1 Basic flower morphology
2.2 Variations
2.3 Terminology
2.4 Outcrossing


3 See also
4 References

4.1 Citations
4.2 Sources


5 Further reading
6 External links



Use of sexual terminology[edit]




Dioicous gametophytes of the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha. In this species, gametes are produced on different plants on umbrella-shaped gametophores with different morphologies. The radiating arms of female gameteophores (left) protect archegonia that produce eggs. Male gametophores (right) are topped with antheridia that produce sperm.


Plants have complex lifecycles involving alternation of generations. One generation, the sporophyte, gives rise to the next generation asexually via spores. Spores may be identical isospores or come in different sizes (microspores and megaspores), but strictly speaking, spores and sporophytes are neither male nor female because they do not produce gametes. The alternate generation, the gametophyte, produces gametes, eggs and/or sperm. A gametophyte can be monoicous (bisexual), producing both eggs and sperm or dioicous (unisexual), either female (producing eggs) or male (producing sperm).
In the bryophytes (liverworts, mosses and hornworts), the sexual gametophyte is the dominant generation. In ferns and seed plants (including cycads, conifers, flowering plants, etc.) the sporophyte is the dominant generation. The obvious visible plant, whether a small herb or a large tree, is the sporophyte, and the gametophyte is very small. In seed plants, each female gametophyte, and the spore that gives rise to it, is hidden within the sporophyte and is entirely dependent on it for nutrition. Each male gametophyte typically consists of from two to four cells enclosed within the protective wall of a pollen grain.
The sporophyte of a flowering plant is often described using sexual terms (e.g. "female" or "male") based on the sexuality of the gametophyte it gives rise to. For example, a sporophyte that produces spores that give rise only to male gametophytes may be described as "male", even though the sporophyte itself is asexual, producing only spores. Similarly, flowers produced by the sporophyte may be described as "unisexual" or "bisexual", meaning that they give rise to either one sex of gametophyte or both sexes of gametophyte.[2]
Flowering plants[edit]
Basic flower morphology[edit]




Flower of Ranunculus glaberrimus


The flower is the characteristic structure concerned with sexual reproduction in flowering plants (angiosperms). Flowers vary enormously in their construction (morphology). A "complete" flower, like that of Ranunculus glaberrimus shown in the figure, has a calyx of outer sepals and a corolla of inner petals. The sepals and petals together form the perianth. Next inwards there are numerous stamens, which produce pollen grains, each containing a microscopic male gametophyte. Stamens may be called the "male" parts of a flower and collectively form the androecium. Finally in the middle there are carpels, which at maturity contain one or more ovules, and within each ovule is a tiny female gametophyte.[3] Carpels may be called the "female" parts of a flower and collectively form the gynoecium.
Each carpel in Ranunculus species is an achene that produces one ovule,[4] which when fertilized becomes a seed. If the carpel contains more than one seed, as in Eranthis hyemalis it is called a follicle. Two or more carpels may be fused together to varying degrees and the entire structure, including the fused styles and stigmas may be called a pistil. The lower part of the pistil, where the ovules are produced, is called the ovary. It may be divided into chambers (locules) corresponding to the separate carpels.[5]
Variations[edit]
See also: Flower § Floral function




Alnus serrulata has unisexual flowers and is monoecious. Shown here: maturing male flower catkins on the right, last year's female catkins on the left.






Ilex aquifolium is dioecious: (above) shoot with flowers from male plant; (top right) male flower enlarged, showing stamens with pollen and reduced, sterile stigma; (below) shoot with flowers from female plant; (lower right) female flower enlarged, showing stigma and reduced, sterile stamens (staminodes) with no pollen


A "perfect" flower has both stamens and carpels, and may be described as "bisexual" or "hermaphroditic". A "unisexual" flower is one in which either the stamens or the carpels are missing, vestigial or otherwise non-functional. Each flower is either "staminate" (having only functional stamens) and thus "male", or "carpellate" (or "pistillate") (having only functional carpels) and thus "female". If separate staminate and carpellate flowers are always found on the same plant, the species is called monoecious. If separate staminate and carpellate flowers are always found on different plants, the species is called dioecious.[6] A 1995 study found that about 6% of angiosperm species are dioecious, and that 7% of genera contain some dioecious species.[7]
Members of the birch family (Betulaceae) are examples of monoecious plants with unisexual flowers. A mature alder tree (Alnus species) produces long catkins containing only male flowers, each with four stamens and a minute perianth, and separate stalked groups of female flowers, each without a perianth.[8] (See the illustration of Alnus serrulata.)
Most hollies (members of the genus Ilex) are dioecious. Each plant produces either functionally male flowers or functionally female flowers. In Ilex aquifolium (see the illustration), the common European holly, both kinds of flower have four sepals and four white petals; male flowers have four stamens, female flowers usually have four non-functional reduced stamens and a four-celled ovary.[9] Since only female plants are able to set fruit and produce berries, this has consequences for gardeners. Amborella represents the first known group of flowering plants to separate from their common ancestor. It too is dioecious; at any one time, each plant produces either flowers with functional stamens but no carpels, or flowers with a few non-functional stamens and a number of fully functional carpels. However, Amborella plants may change their "sex" over time. In one study, five cuttings from a male plant produced only male flowers when they first flowered, but at their second flowering three switched to producing female flowers.[10]
In extreme cases, all of the parts present in a complete flower may be missing, so long as at least one carpel or one stamen is present. This situation is reached in the female flowers of duckweeds (Lemna), which comprise a single carpel, and in the male flowers of spurges (Euphorbia) which comprise a single stamen.[11]
A species such as Fraxinus excelsior, the common ash of Europe, demonstrates one possible kind of variation. Ash flowers are wind-pollinated and lack petals and sepals. Structurally, the flowers may be bisexual, consisting of two stamens and an ovary, or may be male (staminate), lacking a functional ovary, or female (carpellate), lacking functional stamens. Different forms may occur on the same tree, or on different trees.[8] The Asteraceae (sunflower family), with close to 22,000 species worldwide, have highly modified inflorescences made up of flowers (florets) collected together into tightly packed heads. Heads may have florets of one sexual morphology – all bisexual, all carpellate or all staminate (when they are called homogamous), or may have mixtures of two or more sexual forms (heterogamous).[12] Thus goatsbeards (Tragopogon species) have heads of bisexual florets, like other members of the tribe Cichorieae,[13] whereas marigolds (Calendula species) generally have heads with the outer florets bisexual and the inner florets staminate (male).[14]
Like Amborella, some plants undergo sex-switching. For example, Arisaema triphyllum (Jack-in-the-pulpit) expresses sexual differences at different stages of growth: smaller plants produce all or mostly male flowers; as plants grow larger over the years the male flowers are replaced by more female flowers on the same plant. Arisaema triphyllum thus covers a multitude of sexual conditions in its lifetime: nonsexual juvenile plants, young plants that are all male, larger plants with a mix of both male and female flowers, and large plants that have mostly female flowers.[15] Other plant populations have plants that produce more male flowers early in the year and as plants bloom later in the growing season they produce more female flowers.[citation needed]
Terminology[edit]
 The complexity of the morphology of flowers and its variation within populations has led to a rich terminology.

Androdioecious: having male flowers on some plants, bisexual ones on others.[6]
Androecious: having only male flowers (the male of a dioecious population); producing pollen but no seed.[16]
Androgynous: see bisexual.[6]
Androgynomonoecious: having male, female, and bisexual flowers on the same plant, also called trimonoecious.[16]
Andromonoecious: having both bisexual and male flowers on the same plant.[6]
Bisexual: each flower of each individual has both male and female structures, i.e. it combines both sexes in one structure.[6] Flowers of this kind are called perfect, having both stamens and carpels. Other terms used for this condition are androgynous, hermaphroditic, monoclinous and synoecious.
Dichogamous: having sexes developing at different times; producing pollen when the stigmas are not receptive,[6] either protandrous or protogynous. This promotes outcrossing by limiting self-pollination.[17] Some dichogamous plants have bisexual flowers, others have unisexual flowers.
Diclinous: see Unisexual.[6]
Dioecious: having either only male or only female flowers.[6] No individual plant of the population produces both pollen and ovules.[18] (From the Greek for "two households". See also the Wiktionary entry for dioecious.)
Gynodioecious: having hermaphrodite flowers and female flowers on separate plants.[19]
Gynoecious: having only female flowers (the female of a dioecious population); producing seed but not pollen.[citation needed]
Gynomonoecious: having both bisexual and female flowers on the same plant.[6]
Hermaphroditic: see bisexual.[6]
Imperfect: (of flowers) having some parts that are normally present not developed,[20] e.g. lacking stamens. See also Unisexual.
Monoclinous: see bisexual.[6]
Monoecious: In the commoner narrow sense of the term, it refers to plants with unisexual flowers which occur on the same individual.[2] In the broad sense of the term, it also includes plants with bisexual flowers.[6] Individuals bearing separate flowers of both sexes at the same time are called simultaneously or synchronously monoecious.[citation needed] Individuals that bear flowers of one sex at one time are called consecutively monoecious.[citation needed] (From the Greek monos "single" + oikia "house". See also the Wiktionary entry for monoecious.)
Perfect: (of flowers) see bisexual.[6]
Polygamodioecious: mostly dioecious, but with either a few flowers of the opposite sex or a few bisexual flowers on the same plant.[2]
Polygamomonoecious: see polygamous.[6] Or, mostly monoecious, but also partly polygamous.[2]
Polygamous: having male, female, and bisexual flowers on the same plant.[6] Also called polygamomonoecious or trimonoecious.[21] Or, with bisexual and at least one of male and female flowers on the same plant.[2]
Protandrous: (of dichogamous plants) having male parts of flowers developed before female parts, e.g. having flowers that function first as male and then change to female or producing pollen before the stigmas of the same plant are receptive.[6] (Protoandrous is also used.)
Protogynous: (of dichogamous plants) having female parts of flowers developed before male parts, e.g. having flowers that function first as female and then change to male or producing pollen after the stigmas of the same plant are receptive.[6]
Subandroecious: having mostly male flowers, with a few female or bisexual flowers.[citation needed]
Subdioecious: having some individuals in otherwise dioecious populations with flowers that are not clearly male or female. The population produces normally male or female plants with unisexual flowers, but some plants may have bisexual flowers, some both male and female flowers, and others some combination thereof, such as female and bisexual flowers. The condition is thought to represent a transition between bisexuality and dioecy.[22][23]
Subgynoecious: having mostly female flowers, with a few male or bisexual flowers.[citation needed]
Synoecious: see bisexual.[6]
Trimonoecious: see polygamous[6] and androgynomonoecious.[16]
Trioecious: see polygamous.[citation needed]
Unisexual: having either functionally male or functionally female flowers.[6] This condition is also called diclinous, incomplete or imperfect.

Outcrossing[edit]
Outcrossing, cross-fertilization or allogamy, in which offspring are formed by the fusion of the gametes of two different plants, is the most common mode of reproduction among higher plants. About 55% of higher plant species reproduce in this way. An additional 7% are partially cross-fertilizing and partially self-fertilizing (autogamy). About 15% produce gametes but are principally self-fertilizing with significant out-crossing lacking. Only about 8% of higher plant species reproduce exclusively by non-sexual means. These include plants that reproduce vegetatively by runners or bulbils, or which produce seeds without embryo fertilization (apomixis). The selective advantage of outcrossing appears to be the masking of deleterious recessive mutations.[24]
The primary mechanism used by flowering plants to ensure outcrossing involves a genetic mechanism known as self-incompatibility. Various aspects of floral morphology promote allogamy. In plants with bisexual flowers, the anthers and carpels may mature at different times, plants being protandrous (with the anthers maturing first) or protogynous (with the carpels mature first).[citation needed] Monoecious species, with unisexual flowers on the same plant, may produce male and female flowers at different times.[citation needed]
Dioecy, the condition of having unisexual flowers on different plants, necessarily results in outcrossing, and might thus be thought to have evolved for this purpose. However, "dioecy has proven difficult to explain simply as an outbreeding mechanism in plants that lack self-incompatibility".[7] Resource-allocation constraints may be important in the evolution of dioecy, for example, with wind-pollination, separate male flowers arranged in a catkin that vibrates in the wind may provide better pollen dispersal.[7] In climbing plants, rapid upward growth may be essential, and resource allocation to fruit production may be incompatible with rapid growth, thus giving an advantage to delayed production of female flowers.[7] Dioecy has evolved separately in many different lineages, and monoecy in the plant lineage correlates with the evolution of dioecy, suggesting that dioecy can evolve more readily from plants that already produce separate male and female flowers.[7]
See also[edit]





Book: Sex






Plants portal



Apomixis
Botany
Evolution of sexual reproduction
Flower
Evolutionary history of plants: Flowers
Flower: Development
Meiosis

References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ Barrett, S.C.H. (2002). "The evolution of plant sexual diversity" (PDF). Nature Reviews Genetics. 3 (4): 274–284. doi:10.1038/nrg776. 
^ a b c d e Hickey, M. & King, C. (2001). The Cambridge Illustrated Glossary of Botanical Terms. Cambridge University Press. 
^ Sporne 1974, pp. 14–15.
^ Whittemore, Alan T. "Ranunculus". http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&taxon_id=127971. Retrieved 2013-03-04.  Missing or empty |title= (help) In Flora of North America Editorial Committee (1982)
^ Sporne 1974, pp. 125–127.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t Beentje, Henk (2010). The Kew Plant Glossary. Richmond, Surrey: Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. ISBN 978-1-84246-422-9. 
^ a b c d e Renner, S.S. & Ricklefs, R.E. (1995). "Dioecy and its correlates in the flowering plants". American Journal of Botany. 82: 596–606. doi:10.2307/2445418. JSTOR 2445418. 
^ a b Stace 2010, pp. 292–296.
^ Stace 2010, p. 669.
^ Buzgo, Matyas; Soltis, Pamela S. & Soltis, Douglas E. (2004). "Floral Developmental Morphology of Amborella trichopoda (Amborellaceae)". International Journal of Plant Sciences. 165 (6): 925–947. doi:10.1086/424024. 
^ Sporne 1974, pp. 15–16.
^ Barkley, Theodore M.; Brouillet, Luc & Strother, John L. "Asteraceae". http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&taxon_id=10074. Retrieved 2013-03-04.  Missing or empty |title= (help) In Flora of North America Editorial Committee (1982)
^ Barkley, Theodore M.; Brouillet, Luc & Strother, John L. "Chichorieae". http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&taxon_id=20701. Retrieved 2013-03-04.  Missing or empty |title= (help) In Flora of North America Editorial Committee (1982)
^ Strother, John L. "Calendula". http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=1&taxon_id=105062. Retrieved 2013-03-04.  Missing or empty |title= (help) In Flora of North America Editorial Committee (1982)
^ Ewing, J.W. & Klein, R.M. (1982). "Sex Expression in Jack-in-the-Pulpit". Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club. 109 (1): 47–50. doi:10.2307/2484467. 
^ a b c Janick, J. (2010). Plant Breeding Reviews. Wiley. ISBN 9780470650028. 
^ Stace, H.M. (1995). "Protogyny, Self-Incompatibility and Pollination in Anthocercis gracilis (Solanaceae)". Australian Journal of Botany. 43 (5): 451–459. doi:10.1071/BT9950451. 
^ Baskauf, Steve (2002). "Sexual systems in angiosperms". Retrieved 2013-02-27. 
^ "Gynodioecious". Dictionary of Botany. Retrieved 2013-04-10. 
^ Cook 1968, p. 131.
^ Geber, Monica A. (1999). Gender and sexual dimorphism in flowering plants. Berlin: Springer. ISBN 3-540-64597-7.  p. 4
^ Olson, Matthew S. & Antonovics, Janis (2000). "Correlation between male and female reproduction in the subdioecious herb Astilbe biternata (Saxifragaceae)". American Journal of Botany. 87 (6): 837. doi:10.2307/2656891. 
^ Strittmatter, L.I.; Negrón-Ortiz, V. & Hickey, R.J. (2002). "Subdioecy in Consolea spinosissima (Cactaceae): breeding system and embryological studies". American Journal of Botany. 89 (9): 1373–1387. doi:10.3732/ajb.89.9.1373. PMID 21665739. 
^ Bernstein, C. & Bernstein, H. (1991). Aging, Sex, and DNA Repair. San Diego: Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-092860-6. 


Sources[edit]

Cook, J. Gordon (1968). ABC of plant terms. Watford, UK: Merrow. OCLC 474319451. 
Flora of North America Editorial Committee, ed. (1982). Flora of North America (online). eFloras.org. Retrieved 2013-03-04. 
Sporne, K.R. (1974). The Morphology of Angiosperms. London: Hutchinson. ISBN 978-0-09-120611-6. 
Stace, Clive (2010). New Flora of the British Isles (3rd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-70772-5. 

Further reading[edit]

Darwin, Charles (1877). The Different Forms of Flowers on Plants of the Same Species. London: J. Murray. 
Linnaeus, Carl (1735). Systema Naturae. 
Sattler, Rolf (1973). Organogenesis of Flowers: a Photographic Text-Atlas. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-0-8020-1864-9. 

External links[edit]

 Media related to Plant sexuality at Wikimedia Commons
Images of sexual systems in flowering plants at bioimages.vanderbilt.edu







v
t
e


Botany




History of botany



Subdisciplines



Plant systematics
Ethnobotany
Paleobotany
Plant anatomy
Plant ecology
Phytogeography

Geobotany
Flora


Phytochemistry
Plant pathology
Bryology
Phycology
Floristics
Dendrology





Plant groups



Algae
Archaeplastida
Bryophyte
Non-vascular plants
Vascular plants
Spermatophytes
Pteridophyte
Gymnosperm
Angiosperm






Plant morphology
(glossary)





Plant cells



Cell wall
Phragmoplast
Plastid
Plasmodesma
Vacuole





Tissues



Meristem
Vascular tissue

Vascular bundle


Ground tissue

Mesophyll


Cork
Wood
Storage organs





Vegetative



Root
Rhizoid
Bulb
Rhizome
Shoot

Stem
Leaf

Petiole
Cataphyll


Bud
Sessility







Reproductive
(Flower)



Flower development
Inflorescence

Umbel
Raceme
Bract
Pedicellate


Flower

Whorl
Floral symmetry
Floral diagram
Floral formula


Receptacle
Hypanthium (Floral cup)
Perianth

Tepal
Petal
Sepal


Sporophyll
Gynoecium

Ovary

Ovule


Stigma


Archegonium
Androecium

Stamen
Staminode
Pollen
Tapetum


Gynandrium
Gametophyte
Sporophyte
Plant embryo
Fruit

Fruit anatomy
Berry
Capsule
Seed

Seed dispersal
Endosperm









Surface structures



Epicuticular wax
Plant cuticle
Epidermis
Stoma
Nectary
Trichome
Prickle











Plant physiology
Materials






Nutrition
Photosynthesis

Chlorophyll


Plant hormone
Transpiration
Turgor pressure
Bulk flow
Aleurone
Phytomelanin
Sugar
Sap
Starch
Cellulose





Plant growth and habit



Secondary growth
Woody plants
Herbaceous plants
Habit

Vines

Lianas


Shrubs

Subshrubs


Trees
Succulent plants







Reproduction


Evolution
Ecology






Alternation of generations
Sporangium

Spore
Microsporangia

Microspore


Megasporangium

Megaspore




Pollination

Pollinators
Pollen tube


Double fertilization
Germination
Evolutionary development
Evolutionary history

timeline


Hardiness zone





Plant taxonomy



History of plant systematics
Herbarium
Biological classification
Botanical nomenclature

Botanical name
Correct name
Author citation
International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN)
- for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP)


Taxonomic rank
International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT)
Plant taxonomy systems
Cultivated plant taxonomy

Citrus taxonomy
cultigen

cultivar
Group
grex









Practice



Agronomy
Floriculture
Forestry
Horticulture








Lists
Related topics






Botanical terms
Botanists

by author abbreviation


Botanical expedition








Category
Commons
Portal
WikiProject












v
t
e


Sex



Biological terms



Sexual dimorphism

Male
Female


Sexual differentiation

Feminization
Virilization


Sex-determination system

XY
ZW
XO
Temperature-dependent
Haplodiploidy


Heterogametic sex
Homogametic sex
Sex chromosome

X chromosome
Y chromosome


Testis-determining factor
Hermaphrodite

Sequential hermaphroditism


Intersex





Sexual reproduction



Evolution of sexual reproduction

Anisogamy
Isogamy


Germ cell
Reproductive system
Sex organ
Meiosis
Gametogenesis

Spermatogenesis
Oogenesis


Gamete

spermatozoon
ovum


Fertilization

External
Internal


Sexual selection
Plant reproduction
Fungal reproduction
Sexual reproduction in animals

Sexual intercourse
Human reproduction







Sexuality



Plant sexuality
Animal sexuality
Human sexuality

Mechanics
Differentiation
Activity










 Sex portal
 Biology portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plant_reproductive_morphology&oldid=818329215"					Categories: Plant sexualityPlant morphologyHidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2013Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014Commons category without a link on Wikidata