



Children performing a Christmas play depicting The Nativity




Literature





Major forms




Novel
Poem
Drama
Short story
Novella




Genres




Comedy
Drama
Epic
Erotic
Nonsense
Lyric
Mythopoeia
Romance
Satire
Tragedy
Tragicomedy




Media




Performance

play


Book




Techniques




Prose
Poetry




History and lists




History

modern




Outline
Glossary of terms


Books
Writers
Literary awards

poetry






Discussion




Criticism
Theory (critical theory)
Sociology
Magazines




 Literature portal





v
t
e





A play is a form of literature written by a playwright, usually consisting of dialogue between characters, intended for theatrical performance rather than just reading. Plays are performed at a variety of levels, from Broadway, Off-Broadway, regional theater, to Community theatre, as well as University or school productions. There are rare dramatists, notably George Bernard Shaw, who have had little preference as to whether their plays were performed or read. The term "play" can refer to both the written texts of playwrights and to their complete theatrical performance.[1]



Contents


1 Genres

1.1 Comedy

1.1.1 Farce
1.1.2 Satirical
1.1.3 Restoration comedy


1.2 Tragedy
1.3 Historical
1.4 Musical theatre
1.5 Theatre of Cruelty
1.6 Theatre of the Absurd


2 Terminology
3 See also

3.1 Lists


4 References
5 External links



Genres[edit]




Symbol of theatre


Comedy[edit]
Main article: Comedy
Comedies are plays which are designed to be humorous. Comedies are often filled with witty remarks, unusual characters, and strange circumstances. Certain comedies are geared toward different age groups. Comedies were one of the two original play types of Ancient Greece, along with tragedies. An example of a comedy would be William Shakespeare's play A Midsummer Night's Dream, or for a more modern example the skits from Saturday Night Live.[2][3]
Farce[edit]
Main article: Farce
A generally nonsensical genre of play, farces are often overacted and often involve slapstick humor. An example of a farce includes William Shakespeare's play The Comedy of Errors, or Mark Twain's play Is He Dead?.
Satirical[edit]
Main article: Satire
A satire play takes a comic look at current events people while at the same time attempting to make a political or social statement, for example pointing out corruption. An example of a satire would be Nikolai Gogol's The Government Inspector and Aristophanes' Lysistrata. Satire plays are generally one of the most popular forms of comedy, and often considered to be their own genre entirely.
Restoration comedy[edit]
Main article: Restoration comedy
Restoration comedy is a genre that explored relationships between men and women, and was considered risqué in its time.[4] Characters featured in restoration comedy included stereotypes of all kinds, and these same stereotypes were found in most plays of this genre, so much so that most plays were very similar in message and content. However, since restoration comedy dealt with unspoken aspects of relationships, it created a type of connection between audience and performance that was more informal and private.
It is commonly agreed that restoration comedy has origins in Molière’s theories of comedy, but differs in intention and tone.[5] The inconsistency between restoration comedy’s morals and the morals of the era is something that often arises during the study of this genre. This may give clues as to why, despite its original success, restoration comedy did not last long in the seventeenth century. However, in recent years, it has become a topic of interest for theatre theorists, who have been looking into theatre styles that have their own conventions of performance.[6]
Tragedy[edit]
Main article: Tragedy
These plays contain darker themes such as death and disaster. Often the protagonist of the play has a tragic flaw, a trait which leads to their downfall. Tragic plays convey all emotions and have extremely dramatic conflicts. Tragedy was one of the two original play types of Ancient Greece. Some examples of tragedies include William Shakespeare's Hamlet, and also John Webster's play The Duchess of Malfi.[2]
Historical[edit]
Main article: History (theatrical genre)




An actress performs a play in front of 2 statues from the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus. Room 21, the British Museum, London






An actor and actress performing a play in front of the Nereid Monument, Room 17, the British Museum, London


These plays focus on actual historical events. They can be tragedies or comedies, but are often neither of these. History as a separate genre was popularized by William Shakespeare. Examples of historical plays include Friedrich Schiller's Demetrius and William Shakespeare's King John.[7]
Musical theatre[edit]
Main article: Musical theatre
Ballad opera, a popular theatre style at the time, was the first style of musical to be performed in the American colonies. The first musical of American origin was premiered in Philadelphia in 1767, and was called “The Disappointment”, however, this play never made it to production. Around the 1920s, theatre styles were beginning to be defined more clearly. For musical theatre, this meant that composers gained the right to create every song in the play, and these new plays were held to more specific conventions, such as thirty-two-bar songs. When the Great Depression came, many people left Broadway for Hollywood, and the atmosphere of Broadway musicals changed significantly. A similar situation occurred during the 1960s, when composers were scarce and musicals lacked vibrancy and entertainment value.
By the 1990s, there were very few original Broadway musicals, as many were recreations of movies or novels. [8]
Musical productions have songs to help explain the story and move the ideas of the play along. They are usually accompanied by dancing. Musicals can be very elaborate in settings and actor performances. Examples of musical productions include Wicked and Fiddler on the Roof.
Theatre of Cruelty[edit]
This theatre style originated in the 1940s when Antonin Artaud hypothesized about the effects of expressing through the body as opposed to “by socially conditioned thought.” In 1946, he wrote a preface to his works in which he explained how he came to write what and the way he did.
Above all, Artaud did not trust language as a means of communication. Plays within the genre of theatre of cruelty are abstract in convention and content. Artaud wanted his plays to have an effect and accomplish something. His intention was to symbolize the subconscious through bodily performances, as he did not believe language could be effective. Artaud considered his plays to be an enactment rather than a re-enactment, which meant he believed his actors were in reality, rather than re-enacting reality.
His plays dealt with heavy issues such as patients in psych wards, and Nazi Germany. Through these performances, he wanted to “make the causes of suffering audible”, however, audiences originally reacted poorly, as they were so taken aback by what they saw. Much of his work was banned in France at the time.
Artaud did not believe that conventional theatre of the time would allow the audience to have a cathartic experience and help heal the wounds of World War II. For this reason, he moved towards radio-based theatre, in which the audience could use their imagination to connect the words they were hearing to their body. This made his work much more personal and individualized, which he believed would increase the effectiveness of portraying suffering.[9]
Theatre of the Absurd[edit]
Theatre of the Absurd: This genre generally includes metaphysical representations of existential qualms and questions. Theatre of the absurd denies rationality, and embraces the inevitability of falling into the abyss of the human condition. Instead of discussing these issues, however, theatre of the absurd is a demonstration of them. This leaves the audience to discuss and question the content of the play for themselves.
One of the main aspects of theatre of the absurd is the physical contradiction to language. Oftentimes, the dialogue between characters will directly oppose their actions.
Famous playwrights within this genre include Beckett, Sartre, Ionesco, Adamov, and Genet.[10]
Terminology[edit]
The term "play" can be either a general term, or more specifically refer to a non-musical play. Sometimes the term "straight play" is used in contrast to "musical", which refers to a play based on music, dance, and songs sung by the play's characters. For a short play, the term "playlet" is sometimes used.
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Theatre.



Canovaccio
Closet drama
Drama
Dramatis personæ
Playwright
Theatre
History of theatre
Screenplay
Musical theatre

Lists[edit]

List of basic theatre topics
List of American plays
List of Canadian plays
List of Romanian plays
List of films based on stage plays or musicals
List of plays made into feature films

References[edit]


^ "Play": Dictionary.com website. Retrieved on January 3, 2008.
^ a b "THE ANCIENT GREEK DRAMA & THEATRE HISTORY PAGE". anarchon.tripod.com. Retrieved 2008-06-16. 
^ "Origin of Comedy". www.theatrehistory.com. Retrieved 2008-06-16. 
^ Vernon, P.F. (1962). "Marriage of Convenience and the Moral Code of Restoration Comedy". Essays of Criticism: 370–387. 
^ The Ornament of Action. Cambridge University Press. 1979. 
^ Styan, J.L. (1986). Restoration Comedy in Performance. Cambridge University Press. 
^ The Three Richards: Richard I ... - Google Book Search. books.google.co.uk. 2006. ISBN 978-1-85285-521-5. Retrieved 2008-06-17. 
^ Bordman, Gerald (1978). American Musical Theatre (3 ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
^ Finter, Helga; Griffin, Matthew (1997). Antonin Artaud and the Impossible Theatre: The Legacy of the Theatre of Cruelty. MIT Press. pp. 15–40. 
^ Esslin, Martin (2001). Theatre of the Absurd. ISBN 1-4000-7523-8. 


External links[edit]



Wikiversity has learning resources about Collaborative_play_writing



List of 380 Plays of the World Translated into Japanese in 1930







v
t
e


Narrative



Character



Antagonist
Antihero
Archenemy
Character arc
Characterization
Deuteragonist
False protagonist
Focal character
Foil
Protagonist
Stock character
Supporting character
Tritagonist
Narrator
Tragic hero








Plot



Action
Backstory
Cliché
Climax
Cliffhanger
Conflict
Deus ex machina
Dialogue
Dramatic structure
Exposition
Eucatastrophe
Foreshadowing
Flashback
Flashforward
Frame story
In medias res
Pace
Plot device
Plot twist
Poetic justice
Reveal
Self-fulfilling prophecy
Subplot
Trope
Kishōtenketsu





Setting



Backstory
Utopia
Dystopia
Alternate history
Fictional location

city
country
universe







Theme



Leitmotif
Metaphor
Moral
Motif
Irony





Style



Allegory
Bathos
Diction
Figure of speech
Imagery
Narrative techniques
Narration
Stylistic device
Suspension of disbelief
Symbolism
Tone
Mode
Mood





Structure



Linear narrative
Nonlinear narrative

films
television series


Types of fiction with multiple endings





Form



Epic
Fable
Fabliau
Fairy tale
Folktale
Flash fiction
Legend
Novella
Novel
Parable
Play
Poem
Screenplay
Short story





Genre



Action fiction
Adventure
Comic
Crime
Docufiction
Epistolary
Erotic
Fiction
Fantasy
Gothic
Historical
Horror
Magic realism
Mystery
Nautical
Paranoid
Philosophical
Picaresque
Political
Psychological
Romance
Saga
Satire
Science
Speculative
Superhero
Thriller
Urban
Western
List of writing genres





Narration



First-person
Multiple narrators
Stream of consciousness
Stream of unconsciousness
Unreliable





Tense



Past
Present
Future





Related



Audience
Author
Creative nonfiction
Fiction writing
Literary theory
Literary science
Narratology
Monomyth
Rhetoric
Screenwriting
Storytelling
Tellability






Literature portal






Culture portal
Theatre portal
Literature portal





Authority control



GND: 4461958-3
NDL: 00562448











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Play_(theatre)&oldid=801796008"					Categories: DramaTheatrePerforming artsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers