

Part of a series on


Politics







Primary topics



Index of politics articles
Politics by country
Politics by subdivision
Political economy
Political history
Political history of the world
Political philosophy









Political systems



Anarchy


City-state
Democracy


Federacy
Feudalism


Dictatorship
Directory


Meritocracy
Monarchy


Parliamentary
Presidential


Republic
Semi-parliamentary


Semi-presidential
Theocracy









Academic disciplines




Political science
(political scientists)


International relations
(theory)

Comparative politics









Public administration



Bureaucracy (street-level)
Adhocracy









Policy



Public policy (doctrine)


Domestic and foreign policy


Civil society


Public interest









Organs of government



Separation of powers


Legislature
Executive


Judiciary
Election commission









Related topics



Sovereignty
Theories of political behavior
Political psychology
Biology and political orientation
Political organisations
Foreign electoral intervention









Subseries



Electoral systems


Elections (voting)


Federalism
Form of government


Ideology
Political campaigning


Political parties










v
t
e





A politician is a person active in party politics, or a person holding or seeking office in government. In democratic countries, politicians seek elective positions within a government through elections or, at times, temporary appointment to replace politicians who have died, resigned or have been otherwise removed from office. In non-democratic countries, they employ other means of reaching power through appointment, bribery, revolutions and intrigues. Some politicians are experienced in the art or science of government.[1] Politicians propose, support and create laws or policies that govern the land and, by extension, its people. Broadly speaking, a "politician" can be anyone who seeks to achieve political power in any bureaucratic institution.



Contents


1 Identity
2 Media and rhetoric
3 Bureaucracy and spoils
4 Careers
5 Characteristics
6 Criticism
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Identity[edit]
Politicians are people who are politically active, especially in party politics. Positions range from local offices to executive, legislative, and judicial offices of regional and national governments.[2][3] Some elected law enforcement officers, such as sheriffs, are considered politicians.[4][5]
Media and rhetoric[edit]
Politicians are known for their rhetoric, as in speeches or campaign advertisements. They are especially known for using common themes that allow them to develop their political positions in terms familiar to the voters.[6] Politicians of necessity become expert users of the media.[7] Politicians in the 19th century made heavy use of newspapers, magazines, and pamphlets, as well as posters.[8] In the 20th century, they branched into radio and television, making television commercials the single most expensive part of an election campaign.[9] In the 21st century, they have become increasingly involved with the social media based on the Internet and smart phones.[10]
Rumor has always played a major role in politics, with negative rumors about an opponent typically more effective than positive rumors about one's own side.[11]
Bureaucracy and spoils[edit]
Once elected, the politician becomes a government official and has to deal with a permanent bureaucracy of non-politicians. Historically, there has been a subtle conflict between the long-term goals of each side.[12] In patronage-based systems, such as the United States and Canada in the 19th century, winning politicians replace the bureaucracy with local politicians who formed their base of support, the "spoils system". Civil service reform was initiated to eliminate the corruption of government services that were involved.[13] However, in many less developed countries, the spoils system is in full-scale operation today.[14]
Careers[edit]
Mattozzi and Merlo argue that there are two main career paths which are typically followed by politicians in modern democracies. First come the career politicians. They are politicians who work in the political sector until retirement. Second are the "political careerists". These are politicians who gain reputation for expertise in controlling certain bureaucracies, then leave politics for a well-paid career in the private sector making use of their political contacts.[15]
Characteristics[edit]
Numerous scholars have studied the characteristics of politicians, comparing those at the local and national levels, and comparing the more liberal or the more conservative ones, and comparing the more successful and less successful in terms of elections.[16] In recent years, special attention has focused on the distinctive career path of women politicians.[17] For example, there are studies of the "Supermadre" model in Latin American politics.[18]
Many politicians have the knack to remember thousands of names and faces and recall personal anecdotes about their constituents—it is an advantage in the job, rather like being seven-foot tall for a basketball player. United States Presidents George W. Bush and Bill Clinton were renowned for their memories.[19][20]
Criticism[edit]
Many critics attack politicians for being out of touch with the public. Areas of friction include the manner in which politicians speak, which has been described as being overly formal and filled with many euphemistic and metaphorical expressions and commonly perceived as an attempt to "obscure, mislead, and confuse".[21]
In the popular image, politicians are thought of as clueless, incompetent and corrupt, taking money in exchange for goods or services, rather than working for the general public good.[22]
Many ex-politicians who could not bear the leadership in politics that causes reprisals for critical thought criticize those who remain politicians for lacking critical thought.[23]
See also[edit]

American election campaigns in the 19th century
Midlothian campaign of 1878–1880 in Britain by one of its most famous politicians, William Gladstone
Political campaign
Political party
Diplomat
Lawyer
Journalist

References[edit]



^ "politician | someone who is active in government usually as an elected official". www.merriam-webster.com. Retrieved 2015-10-02. 
^ "politician - Webster's New World College Dictionary". Yourdictionary.com. 2013-05-21. Retrieved 2013-06-26. 
^ "politician - Princeton Wordnet dictionary". wordfind.com. 
^ Gaines, Miller, Larry, Roger LeRoy (2012). Criminal Justice in Action. Wadsworth Publishing. p. 152. ISBN 978-1111835576. 
^ Grant, Grant, Donald Lee, Jonathan (2001). The Way It Was in the South: The Black Experience in Georgia. University of Georgia Press. p. 449. ISBN 978-0820323299. 
^ Jonathan Charteris-Black, Politicians and rhetoric: The persuasive power of metaphor (Palgrave-MacMillan, 2005)
^ Ofer Feldman, Beyond public speech and symbols: Explorations in the rhetoric of politicians and the media (2000).
^ Robert J. Dinkin, Campaigning in America: A History of Election Practices (1989) online
^ Kathleen Hall Jamieson and Keith Spillette, The Press Effect: Politicians, Journalists, and the Stories that Shape the Political World (2014)
^ Nathaniel G. Pearlman, Margin of Victory: How Technologists Help Politicians Win Elections (2012) online
^ David Coast and Jo Fox, "Rumour and Politics" History Compass (2015), 13#5 pp 222-234.
^ Joel D. Aberbach, Robert D. Putnam, and Bert A. Rockman, eds., Bureaucrats and politicians in western democracies (Harvard University Press, 1981)
^ David A. Schultz, and Robert Maranto, eds., The politics of civil service reform (1998).
^ Morris Szeftel, "Political graft and the spoils system in Zambia—the state as a resource in itself." Review of African Political Economy 9.24 (1982): 4-21.
^ Andrea Mattozzi and Antonio Merlo, "Political careers or career politicians?." Journal of Public Economics 92#3 (2008): 597-608.
^ Timothy S. Prinz, "The career paths of elected politicians: a review and prospectus." in Shirley Williams and Edward L. Lascher, eds. Ambition and beyond: career paths of American politicians (1993) pp: 11-63.
^ Elina Haavio-Mannila and Torild Skard, eds. Unfinished Democracy: women in Nordic politics (2013)
^ Elsa M. Chaney, Supermadre: Women in Politics in Latin America (University of Texas Press, 2014).
^ Iwan W. Morgan (2010). Assessing George W. Bush's Legacy: The Right Man?. p. 45. ISBN 9780230114333. 
^ James E. Mueller (2008). Tag Teaming the Press: How Bill and Hillary Clinton Work Together to Handle the Media. p. 32. ISBN 9780742563926. 
^ Invitation to Critical Thinking - Page 319, Vincent E. Barry - 2007
^ Arnold J. Heidenheimer and Michael Johnston, eds. Political corruption: Concepts and contexts (2011).
^ Knapptryckarkompaniet, Anne-Marie Palsson, 2011



Further reading[edit]


Aberbach, Joel D., Robert D. Putnam, and Bert A. Rockman, eds., Bureaucrats and politicians in western democracies (Harvard University Press, 1981)
Heywood, Paul M. ed. Routledge Handbook of Political Corruption (2014)
Welch, Susan, John Gruhl, John Comer, and Susan M. Rigdon. Understanding American Government. 8th ed. Belmont, USA: Thompson Wadsworth, 2006
"Merriam Webster Online Dictionary" Definition of politician 5 June 2006


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Politicians.



 The dictionary definition of politician at Wiktionary
 Quotations related to Politician at Wikiquote




Authority control



GND: 4046517-2
NDL: 00570489
NKC: ph115781











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Politician&oldid=809990113"					Categories: PoliticiansPolitical occupationsLegal professionsPositions of authorityHidden categories: Use dmy dates from June 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers