Not to be confused with Second Polish Republic.


Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth↓






1569–1795










Royal Banner (c. 1605)



Royal Coat of arms





Motto
"Si Deus nobiscum quis contra nos"
"If God is with us, then who is against us"
"Pro Fide, Lege et Rege"[note 1]
"For Faith, Law and King'"






The location of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1619.



Capital
Kraków[1] and Wilno
(1569–1793)
Warsaw[b]
(1793–1795)


Languages
Official:
Polish and Latin

Regional: 



Lithuanian
Ruthenian
(see Languages section for details)







Religion
Official:
Roman Catholicism

Minority: 



Orthodox Christianity
Protestantism
Judaism
Islam







Government
Hereditary Monarchy
(1569–1573)
Elective Monarchy
(1573–1791 / 1792–1795)
Constitutional Monarchy
(1791–1792)


King / Grand Duke



 • 
1569–1572
Sigismund II Augustus (first)


 • 
1764–1795
Stanisław August Poniatowski (last)


Legislature
General Sejm


 • 
Privy Council
Senate


Historical era
Early modern period


 • 
Union established
July 1, 1569


 • 
Protectorate of the Russian Empire
1768


 • 
May 3 Constitution
May 3, 1791


 • 
2nd Partition
January 23, 1793


 • 
3rd Partition
October 24, 1795


Area


 • 
1582
815,000 km2 (315,000 sq mi)


 • 
1650
1,153,465 km2 (445,355 sq mi)


Population


 • 
1582 est.
6,500,000 


     Density
8/km2 (21/sq mi)


 • 
1650 est.
11,000,000 


     Density
10/km2 (25/sq mi)







Preceded by
Succeeded by






Kingdom of Poland (1385–1569)



Grand Duchy of Lithuania






Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria



Russian Empire



Kingdom of Prussia









Today part of


See list

 Belarus
 Estonia
 Latvia
 Lithuania
 Moldova
 Poland
 Romania
 Russia
 Slovakia
 Ukraine





The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, formally the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, after 1791 the Commonwealth of Poland, was a dualistic state, a bi-confederation of Poland and Lithuania ruled by a common monarch, who was both the King of Poland and the Grand Duke of Lithuania. It was one of the largest[2][3] and most populous countries of 16th- and 17th-century Europe. At its peak in the early 17th century, the Commonwealth spanned some 450,000 square miles (1,200,000 km2)[4] and sustained a multi-ethnic population of 11 million.[5]
The Commonwealth was established by the Union of Lublin in July 1569, but the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania had been in a de facto personal union since 1386 with the marriage of the Polish queen Hedwig and Lithuania's Grand Duke Jogaila, who was crowned King jure uxoris Władysław II Jagiełło of Poland. The First Partition of Poland in 1772 and the Second Partition of Poland in 1793 greatly reduced the nation's size and the Commonwealth disappeared as an independent state following the Third Partition of Poland in 1795.
The Union possessed many features unique among contemporary states. Its political system was characterized by strict checks upon monarchical power. These checks were enacted by a legislature (sejm) controlled by the nobility (szlachta). This idiosyncratic system was a precursor to modern concepts of democracy,[6] constitutional monarchy,[7][8][9] and federation.[10] Although the two component states of the Commonwealth were formally equal, Poland was the dominant partner in the union.[11]
The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth was marked by high levels of ethnic diversity and by relative religious tolerance, guaranteed by the Warsaw Confederation Act 1573;[12][13][14] however, the degree of religious freedom varied over time.[15] The Constitution of 1791, however, acknowledged Catholicism as the "dominant religion," unlike the Warsaw Confederation; although, freedom of religion was still granted with it.[9]
After several decades of prosperity,[16][17][18] it entered a period of protracted political,[9][19] military and economic[20] decline. Its growing weakness led to its partitioning among its neighbors, Austria, Prussia and the Russian Empire, during the late 18th century. Shortly before its demise, the Commonwealth adopted a massive reform effort and enacted the Constitution of May 3, 1791—the first codified constitution in modern European history and the second in modern world history (after the United States Constitution).[21][22][23][24][25]



Contents


1 Name
2 History
3 State organization and politics

3.1 Golden Liberty
3.2 Shortcomings
3.3 Late reforms


4 Economy
5 Military
6 Culture

6.1 Science and literature
6.2 Art and music
6.3 Szlachta and Sarmatism
6.4 Demographics and religion
6.5 Warsaw Confederation and religious freedom
6.6 Languages


7 Legacy
8 Administrative divisions
9 Geography
10 Image gallery
11 See also
12 Notes
13 References
14 Sources
15 External links



Name[edit]
The official name of the state was The Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (Polish: Królestwo Polskie i Wielkie Księstwo Litewskie, Lithuanian: Lenkijos Karalystė ir Lietuvos Didžioji Kunigaikštystė, Latin: Regnum Poloniae Magnusque Ducatus Lithuaniae) and the Latin term was usually used in international treaties and diplomacy.[26] In the 17th century and later it was also known as the Most Serene Commonwealth of Poland (Polish: Najjaśniejsza Rzeczpospolita Polska, Latin: Serenissima Res Publica Poloniae),[27] the Commonwealth of the Polish Kingdom,[28] or the Commonwealth of Poland.[29] Its inhabitants referred to it in everyday speech as the "Rzeczpospolita" (Ruthenian: Рѣч Посполита Rech Pospolita, Lithuanian: Žečpospolita). Western Europeans often simply called it Poland and in most past and modern sources it is referred to as the Kingdom of Poland, or just Poland.[26][30][31] The terms: the Commonwealth of Poland and the Commonwealth of Two Nations (Polish: Rzeczpospolita Obojga Narodów, Latin: Res Publica Utriusque Nationis) were used in the Reciprocal Guarantee of Two Nations.[32] The English term 'Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth' and German 'Polen-Litauen' are seen as renderings of the Commonwealth of Two Nations variant.[26] Other names include the Republic of Nobles (Polish: Rzeczpospolita szlachecka) and the First Commonwealth (Polish: I Rzeczpospolita), the latter relatively common in Polish historiography.
History[edit]
Main articles: History of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (1569–1648), (1648–1764), and (1764–1795)




Grand Standard Bearer of the Crown (Chorąży Wielki Koronny), Sebastian Sobieski, at the wedding procession of King Sigismund III, as painted anonymously on the Stockholm Roll (c. 1605).


Poland and Lithuania underwent an alternating series of wars and alliances during the 14th century and early 15th century. Several agreements between the two (the Union of Kraków and Vilna, the Union of Krewo, the Union of Wilno and Radom, the Union of Grodno, and the Union of Horodło) were struck before the permanent 1569 Union of Lublin. This agreement was one of the signal achievements of Sigismund II Augustus, last monarch of the Jagiellon dynasty. Sigismund believed he could preserve his dynasty by adopting elective monarchy. His death in 1572 was followed by a three-year interregnum during which adjustments were made to the constitutional system; these adjustments significantly increased the power of the Polish nobility and established a truly elective monarchy.[33]
The Commonwealth reached its Golden Age in the early 17th century. Its powerful parliament was dominated by nobles (Pic. 2) who were reluctant to get involved in the Thirty Years' War; this neutrality spared the country from the ravages of a political-religious conflict that devastated most of contemporary Europe. The Commonwealth was able to hold its own against Sweden, the Tsardom of Russia, and vassals of the Ottoman Empire, and even launched successful expansionist offensives against its neighbors. In several invasions during the Time of Troubles, Commonwealth troops entered Russia and managed to take Moscow and hold it from September 27, 1610 to November 4, 1612, when they were driven out after a siege.
Commonwealth power began waning after a series of blows during the following decades. A major rebellion of Ukrainian Cossacks in the southeastern portion of the Commonwealth (the Khmelnytskyi Uprising in modern-day Ukraine) began in 1648. It resulted in a Ukrainian request, under the terms of the Treaty of Pereyaslav, for protection by the Russian Tsar.[34] Russian annexation of part of Ukraine gradually supplanted Polish influence. The other blow to the Commonwealth was a Swedish invasion in 1655, known as the Deluge, which was supported by troops of Transylvanian Duke George II Rákóczi and Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg.




Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth at its maximum extent, after the Truce of Deulino in 1619, superimposed on a current political map.


In the late 17th century, the king of the weakened Commonwealth, John III Sobieski, allied with Holy Roman Emperor Leopold I to deal crushing defeats to the Ottoman Empire. In 1683, the Battle of Vienna marked the final turning point in the 250-year struggle between the forces of Christian Europe and the Islamic Ottomans. For its centuries-long opposition to Muslim advances, the Commonwealth would gain the name of Antemurale Christianitatis (bulwark of Christianity).[10][35] During the next 16 years, the Great Turkish War would drive the Turks permanently south of the Danube River, never again to threaten central Europe.[36]
By the 18th century, destabilization of its political system brought Poland to the brink of civil war. The Commonwealth was facing many internal problems and was vulnerable to foreign influences. An outright war between the King and the nobility broke out in 1715, and Tsar Peter the Great's mediation put him in a position to further weaken the state.[37] The Russian army was present at the Silent Sejm of 1717, which limited the size of the armed forces to 24,000 and specified its funding, reaffirmed the destabilizing practice of liberum veto, and banished the king's Saxon army; the Tsar was to serve as guarantor of the agreement.[37] Western Europe's increasing exploitation of resources in the Americas rendered the Commonwealth's supplies less crucial.[38]
In 1768, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth became a protectorate of the Russian Empire.[39][40] Control of Poland was central to Catherine the Great's diplomatic and military strategies.[41] Attempts at reform, such as the Four-Year Sejm's May Constitution, came too late. The country was partitioned in three stages by the neighboring Russian Empire, the Kingdom of Prussia, and the Habsburg Monarchy. By 1795, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth had been completely erased from the map of Europe. Poland and Lithuania were not re-established as independent countries until 1918.
State organization and politics[edit]
See also: Offices in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
Golden Liberty[edit]
Main article: Golden Liberty




Union of Lublin of 1569 by Jan Matejko.


The political doctrine of the Commonwealth was: our state is a republic under the presidency of the King. Chancellor Jan Zamoyski summed up this doctrine when he said that Rex regnat et non-gubernat ("The King reigns but [lit. 'and'] does not govern").[42] The Commonwealth had a parliament, the Sejm, as well as a Senat and an elected king (Pic. 1). The king was obliged to respect citizens' rights specified in King Henry's Articles as well as in Pacta conventa, negotiated at the time of his election.
The monarch's power was limited, in favor of a sizable noble class. Each new king had to pledge to uphold the Henrician Articles, which were the basis of Poland's political system (and included near-unprecedented guarantees of religious tolerance). Over time, the Henrician Articles were merged with the Pacta Conventa, specific pledges agreed to by the king-elect. From that point onwards, the king was effectively a partner with the noble class and was constantly supervised by a group of senators. The Sejm could veto the king on important matters, including legislation (the adoption of new laws), foreign affairs, declaration of war, and taxation (changes of existing taxes or the levying of new ones).
The foundation of the Commonwealth's political system, the "Golden Liberty" (Polish: Złota Wolność, a term used from 1573 on), included:

election of the king by all nobles wishing to participate, known as wolna elekcja (free election);
Sejm, the Commonwealth parliament which the king was required to hold every two years;
Pacta conventa (Latin), "agreed-to agreements" negotiated with the king-elect, including a bill of rights, binding on the king, derived from the earlier Henrician Articles.
religious freedom guaranteed by Warsaw Confederation Act 1573,[12]
rokosz (insurrection), the right of szlachta to form a legal rebellion against a king who violated their guaranteed freedoms;
liberum veto (Latin), the right of an individual Sejm deputy to oppose a decision by the majority in a Sejm session; the voicing of such a "free veto" nullified all the legislation that had been passed at that session; during the crisis of the second half of the 17th century, Polish nobles could also use the liberum veto in provincial sejmiks;
konfederacja (from the Latin confederatio), the right to form an organization to force through a common political aim.





The Republic at the Zenith of Its Power. Golden Liberty. The Royal Election of 1573.


The three regions (see below) of the Commonwealth enjoyed a degree of autonomy.[43] Each voivodship had its own parliament (sejmik), which exercised serious political power, including choice of poseł (deputy) to the national Sejm and charging of the deputy with specific voting instructions. The Grand Duchy of Lithuania had its own separate army, treasury and most other official institutions.[44]
Golden Liberty created a state that was unusual for its time, although somewhat similar political systems existed in the contemporary city-states like the Republic of Venice.[45] Both states were styled "Serenissima Respublica" or the "Most Serene Republic".[46] At a time when most European countries were headed toward centralization, absolute monarchy and religious and dynastic warfare, the Commonwealth experimented with decentralization,[10] confederation and federation, democracy and religious tolerance.[47]
This political system unusual for its time stemmed from the ascendance of the szlachta noble class over other social classes and over the political system of monarchy. In time, the szlachta accumulated enough privileges (such as those established by the Nihil novi Act of 1505) that no monarch could hope to break the szlachta's grip on power. The Commonwealth's political system is difficult to fit into a simple category, but it can be tentatively described as a mixture of:

confederation and federation, with regard to the broad autonomy of its regions. It is, however, difficult to decisively call the Commonwealth either confederation or federation, as it had some qualities of both;
oligarchy,[10] as only the szlachta—around 15% of the population—had political rights;
democracy, since all the szlachta were equal in rights and privileges, and the Sejm could veto the king on important matters, including legislation (the adoption of new laws), foreign affairs, declaration of war, and taxation (changes of existing taxes or the levying of new ones). Also, the 15% of Commonwealth population who enjoyed those political rights (the szlachta)[48] was a substantially larger percentage than in majority European countries even in the nineteenth century;[49] note that in 1820 in France only about 1.5% of the male adult population had the right to vote, and in 1840 in Belgium, only about 5%.[48][49]
elective monarchy, since the monarch, elected by the szlachta, was Head of State;
constitutional monarchy, since the monarch was bound by pacta conventa and other laws, and the szlachta could disobey any king's decrees they deemed illegal.

Shortcomings[edit]




The Troelfth Cake, an allegory of the First Partition of Poland. Contemporary drawing by Jean-Michel Moreau le Jeune.


The end of the Jagiellon dynasty in 1572—after nearly two centuries—disrupted the fragile equilibrium of the Commonwealth's government. Power increasingly slipped away from the central government to the nobility.
When presented with periodic opportunities to fill the throne, the szlachta exhibited a preference for foreign candidates who would not found another strong dynasty. This policy often produced monarchs who were either totally ineffective or in constant debilitating conflict with the nobility. Furthermore, aside from notable exceptions such as the able Transylvanian Stefan Batory (1576–86), the kings of foreign origin were inclined to subordinate the interests of the Commonwealth to those of their own country and ruling house. This was especially visible in the policies and actions of the first two elected kings from the Swedish House of Vasa, whose politics brought the Commonwealth into conflict with Sweden, culminating in the war known as The Deluge (1655), one of the events that mark the end of the Commonwealth's Golden Age and the beginning of the Commonwealth's decline.
Zebrzydowski Rebellion (1606–07) marked a substantial increase in the power of the Polish magnates, and the transformation of szlachta democracy into magnate oligarchy. The Commonwealth's political system was vulnerable to outside interference, as Sejm deputies bribed[50][51] by foreign powers might use their liberum veto to block attempted reforms. This sapped the Commonwealth and plunged it into political paralysis and anarchy for over a century, from the mid-17th century to the end of the 18th, while its neighbors stabilized their internal affairs and increased their military might.
Late reforms[edit]
The Commonwealth did eventually make a serious effort to reform its political system, adopting in 1791 the Constitution of May 3, 1791, which historian Norman Davies calls the first of its kind in Europe.[25] The revolutionary Constitution recast the erstwhile Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth as a Polish–Lithuanian federal state with a hereditary monarchy and abolished many of the deleterious features of the old system.




Adoption of the Constitution of May 3, 1791 by the Four-Year Sejm and Senate


The new constitution:

abolished the liberum veto and banned the szlachta's confederations;
provided for a separation of powers among legislative, executive and judicial branches of government;
established "popular sovereignty" and extended political rights to include not only the nobility but the bourgeoisie;
increased the rights of the peasantry;
preserved religious tolerance (but with a condemnation of apostasy from the Catholic faith).

These reforms came too late, however, as the Commonwealth was immediately invaded from all sides by its neighbors, which had been content to leave the Commonwealth alone as a weak buffer state, but reacted strongly to attempts by king Stanisław August Poniatowski and other reformers to strengthen the country.[43] Russia feared the revolutionary implications of the May 3rd Constitution's political reforms and the prospect of the Commonwealth regaining its position as a European power. Catherine the Great regarded the May constitution as fatal to her influence[52] and declared the Polish constitution Jacobinical.[53] Grigori Aleksandrovich Potemkin drafted the act for the Targowica Confederation, referring to the constitution as the "contagion of democratic ideas".[54] Meanwhile, Prussia and Austria used it as a pretext for further territorial expansion.[53] Prussian minister Ewald Friedrich von Hertzberg called the constitution "a blow to the Prussian monarchy",[55] fearing that a strengthened Poland would once again dominate Prussia.[52][56] In the end, the May 3 Constitution was never fully implemented, and the Commonwealth entirely ceased to exist only four years after the its adoption.
Economy[edit]
Main article: Old-Polish Industrial Region




"Grain pays"...






...and "Grain doesn't pay". The two pictures illustrate that agriculture, once extremely profitable to the nobility (szlachta) in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, became much less so beginning in the second half of the 17th century.






Cereals export through Gdańsk 1619–1799


The economy of the Commonwealth was dominated by feudal agriculture based on the plantation system (serfs).[20] Slavery was forbidden in Poland in the 15th century, and formally abolished in Lithuania in 1588,[57] replaced by the second enserfment. Typically a nobleman's landholding comprised a folwark, a large farm worked by serfs to produce surpluses for internal and external trade. This economic arrangement worked well for the ruling classes in the early era of the Commonwealth, which was one of the most prosperous eras of the grain trade.[58] The economic strength of Commonwealth grain trade waned from the late 17th century on. Trade relationships were disrupted by the wars, and the Commonwealth proved unable to improve its transport infrastructure or its agricultural practices.[59] Serfs in the region were increasingly tempted to flee.[60] The Commonwealth's major attempts at countering this problem and improving productivity consisted of increasing serfs' workload and further restricting their freedoms in a process known as export-led serfdom.[59][60]
Urban population of the Commonwealth was low compared to Western Europe. Exact numbers depend on calculation methods. According to one source, the urban population of the Commonwealth was about 20% of the total in the 17th century, compared to approximately 50% in the Netherlands and Italy (Pic. 7).[61] Another source suggests much lower figures: 4–8% urban population in Poland, 34–39% in the Netherlands and 22–23% in Italy.[62] The Commonwealth's preoccupation with agriculture, coupled with the szlachta's privileged position when compared to the bourgeoisie, resulted in a fairly slow process of urbanization and thus a rather slow development of industries.[61]
While similar conflicts among social classes may be found all over Europe, nowhere were the nobility as dominant at the time as in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. There is, however, much debate among historians as to which processes most affected those developments, since until the wars and crises of the mid-17th century the cities of the Commonwealth had not markedly lagged in size and wealth behind their western counterparts. The Commonwealth did have numerous towns and cities, commonly founded on Magdeburg rights. Some of the largest trade fairs in the Commonwealth were held at Lublin. See the geography section, below, for a list of major cities in the Commonwealth (commonly capitals of voivodships).
Poland-Lithuania played a significant role in the supply of 16th century Western Europe by the export of three sorts of goods, notably grain (rye), cattle (oxen) and fur.[63] These three articles amounted to nearly 90% of the country's exports to western markets by overland- and maritime trade.[63]




Coat of arms of Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth on 15 ducats of Sigismund III from 1617.


Although the Commonwealth was Europe's largest grain producer, the bulk of her grain was consumed domestically. Estimated grain consumption in the Polish Crown (Poland proper) and Prussia in 1560–70 was some 113,000 tons of wheat (or 226,000 łaszt – a łaszt, or "last", being a large bulk measure; in the case of grain, about half a ton). Average yearly production of grain in the Commonwealth in the 16th Century was 120,000 tons, 6% of which was exported, while cities consumed some 19% and the remainder was consumed by the villages. Commonwealth grain achieved far more importance in poor crop years, as in the early 1590s and the 1620s, when governments throughout southern Europe arranged for large grain imports to cover shortfalls in their jurisdictions.
Still, grain was by far the largest export commodity of the Commonwealth. The owner of a folwark usually signed a contract with merchants of Gdańsk, who controlled 80% of this inland trade, to ship the grain north to that seaport on the Baltic Sea.[64] Many rivers in the Commonwealth were used for shipping purposes: the Vistula, Pilica, Bug, San, Nida, Wieprz, Neman. The rivers had relatively developed infrastructure, with river ports and granaries. Most of the river shipping moved north, southward transport being less profitable, and barges and rafts were often sold off in Gdańsk for lumber. Hrodna become an important site after formation of a customs post at Augustów in 1569, which became a checkpoint for merchants travelling to the Crown lands from the Grand Duchy.[65]




Portrait of the Italian merchant and banker Guglielmo Orsetti. His wealth enabled him to make large loans to the Commonwealth.[66]



Portrait of the Greek merchant Constantine Corniaktos, who dealt with international trade, especially from the Ottoman Empire.




From Gdańsk, ships, mostly from the Netherlands and Flanders, carried the grain to ports such as Antwerp and Amsterdam.[67][68] Besides grain, other seaborne exports included carminic acid from Polish cochineal, lumber and wood-related products such as ash, and tar.[61] The land routes, mostly to the German lands of the Holy Roman Empire such as the cities of Leipzig and Nuremberg, were used for export of live cattle (herds of around 50,000 head) hides, furs, salt, tobacco, hemp, cotton (mostly from Greater Poland) and linen.[69][70]
The Commonwealth imported wine, fruit, spices, luxury goods (e.g. tapestries, Pic. 5), clothing, fish, beer and industrial products like steel and tools. A few riverboats carried south imports from Gdańsk like wine, fruit, spices and herring. Somewhere between the 16th and 17th centuries, the Commonwealth's trade balance shifted from positive to negative.
With the advent of the Age of Discovery, many old trading routes such as the Amber Road (Pic. 4) lost importance as new ones were created. Poland's importance as a caravan route between Asia and Europe diminished, while new local trading routes were created between the Commonwealth and Russia. Many goods and cultural artifacts continued to pass from one region to another via the Commonwealth. For example, Isfahan rugs imported from Persia to the Commonwealth were actually known in the West as "Polish rugs" (French: Polonaise).[71]
Commonwealth currency included the złoty and the grosz. The City of Gdańsk had the privilege of minting its own coinage.
Military[edit]
Main articles: Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth army and Royal Guards (Poland)




Winged Hussars, one of the main types of the cavalry in the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland between the 16th and 18th centuries.






Polish military men, 1697–1795, drawing by Jan Matejko


The military of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth evolved from the merger of the armies of the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The army was commanded by the Hetman. The most unusual formation of the army was the heavy cavalry in the form of the Polish winged hussars. The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Navy never played a major role in the military structure, and ceased to exist in the mid-17th century.
Commonwealth forces were engaged in numerous conflicts in the south (against the Ottoman Empire), the east (against the Tsardom of Muscovy, later known as the Russian Empire) and the north (the Kingdom of Sweden); as well as internal conflicts (most notably, numerous Cossack uprisings). For the first century or so, the Commonwealth military was usually successful, but became less so from around the mid-17th century. Plagued by insufficient funds, it found itself increasingly hard-pressed to defend the country, and inferior in numbers to the growing armies of the Commonwealth's neighbors.
The Commonwealth was formed at the Union of Lublin of 1569 from the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The armies of those states differed from the organization common in the west of Europe, as according to Bardach, the mercenary formations (Polish: wojsko najemne), common there, never gained popularity in Poland.[72] Brzezinski, however, notes that foreign mercenaries did form a significant portion of the more elite infantry units, at least till the early 17th century.[73] In the 15th century Poland, several other formations formed the core of the military.[74] There was a small standing army, obrona potoczna ("continuous defense") about 1,500–3,000 strong, paid for by the king, and primarily stationed at the troubled south and eastern borders.[74][75] It was supplemented by two formations mobilized in case of war: the pospolite ruszenie (Polish levée en masse – feudal levy of mostly noble knights-landholders), and the wojsko zaciężne, recruited by the Polish commanders for the conflict (it differed from Western mercenary formations in that it was commanded by Polish officers, and dissolved after the conflict has ended).[74]
Several years before the Union of Lublin, the Polish obrona potoczna was reformed, as the Sejm (national parliament of Poland) legislated in 1562–1563 the creation of wojsko kwarciane (named after kwarta tax levied on the royal lands for the purpose of maintaining this formation).[74] This formation was also paid for by the king, and in the peace time, numbered about 3,500–4,000 men according to Bardach;[74] Brzezinski gives the range of 3,000–5,000.[75] It was composed mostly of the light cavalry units manned by nobility (szlachta) and commanded by hetmans.[74][76] Often, in wartime, the Sejm would legislate a temporary increase in the size of the wojsko kwarciane.[74]
Following the end of the Commonwealth, Polish military tradition would be continued by the Napoleonic Polish Legions and the Army of the Duchy of Warsaw.
Culture[edit]
Further information: Renaissance in Poland, Baroque in Poland, Enlightenment in Poland and Ukrainian Baroque
Science and literature[edit]




Multi-stage rocket, from Kazimierz Siemienowicz's Artis Magnæ Artilleriæ pars prima


The Commonwealth was an important European center for the development of modern social and political ideas. It was famous for its rare quasi-democratic political system, praised by philosophers, and during the Counter-Reformation was known for near-unparalleled religious tolerance, with peacefully coexisting Roman Catholic, Jewish, Orthodox Christian, Protestant and Muslim (Sufi) communities. In the 18th century, the French Catholic Rulhiere wrote of 16th century Poland: "This country, which in our day we have seen divided on the pretext of religion, is the first state in Europe that exemplified tolerance. In this state, mosques arose between churches and synagogues.”[21] The Commonwealth gave rise to the famous Christian sect of the Polish Brethren, antecedents of British and American Unitarianism.[77]
With its political system, the Commonwealth gave birth to political philosophers such as Andrzej Frycz Modrzewski (1503–1572) (Pic. 9), Wawrzyniec Grzymała Goślicki (1530–1607) and Piotr Skarga (1536–1612). Later, works by Stanisław Staszic (1755–1826) and Hugo Kołłątaj (1750–1812) helped pave the way for the Constitution of May 3, 1791, which Norman Davies calls the first of its kind in Europe.[25]




Commonwealth referred to as 'Polonian Empyre' in the title page of Goślicki's The Counsellor published in England in 1598.


Kraków's Jagiellonian University is one of the oldest universities in the world (established in 1364),[78] together with the Jesuit Academy of Wilno (established in 1579) they were the major scholarly and scientific centers in the Commonwealth. The Komisja Edukacji Narodowej, Polish for Commission for National Education, formed in 1773, was the world's first national Ministry of Education.[79] Commonwealth scientists included: Martin Kromer (1512–1589), historian and cartographer; Michał Sędziwój (1566–1636), alchemist and chemist; Jan Brożek (Ioannes Broscius in Latin) (1585–1652), polymath: a mathematician, physician and astronomer; Krzysztof Arciszewski (Crestofle d'Artischau Arciszewski in Portuguese) (1592–1656), engineer, ethnographer, general and admiral of the Dutch West Indies Company army in the war with the Spanish Empire for control of Brazil;[80] Kazimierz Siemienowicz (1600–1651), military engineer, artillery specialist and a founder of rocketry; Johannes Hevelius (1611–1687), astronomer, founder of lunar topography; Michał Boym (1612–1659), orientalist, cartographer, naturalist and diplomat in Ming Dynasty's service (Pic. 11); Adam Adamandy Kochański (1631–1700), mathematician and engineer; Baal Shem Tov (הבעל שם טוב in Hebrew) (1698–1760), considered to be the founder of Hasidic Judaism; Marcin Odlanicki Poczobutt (1728–1810), astronomer and mathematician (Pic. 12); Jan Krzysztof Kluk (1739–1796), naturalist, agronomist and entomologist, John Jonston (1603–1675) scholar and physician, descended from Scottish nobility. In 1628 the Czech teacher, scientist, educator, and writer John Amos Comenius took refuge in the Commonwealth, when the Protestants were persecuted under the Counter Reformation.[77][81]
The works of many Commonwealth authors are considered classics, including those of Jan Kochanowski (Pic. 10), Wacław Potocki, Ignacy Krasicki, and Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz. Many szlachta members wrote memoirs and diaries. Perhaps the most famous are the Memoirs of Polish History by Albrycht Stanisław Radziwiłł (1595–1656) and the Memoirs of Jan Chryzostom Pasek (ca. 1636–ca. 1701). Jakub Sobieski (1590–1646) (father of John III Sobieski) wrote notable diaries. During the Khotyn expedition in 1621 he wrote a diary called Commentariorum chotinensis belli libri tres (Diary of the Chocim War), which was published in 1646 in Gdańsk. It was used by Wacław Potocki as a basis for his epic poem, Transakcja wojny chocimskiej (The Progress of the War of Chocim). He also authored instructions for the journey of his sons to Kraków (1640) and France (1645), a good example of liberal education of the era.
Art and music[edit]




Coffin portrait of Barbara Domicela Lubomirska née Szczawińska, 1676.






Karol Stanisław Radziwiłł, the richest noble of his time and a representative of Sarmatism.


The two great religious cultures of the Commonwealth, Latin and Eastern Orthodox, coexisted and penetrated each other, which is reflected in the great popularity of icons (Pic. 13) and the icons resembling effigies of Mary, as well as the metal dresses typical of the Orthodox Church in the predominantly Latin territories of today's Poland (Black Madonna) and Lithuania (Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn).[82] The implementation of post-Renaissance naturalism and the sentimentality of the Polish baroque in Orthodox painting as well as the creation of the Cossack Baroque style in architecture, also inspired by Polish patterns, were the major factors of Latin infiltration into Eastern Orthodox art (Pic. 3).[83]
A common art form of the Sarmatian period were coffin portraits, particular to the culture of the Commonwealth, used in funerals and other important ceremonies.[84] As a rule, such portraits were nailed to sheet metal, six – or eight – sided in shape, fixed to the front of a coffin placed on a high, ornate catafalque.[85]
Another characteristic is common usage of black marble. Altars, fonts, portals, balustrades, columns, monuments, tombstones, headstones and whole rooms (e.g. Marble Room at the Royal Castle in Warsaw, St. Casimir Chapel of the Wilno Cathedral and Vasa Chapel of the Wawel Cathedral) were decorated with black marble.
Music was a common feature of religious and secular events. To that end many noblemen founded church and school choirs, and employed their own ensembles of musicians. Some, like Stanisław Lubomirski built their own opera houses (in Nowy Wiśnicz). Yet others, like Janusz Skumin Tyszkiewicz and Krzysztof Radziwiłł were known for their sponsorship of arts which manifested itself in their permanently retained orchestras, at their courts in Wilno.[86] Musical life further flourished during the reign of the Vasas. Both foreign and domestic composers were active in the Commonwealth. King Sigismund III brought in Italian composers and conductors, such as Luca Marenzio, Annibale Stabile, Asprilio Pacelli, Marco Scacchi and Diomedes Cato for the royal orchestra. Notable home grown musicians, who also composed and played for the King's court, included Bartłomiej Pękiel, Jacek Różycki, Adam Jarzębski, Marcin Mielczewski, Stanisław Sylwester Szarzyński, Damian Stachowicz, Mikołaj Zieleński and Grzegorz Gorczycki.[86]




Baroque Leżajsk organ by Stanisław Studziński and Jan Głowiński were accomplished in 1693.


Magnates often undertook construction projects as monuments to themselves: churches, cathedrals, monasteries (Pic. 14), and palaces like the present-day Presidential Palace in Warsaw and Pidhirtsi Castle built by Grand Hetman Stanisław Koniecpolski herbu Pobóg. The largest projects involved entire towns, although in time many of them would lapse into obscurity or be totally abandoned. Usually they were named after the sponsoring magnate. Among the most famous is the town of Zamość, founded by Jan Zamoyski and designed by the Italian architect Bernardo Morando. The magnates throughout Poland competed with the kings. The monumental castle Krzyżtopór, built in the style palazzo in fortezza between 1627 and 1644, had several courtyards surrounded by fortifications. Due to efforts of powerful Radziwiłł family, the town of Nesvizh in today's Belarus came to exercise significant influence in many domains – the Nesvizh manufactures of firearm, carpets, kontusz sashes and tapestries as well as school of painting produced renowned and luxury items.[87] Late baroque fascination with the culture and art of the "central nation" is reflected in Queen Marie's Chinese Palace in Zolochiv.[88] 18th century magnate palaces represents the characteristic type of baroque suburban residence built entre cour et jardin (between the entrance court and the garden). Its architecture – a merger of European art with old Commonwealth building traditions are visible in Wilanów Palace in Warsaw (Pic. 15), Branicki Palace in Białystok and in Warsaw, Potocki Palace in Radzyń Podlaski and in Krystynopol, Raczyński Palace in Rogalin and Sapieha Palace in Ruzhany.
Szlachta and Sarmatism[edit]
Main articles: Szlachta and Sarmatism




The First Lady of the Republic,[89] Elżbieta Sieniawska, portrayed in Sarmata pose and in male coat delia.


The prevalent ideology of the szlachta became "Sarmatism", named after the Sarmatians, alleged ancestors of the Poles.[56] This belief system was an important part of the szlachta's culture, penetrating all aspects of its life. Sarmatism enshrined equality among szlachta, horseback riding, tradition, provincial rural life, peace and pacifism; championed oriental-inspired attire (żupan, kontusz, sukmana, pas kontuszowy, delia, szabla); and served to integrate the multi-ethnic nobility by creating an almost nationalistic sense of unity and of pride in the szlachta's Golden Freedoms.[56]
In its early, idealistic form, Sarmatism represented a positive cultural movement: it supported religious belief, honesty, national pride, courage, equality and freedom. In time, however, it became distorted. Late extreme Sarmatism turned belief into bigotry, honesty into political naïveté, pride into arrogance, courage into stubbornness and freedom into anarchy.[90] The faults of Sarmatism were blamed for the demise of the country from the late 18th century onwards. Criticism, often one-sided and exaggerated, was used by the Polish reformists to push for radical changes. This self-deprecation was accompanied by works of Prussian, Russian and Austrian historians, who tried to prove that it was Poland itself that was to blame for its fall.[91]
Demographics and religion[edit]
Further information: Historical demographics of Poland.




Population density per voivodeships in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1650.






Some social strata in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth's society – 1655. From left: Jew, Barber surgeon, Painter, Butcher, Musician, Tailor, Barmaid, Pharmacist, Shoemaker, Goldsmith, Merchant and Armenian.


The Commonwealth comprised various identities: Poles, Lithuanians, Czechs, Hungarians, Slovaks, Ruthenians (Belarusians and Ukrainians), and Vlachs (Romanians). Sometimes inhabitants of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania were called Litvins, a Slavic term for people from Lithuania, regardless their ethnicity (with the exception of Jews, which were called Litvaks). Shortly after the Union of Lublin (1569), the Commonwealth population was around 7 million, with a rough breakdown of 4.5 m Poles, 0.75 m Lithuanians, 0.7 m/10% Jews and 2 m Ruthenians.[92] In 1618, after the Truce of Deulino, the Commonwealth population increased together with its territory, reaching 12 million people, which was composed roughly of 4.5 m Poles, 3.5 m Ukrainians, 1.5 m Belarusians, 0.75 m Lithuanians, 0.75 m Old Prussians, 0.5 m Jews, and 0.5 m Livonians.[5] At that time nobility was 10% of the population, and burghers were 15%.[5] The average population density per square kilometer was: 24 in Mazovia, 23 in Lesser Poland, 19 in Great Poland, 12 in Lublin palatinate, 10 in the Lvov area, 7 in Podolia and Volhynia, 3 in the Ukraine. There was a tendency for the people from the more densely inhabited western territories to migrate eastwards.[93] In the period from 1648–57, populations losses are estimated at 4 m.[5] Coupled with further population and territorial losses, in 1717 the Commonwealth population had fallen to 9 m, with roughly 4.5 m/50% Poles, 1.5 m/17% Ukrainians, 1.2 m Belarusians, 0.8 m Lithuanians, 0.5 m Jews, and 0.5 m others.[5] Just before the first partition of Poland, the Commonwealth's population stood at some 14 million, including around 1 million nobles,[94] 4,7 million Uniates and 400,000 Orthodox Christians.[95] In 1792, the population was around 11 million and included 750,000 nobles.[94]
Warsaw Confederation and religious freedom[edit]
Main article: Warsaw Confederation




Original act of the Warsaw Confederation 1573. First act of religious freedom in Europe.


Historian Norman Davies wrote: “Certainly, the wording and substance of the declaration of the Confederation of Warsaw of 28 January 1573 were extraordinary with regards to prevailing conditions elsewhere in Europe; and they governed the principles of religious life in the Republic for over two hundred years."[96]
Poland has a long tradition of religious freedom. The right to worship freely was a basic right given to all inhabitants of the Commonwealth throughout the 15th and early 16th century. Complete freedom of religion was officially recognized in Poland in 1573 during the Warsaw Confederation. Poland kept religious freedom laws during an era when religious persecution was an everyday occurrence in the rest of Europe.[97] The Commonwealth was a place where the most radical religious sects, trying to escape persecution in other countries of the Christian world, sought refuge.[98] In 1561 Bonifacio d’Oria, a religious exile living in Poland, wrote of his adopted country's virtues to a colleague back in Italy: “You could live here in accordance with your ideas and preferences, in great, even the greatest freedoms, including writing and publishing. No one is a censor here."[21]

"This country became a place of shelter for heretics” – Cardinal Hosius, papal legate to Poland.[98]

To be Polish, in the non-Polish lands[citation needed] of the Commonwealth, was then much less an index of ethnicity than of religion and rank; it was a designation largely reserved for the landed noble class (szlachta), which included Poles, but also many members of non-Polish origin who converted to Catholicism in increasing numbers with each following generation. For the non-Polish noble such conversion meant a final step of Polonization that followed the adoption of the Polish language and culture.[99] Poland, as the culturally most advanced part of the Commonwealth, with the royal court, the capital, the largest cities, the second-oldest university in Central Europe (after Prague), and the more liberal and democratic social institutions had proven an irresistible magnet for the non-Polish nobility in the Commonwealth.[10] Many referred to themselves as "gente Ruthenus, natione Polonus" (Ruthenian by blood, Polish by nationality) since the 16th century onwards.[100]




Greek-Catholic St. George's Cathedral in Lwów was constructed between 1746–1762 following the Act of Unification of the Lwów archeparchy with the Holy See.[101]



Church in Kamieniec Podolski was converted into a mosque during the Turkish occupation between 1672–1699, the 33m minaret was added at that time.[102]




As a result, in the eastern territories a Polish (or Polonized) aristocracy dominated a peasantry whose great majority was neither Polish nor Catholic. Moreover, the decades of peace brought huge colonization efforts to nowadays Ukraine, heightening the tensions among nobles, Jews, Cossacks (traditionally Orthodox), Polish and Ruthenian peasants. The latter, deprived of their native protectors among the Ruthenian nobility, turned for protection to cossacks that facilitated violence that in the end broke the Commonwealth. The tensions were aggravated by conflicts between Eastern Orthodoxy and the Greek Catholic Church following the Union of Brest, overall discrimination of Orthodox religions by dominant Catholicism,[103] and several Cossack uprisings. In the west and north, many cities had sizable German minorities, often belonging to Lutheran or Reformed churches. The Commonwealth had also one of the largest Jewish diasporas in the world – by the mid-16th century 80% of the world's Jews lived in Poland (Pic. 16).[104]
Until the Reformation, the szlachta were mostly Catholic or Eastern Orthodox (Pic. 3, 13). However, many families quickly adopted the Reformed religion. After the Counter-Reformation, when the Catholic Church regained power in Poland, the szlachta became almost exclusively Catholic, despite the fact that Catholicism was not a majority religion (the Catholic and Orthodox churches counted approximately 40% of the population each, while the remaining 20% were Jews and members of various Protestant churches).[105]
The Crown had about double the population of Lithuania and five times the income of the latter's treasury. As with other countries, the borders, area and population of the Commonwealth varied over time. After the Peace of Jam Zapolski (1582), the Commonwealth had approximately 815,000 km² area and a population of 7.5 million.[106] After the Truce of Deulino (1618), the Commonwealth had an area of some 990,000 km² and a population of 11–12 million (including some 4 million Poles and close to a million Lithuanians).[107]
Languages[edit]




First Anniversary anthem of the Constitution of May 3, 1791 (1792) in Hebrew, Polish, German and French.



Polish – officially recognized;[108] dominant language, used by most of the Commonwealth's nobility[108][109][110][111] and by the peasantry in the Crown province;[112] official language in the Crown chancellery and since 1697 in the Grand Duchy chancellery.[113] Dominant language in the towns.[112]
Latin – off. recog.;[108][114] commonly used in foreign relations[113] and popular as a second language among some of the nobility.[115]
French – not officially recognized; replaced Latin at the royal court in Warsaw in the beginning of the 18th century as a language used in foreign relations and as genuine spoken language.[116][117] It was commonly used as a language of science and literature and as a second language among some of the nobility.[118]
Ruthenian – also known as Chancellery Slavonic;[113] off. recog.;[108] official language in the Grand Duchy chancellery until 1697 (when replaced by Polish); used in some foreign relations[113][114][119] its dialects (modern Belarusian and Ukrainian) were widely used in the Grand Duchy and eastern parts of the Crown as spoken language.
Lithuanian – not officially recognised;[108][120] but used in some official documents in the Grand Duchy[121][122][123] and, mostly, used as a spoken language in the northwest part of the Grand Duchy (in Lithuania Proper)[124] and the northern part of Ducal Prussia (Polish fief).
German – off. recog.;[108] used in some foreign relations,[113] in Ducal Prussia and by minorities in the cities especially in the Royal Prussia.[112][125]
Hebrew – off. recog.;[108] and Aramaic used by Jews for religious, scholarly, and legal matters.
Yiddish – not officially recognized;[126][127] used by Jews in their daily life[112]
Italian – not officially recognised; used in some foreign relations and by Italian minorities in cities.[128]
Armenian – off. recog.[108] used by the Armenian minority.[127][129]
Arabic – not officially recognised; used in some foreign relations[130] and by Tatars in their religious matters, they also wrote Ruthenian in the Arabic script.[131]

Legacy[edit]
Main article: Międzymorze
The Duchy of Warsaw, established in 1807, traced its origins to the Commonwealth. Other revival movements appeared during the November Uprising (1830–31), the January Uprising (1863–64) and in the 1920s, with Józef Piłsudski's failed attempt to create a Polish-led Międzymorze ("Between-Seas") federation that would have included Lithuania and Ukraine. Today's Republic of Poland considers itself a successor to the Commonwealth,[132] whereas the Republic of Lithuania, re-established at the end of World War I, saw the participation of the Lithuanian state in the old Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth mostly in a negative light at the early stages of regaining its independence,[133] although this attitude has been changing recently.[134]
Administrative divisions[edit]
Main article: Administrative division of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
See also: Offices in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth




Outline of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth with its major subdivisions after the 1618 Truce of Deulino, superimposed on present-day national borders.
  Crown of the Kingdom of Poland
  Grand Duchy of Lithuania
  Duchy of Livonia
  Duchy of Prussia, Polish fief
  Duchy of Courland and Semigallia, Commonwealth fief



While the term "Poland" was also commonly used to denote this whole polity, Poland was in fact only part of a greater whole—the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, which comprised primarily two parts:

the Crown of the Polish Kingdom (Poland proper), colloquially "the Crown"
the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, colloquially "Lithuania"

The Commonwealth was further divided into smaller administrative units known as voivodeships (województwa). Each voivodeship was governed by a Voivode (wojewoda, governor). Voivodeships were further divided into starostwa, each starostwo being governed by a starosta. Cities were governed by castellans. There were frequent exceptions to these rules, often involving the ziemia subunit of administration.
The lands that once belonged to the Commonwealth are now largely distributed among several Central and East European countries: Poland, Ukraine, Moldova (Transnistria), Belarus, Russia, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.[135][136] Also some small towns in Slovakia, then within the Kingdom of Hungary, became a part of Poland in the Treaty of Lubowla.
Other notable parts of the Commonwealth, without respect to region or voivodship divisions, include:

Lesser Poland (Polish: Małopolska), southern Poland, with two largest cities, its capital at Kraków (Cracow) and Lublin in the north-east;
Greater Poland (Polish: Wielkopolska), west–central Poland around Poznań and the Warta River system;
Masovia (Polish: Mazowsze), central Poland, with its capital at Warszawa (Warsaw);
Lithuania Proper (Lithuanian: Lietuva siaurąją prasme, tikroji Lietuva), the catholic, or, perhaps, in some cases ethnically Lithuanian, part of Grand Duchy in the northwest of it;
Samogitia (Polish: Żmudź, Lithuanian: Žemaitija), an autonomous area of Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the westernmost part of it, the western part of Lithuania Proper;
Royal Prussia (Polish: Prusy Królewskie), at the southern shore of the Baltic Sea, was an autonomous area since the Second Peace of Thorn (1466), incorporated into the Crown in 1569 with the Commonwealth's formation;

Pomerelia (Polish: Pomorze Gdańskie), Pomerania around Gdańsk (Danzig), western part of Royal Prussia;


Ruthenia (Polish: Ruś), the eastern Commonwealth, adjoining Russia;
Duchy of Livonia (Inflanty), a joint domain of the Crown and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Parts lost to Sweden in the 1620s and in 1660;
Duchy of Courland (Polish: Kurlandia), a northern fief of the Commonwealth. It established a colony in Tobago in 1637 and on St. Andrews Island at the Gambia River in 1651 (see Couronian colonization);
Silesia (Polish: Śląsk) was not within the Commonwealth, but small parts belonged to various Commonwealth kings; in particular, the Vasa kings were dukes of Opole (Oppeln) and Racibórz (Ratibor) from 1645 to 1666.[137]

Commonwealth borders shifted with wars and treaties, sometimes several times in a decade, especially in the eastern and southern parts. After the Peace of Jam Zapolski (1582), the Commonwealth had approximately 815,000 km² area and a population of 7.5 million.[106] After the Truce of Deulino (1618), the Commonwealth had an area of some 1 million km² (990,000 km²) and a population of about 11 million.[107]
Geography[edit]




16th century map of Europe by Gerardus Mercator.



Topographical map of the Commonwealth in 1764.




In the 16th century, the Polish bishop and cartographer Martin Kromer published a Latin atlas, entitled Poland: about Its Location, People, Culture, Offices and the Polish Commonwealth, which was regarded as the most comprehensive guide to the country.
Kromer's works and other contemporary maps, such as those of Gerardus Mercator, show the Commonwealth as mostly plains. The Commonwealth's southeastern part, the Kresy, was famous for its steppes. The Carpathian Mountains formed part of the southern border, with the Tatra Mountain chain the highest, and the Baltic Sea formed the Commonwealth's northern border. As with most European countries at the time, the Commonwealth had extensive forest cover, especially in the east. Today, what remains of the Białowieża Forest constitutes the last largely intact primeval forest in Europe.[138]

Image gallery[edit]






v
t
e


Pictures






Politics and economy






Statuta Regni Poloniae in ordinem alphabeti digesta (Statutes of the Polish Kingdom, Arranged in Alphabetical Order), 1563.









Grand Marshal of the Crown Łukasz Opaliński portraited with the insignium of his power in the parliament - the Marshal's cane, 1640.









Rococo iconostasis in the Orthodox Church of the Holy Spirit in Vilnius, designed by Johann Christoph Glaubitz, 1753–1756.









18th century amber casket. Gdańsk patronized by the Polish court flourished as the center for amber working in the 17th century.[139]









Stanisław Poniatowski, Commander of the Royal Guards and Grand Treasurer. Painted by Angelika Kauffmann in 1786.









Equestrian portrait of King Sigismund III of Poland, by Peter Paul Rubens, 1624.









Tapestry with the Arms of Michał Kazimierz Pac, Jan Leyniers, Brussels, 1667–1669.









Silver tankard by Józef Ceypler, Kraków, 1739–1745.









Example of the merchant architecture: Konopnica's tenement house in Lublin, 1575.









Hussars' armours, first half of the 17th century.





Science, art and architecture






De republica emendanda (1554) by Andrzej Frycz Modrzewski, proposed a deep programme of reforms of the state, society and church.









Merkuriusz Polski Ordynaryjny, the first Polish newspaper published on the orders of Queen Marie Louise Gonzaga in 1661.









Title page of Treny (1580) by Jan Kochanowski, a series of elegies upon the death of his beloved daughter, is an acknowledged masterpiece.









A plate from Michał Boym's Flora Sinensis (1656), the first description of an ecosystem of the Far East published in Europe.[140]









Taurus Poniatovii, constellation originated by Marcin Poczobutt in 1777 to honor the king Stanisław II Augustus.[141]









Branicki Palace in Białystok, designed by Tylman van Gameren, is sometimes referred to as the "Polish Versailles."









Pažaislis Monastery in Kaunas, Pietro Puttini, built 1674–1712.









Zamość City Hall, designed by Bernardo Morando, is a unique example of Renaissance architecture in Europe, consistently built in accordance with the Italian theories of an "ideal town."[142]









Plafond Allegory of Spring, Jerzy Siemiginowski, 1680s, Wilanów Palace.









Łańcut Synagogue was established by Stanisław Lubomirski, 1733.[143]









See also[edit]



Part of a series on the



History of the
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth







1569–1648
1648–1764
1764–1795




 Poland portal





v
t
e






Historical powers
List of Polish Coats of Arms
List of szlachta
Polish heraldry
Lithuanian nobility
History of the Germans in Poland
History of the Jews in Poland
History of Poland
History of Lithuania

Notes[edit]


^ Pro Fide, Lege et Rege was the motto since the 18th century.


a. ^ Name in native and official languages:

Latin: Regnum Poloniae Magnusque Ducatus Lithuaniae / Serenissima Res Publica Poloniae[27]
French: Royaume de Pologne et Grand-duché de Lituanie / Sérénissime République de Pologne et Grand-duché de Lituanie[144]
Polish: Królestwo Polskie i Wielkie Księstwo Litewskie
Lithuanian: Lenkijos Karalystė ir Lietuvos Didžioji Kunigaikštystė
Belarusian: Каралеўства Польскае і Вялікае Княства Літоўскае (Karaleŭstva Polskaje і Vialіkaje Kniastva Lіtoŭskaje)
Ukrainian: Королівство Польське і Велике князівство Литовське
German: Königreich Polen und Großfürstentum Litauen

b. ^ Some historians date the change of the Polish capital from Kraków to Warsaw between 1595 and 1611, although Warsaw was not officially designated capital until 1793.[145] The Commonwealth Sejm began meeting in Warsaw soon after the Union of Lublin and its rulers generally maintained their courts there, although coronations continued to take place in Krakow.[145] The modern concept of a single capital city was to some extent inapplicable in the feudal and decentralized Commonwealth.[145] Warsaw is described by some historians as the capital of the entire Commonwealth.[146][147] Wilno, the capital of the Grand Duchy,[37][148][149] is sometimes called the second capital of the entity.[150][151]
References[edit]


^ Jagiellonian University Centre for European studies, "A Very Short History of Kraków", see: "1596 administrative capital, the tiny village of Warsaw". Archived from the original on March 12, 2009. Retrieved November 29, 2012. 
^ Norman Davies, Europe: A History, Pimlico 1997, p. 554: Poland-Lithuania was another country which experienced its 'Golden Age' during the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. The realm of the last Jagiellons was absolutely the largest state in Europe
^ Piotr Wandycz (2001). The price of freedom (p.66). p. 66. ISBN 978-0-415-25491-5. Retrieved August 13, 2011. 
^ Bertram Benedict (1919). A history of the great war. Bureau of national literature, inc. p. 21. Retrieved August 13, 2011. 
^ a b c d e Based on 1618 population map Archived February 17, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. (p115), 1618 languages map (p119), 1657–67 losses map (p128) and 1717 map Archived February 17, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. (p141) from Iwo Cyprian Pogonowski, Poland a Historical Atlas, Hippocrene Books, 1987, ISBN 0-88029-394-2
^ Maciej Janowski, Polish Liberal Thought, Central European University Press, 2001, ISBN 963-9241-18-0, Google Print: p3, p12
^ Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848, Oxford University Press, 1996, ISBN 0-19-820654-2, Google print p84
^ Rett R. Ludwikowski, Constitution-Making in the Region of Former Soviet Dominance, Duke University Press, 1997, ISBN 0-8223-1802-4, Google Print, p34
^ a b c George Sanford, Democratic Government in Poland: Constitutional Politics Since 1989, Palgrave, 2002, ISBN 0-333-77475-2, Google print p11—constitutional monarchy, p3—anarchy
^ a b c d e Aleksander Gella, Development of Class Structure in Eastern Europe: Poland and Her Southern Neighbors, SUNY Press, 1998, ISBN 0-88706-833-2, Google Print, p13
^ "Formally, Poland and Lithuania were to be distinct, equal components of the federation… But Poland, which retained possession of the Lithuanian lands it had seized, had greater representation in the Diet and became the dominant partner.""Lublin, Union of". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. [1]
^ a b # Norman Davies, God's Playground. A History of Poland, Vol. 1: The Origins to 1795, Vol. 2: 1795 to the Present. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-925339-0 / ISBN 0-19-925340-4
^ Halina Stephan, Living in Translation: Polish Writers in America, Rodopi, 2003, ISBN 90-420-1016-9, Google Print p373. Quoting from Sarmatian Review academic journal mission statement: Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth was [...] characterized by religious tolerance unusual in premodern Europe
^ This quality of the Commonwealth was recognized by its contemporaries. Robert Burton, in his The Anatomy of Melancholy, first published in 1621, writes of Poland: "Poland is a receptacle of all religions, where Samosetans, Socinians, Photinians [...], Arians, Anabaptists are to be found"; "In Europe, Poland and Amsterdam are the common sanctuaries [for Jews]".
^ Feliks Gross, Citizenship and Ethnicity: The Growth and Development of a Democratic Multiethnic Institution, Greenwood Press, 1999, ISBN 0-313-30932-9, Google Print, p122 (notes)
^ "In the mid-1500s, united Poland was the largest state in Europe and perhaps the continent's most powerful nation politically and militarily". "Poland". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved June 26, 2009
^ Francis Dvornik (1992). The Slavs in European History and Civilization. Rutgers University Press. p. 300. ISBN 0-8135-0799-5. 
^ Salo Wittmayer Baron (1976). A social and religious history of the Jews. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-08853-1. 
^ Martin Van Gelderen, Quentin Skinner, Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage, Cambridge University Press, 2002, ISBN 0-521-80756-5 Google Print: p54
^ a b "The Causes of Slavery or Serfdom: A Hypothesis" (discussion and full online text) of Evsey Domar (1970). Economic History Review 30:1 (March), pp. 18–32.
^ a b c Poland's 1997 Constitution in Its Historical Context; Daniel H. Cole, Indiana University School of Law, September 22, 1998 http://indylaw.indiana.edu/instructors/cole/web%20page/polconst.pdf
^ Blaustein, Albert (January 1993). Constitutions of the World. Fred B. Rothman & Company. 
^ Isaac Kramnick, Introduction, Madison, James (November 1987). The Federalist Papers. Penguin Classics. ISBN 0-14-044495-5. 
^ John Markoff describes the advent of modern codified national constitutions as one of the milestones of democracy, and states that "The first European country to follow the U.S. example was Poland in 1791." John Markoff, Waves of Democracy, 1996, ISBN 0-8039-9019-7, p.121.
^ a b c Davies, Norman (1996). Europe: A History. Oxford University Press. p. 699. ISBN 0-19-820171-0. 
^ a b c "Regnum Poloniae Magnusque Ducatus Lithuaniae - definicja, synonimy, przykłady użycia". sjp.pwn.pl. Retrieved 2016-10-27. 
^ a b Ex quo serenissima respublica Poloniae in corpore ad exempluin omnium aliarnm potentiarum, lilulum regiuin Borussiae recognoscere decrevit (...)
Antoine-François-Claude Ferrand (1820). "Volume 1". Histoire des trois démembremens de la Pologne: pour faire suite à l'histoire de l'Anarchie de Pologne par Rulhière (in French). Deterville. p. 182. 
^ the name given by Marcin Kromer in his work Polonia sive de situ, populis, moribus, magistratibus et re publica regni Polonici libri duo, 1577
^ the therm used for instance in Zbior Deklaracyi, Not I Czynnosci Głownieyszych, Ktore Poprzedziły I Zaszły Pod Czas Seymu Pod Węzłem Konfederacyi Odprawuiącego Się Od Dnia 18. Wrzesnia 1772. Do 14 Maia 1773
^ Name used for the common state, Henryk Rutkowski, Terytorium, w: Encyklopedia historii gospodarczej Polski do 1945 roku, t. II, Warszawa 1981, s. 398.
^ Richard Buterwick. The Polish Revolution and the Catholic Church, 1788–1792: A Political History. Oxford University Press. 2012. pp. 5, xvii.
^ 1791 document signed by the King Stanislaw August "Zareczenie wzaiemne Oboyga Narodow" pp. 1, 5 [2]
^ The death of Sigismund II Augustus in 1572 was followed by a three-year Interregnum during which adjustments were made in the constitutional system. The lower nobility was now included in the selection process, and the power of the monarch was further circumscribed in favor of the expanded noble class. From that point, the king was effectively a partner with the noble class and constantly supervised by a group of senators.
"The Elective Monarchy". Poland – The Historical Setting. Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress. 1992. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved July 15, 2011. 
^ . In 1651, in the face of a growing threat from Poland, and forsaken by his Tatar allies, Khmelnytsky asked the Tsar to incorporate Ukraine as an autonomous duchy under Russian protection."Pereyaslav Agreement". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. [3]
^ Poland, the knight among nations, Louis Edwin Van Norman, New York: 1907, p. 18
^ William J. Duiker, Jackson J. Spielvogel (2006). The Essential World History: Volume II: Since 1500. Cengage Learning. p. 336. ISBN 0-495-09766-7. 
^ a b c Norman Davies (1998). Europe: A History. HarperCollins. pp. 657–660. ISBN 978-0-06-097468-8. 
^ Rey Koslowski (2000). Migrants and citizens: demographic change in the European state system. Cornell University Press. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-8014-3714-4. 
^ Suziedelis 2011, p. xxv.
^ Andrzej Jezierski, Cecylia Leszczyńska, Historia gospodarcza Polski, 2003, s. 68.
^ Russia's Rise as a European Power, 1650–1750, Jeremy Black, History Today, Vol. 36 Issue: 8, August 1986
^ Jan Zamoyski's speech in the Parliament, 1605 Harbottle Thomas Benfield (2009). Dictionary of Quotations (Classical). BiblioBazaar, LLC. p. 254. ISBN 1-113-14791-1. 
^ a b Pacy, James S.; James T. McHugh (2001). Diplomats without a Country: Baltic Diplomacy, International Law, and the Cold War (1st ed.). Post Road West, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. doi:10.1336/0313318786. ISBN 0-313-31878-6. Retrieved 2006-09-03. 
^ Bardach, Juliusz (1998). O Rzeczpospolitą Obojga Narodów. Warszawa. 
^ Joanna Olkiewicz, Najaśniejsza Republika Wenecka (Most Serene Republic of Venice), Książka i Wiedza, 1972, Warszawa
^ Joseph Conrad, Notes on Life and Letters: Notes on Life and Letters, Cambridge University Press, 2004, ISBN 0-521-56163-9, Google Print, p422 (notes)
^ Frost, Robert I. The Northern Wars: War, State and Society in northeastern Europe, 1558–1721. Harlow, England; New York: Longman's.  2000. Especially pp9–11, 114, 181, 323.
^ a b David Sneath (2007). The headless state: aristocratic orders, kinship society, & misrepresentations of nomadic inner Asia. Columbia University Press. p. 188. ISBN 0-231-14054-1. 
^ a b M. L. Bush (1988). Rich noble, poor noble. Manchester University Press ND. pp. 8–9. ISBN 0-7190-2381-5. 
^ William Christian Bullitt, Jr., The Great Globe Itself: A Preface to World Affairs, Transaction Publishers, 2005, ISBN 1-4128-0490-6, Google Print, pp42–43
^ John Adams, The Political Writings of John Adams, Regnery Gateway, 2001, ISBN 0-89526-292-4, Google Print, p.242
^ a b Henry Eldridge Bourne, The Revolutionary Period in Europe 1763 to 1815, Kessinger Publishing, 2005, ISBN 1-4179-3418-2, Google Print p161
^ a b Wolfgang Menzel, Germany from the Earliest Period Vol. 4, Kessinger Publishing, 2004, ISBN 1-4191-2171-5, Google Print, p33
^ Isabel de Madariaga, Russia in the Age of Catherine the Great, Sterling Publishing Company, Inc., 2002, ISBN 1-84212-511-7, Google Print p431
^ Carl L. Bucki, The Constitution of May 3, 1791 Archived December 5, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., Text of a presentation made at the Polish Arts Club of Buffalo on the occasion of the celebrations of Poland's Constitution Day on May 3, 1996. Retrieved March 20, 2006
^ a b c Piotr Stefan Wandycz. The Price of Freedom: A History of East Central Europe from the Middle Ages to the Present, Routledge (UK), 2001, ISBN 0-415-25491-4, Google Print p.131.
^ "Welcome to Encyclopædia Britannica's Guide to History". Britannica.com. January 31, 1910. Retrieved 2009-02-01. 
^ PPerry Anderson (1979). Lineages of the absolutist state. Verso. p. 285. ISBN 0-86091-710-X. 
^ a b Robert Bideleux, Ian Jeffries (2007). A history of Eastern Europe: crisis and change. Taylor & Francis. p. 189. ISBN 978-0-415-36627-4. 
^ a b Yves-Marie Bercé (1987). Revolt and revolution in early modern Europe: an essay on the history of political violence. Manchester University Press. p. 151. 
^ a b c Institute of History (Polish Academy of Sciences) (1991). "Volumes 63–66". Acta Poloniae historica. National Ossoliński Institute. p. 42. ISBN 0-88033-186-0. 
^ Allen, Robert. "Economic Structure and agricultural productivity in Europe, 1300–1800" (PDF). Retrieved May 5, 2015. 
^ a b Zsigmond Pál Pach, Zs. P. Pach (1970). The role of East-Central Europe in international trade, 16th and 17th centuries. Akadémiai Kiadó. p. 220. 
^ Krzysztof Olszewski (2007). The Rise and Decline of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth due to Grain Trade (PDF). p. 7. Retrieved 2009-04-22. [permanent dead link]
^ Jarmo Kotilaine (2005). Russia's foreign trade and economic expansion in the seventeenth century: windows on the world. BRILL. p. 47. ISBN 90-04-13896-X. 
^ Zofia Baranowicz; Aleksander Gieysztor; Janusz Durko (1980). Warszawa, jej dzieje i kultura (in Polish). Arkady. p. 667. ISBN 83-213-2958-6. 
^ Krzysztof Olszewski (2007). The Rise and Decline of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth due to Grain Trade. pp. 6–7. 
^ Maciej Kobyliński. "Rzeczpospolita spichlerzem Europy". www.polinow.pl (in Polish). Retrieved 2009-12-28. 
^ Nicholas L. Chirovsky (1984). The Lithuanian-Rus'commonwealth, the Polish domination, and the Cossack-Hetman state. Philosophical Library. p. 367. ISBN 0-8022-2407-5. 
^ Sven-Olof Lindquist, Birgitta Radhe (1989). Economy and culture in the Baltic, 1650–1700: papers of the VIIIth Visby Symposium held at Gotland's Historical Museum, Visby, August 18th–22th [sic], 1986. Gotlands Fornsal. p. 367. ISBN 91-971048-8-4. 
^ ""Polonaise" carpet". www.museu.gulbenkian.pt. Archived from the original on February 28, 2003. Retrieved May 18, 2009. 
^ Juliusz Bardach, Boguslaw Lesnodorski, and Michal Pietrzak, Historia panstwa i prawa polskiego (Warsaw: Paristwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1987, p.229
^ Brzezinski (1988), p. 6.
^ a b c d e f g Bardach et al. (1987), pp. 229–230.
^ a b Brzezinski (1987), p. 10.
^ Bardach et al. (1987), pp. 227–228.
^ a b J. K. Fedorowicz; Maria Bogucka; Henryk Samsonowicz (1982). A Republic of nobles: studies in Polish history to 1864. CUP Archive. p. 209. ISBN 0-521-24093-X. 
^ Jacek F. Gieras (1994). "Volume 30 of Monographs in electrical and electronic engineering, Oxford science publications". Linear induction drives. Oxford University Press. p. V. ISBN 0-19-859381-3. 
^ Norman Davies (2005). God's Playground: A History of Poland. Columbia University Press. p. 167. ISBN 0-231-12819-3. 
^ "Setting Sail". www.warsawvoice.pl. May 29, 2003. Retrieved 2009-05-21. 
^ Paul Peucker. "Jan Amos Comenius (1592–1670)" (PDF). www.moravian.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 2, 2009. Retrieved May 18, 2009. 
^ Państwowy Instytut Badania Sztuki Ludowej (1974). "Volumes 28–29". Polska sztuka ludowa (Polish Folk Art). Państwowy Instytut Sztuki. p. 259. 
^ Paul Robert Magocsi (1996). A history of Ukraine. University of Toronto Press. pp. 286–287. ISBN 0-8020-7820-6. 
^ "Portraits collection". www.muzeum.leszno.pl. Retrieved 2009-05-18. 
^ Mariusz Karpowicz (1991). Baroque in Poland. Arkady. p. 68. ISBN 83-213-3412-1. 
^ a b Michael J. Mikoś. "Baroque". www.staropolska.pl. Retrieved 2009-05-13. 
^ Włodzimierz Piwkowski. "Mecenat radziwiłłowski w dziedzinie kultury, sztuki i rzemiosła artystycznego". www.mm.pl (in Polish). Archived from the original on September 7, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2010. 
^ "Palaces and Castles in a Lion Country". www.lvivtoday.com.ua. June 2, 2008. Retrieved 2009-05-19. 
^ Kazimierz Maliszewski (1990). Obraz świata i Rzeczypospolitej w polskich gazetach rękopiśmiennych z okresu późnego baroku: studium z dziejów kształtowania się i rozpowszechniania sarmackich stereotypów wiedzy i informacji o "theatrum mundi" (in Polish). Schr. p. 79. ISBN 83-231-0239-2.  W każdym razie "królowa bez korony i pierwsza dama Rzeczypospolitej", jak współcześni określali Sieniawską, zasługuje na biografię naukową.
^ Andrzej Wasko, Sarmatism or the Enlightenment: <space>The Dilemma of Polish Culture, Sarmatian Review XVII.2, online
^ Dziejochciejstwo, dziejokrętactwo, Janusz Tazbir, Polityka 6 (2591) February 10, 2007 (in Polish)
^ Total and Jewish population based on Frazee; others are estimations from Pogonowski (se following reference). Charles A. Frazee, World History the Easy Way, Barron's Educational Series, ISBN 0-8120-9766-1, Google Print, 50
^ R. B. Wernham, The new Cambridge modern history: The Counter-Reformation and price revolution, 1559–1610,1968, Cambridge University Press, Google print p. 377
^ a b Matthew P. Romaniello, Charles Lipp. Contested Spaces of Nobility in Early Modern Europe. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. 2011. p. 233.
^ David L. Ransel, Bozena Shallcross. Polish Encounters, Russian Indentity. Indiana University Press. 2005. p. 25.
^ Norman Davies, God's Playground. A History of Poland, Vol. 1: The Origins to 1795, Vol. 2: 1795 to the Present. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-925339-0 / ISBN 0-19-925340-4
^ Zamoyski, Adam. The Polish Way. New York: Hippocrene Books, 1987
^ a b {{cite web |url = http://portal.unesco.org/ci/en/ev.php-URL_ID=23126&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html |title = Memory of the World Register Nomination Form |work = portal.unesco.org |publisher = |pages = |page = |accessdate = 2011-08-02} }
^ Linda Gordon, Cossack Rebellions: Social Turmoil in the Sixteenth Century Ukraine, SUNY Press, 1983, ISBN 0-87395-654-0, Google Print, p.51
^ Serhii Plokhy (2006). The origins of the Slavic nations: premodern identities in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus. Cambridge University Press. p. 169. ISBN 0-521-86403-8. 
^ "Lemberg". Catholic Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2010-09-03. 
^ Peter Kardash, Brett Lockwood (1988). Ukraine and Ukrainians. Fortuna. p. 134. 
^ "Poland, history of", Encyclopædia Britannica from Encyclopædia Britannica Premium Service. [4]. Retrieved February 10, 2006 and "Ukraine", Encyclopædia Britannica from Encyclopædia Britannica Premium Service. [5]. Retrieved February 14, 2006.
^ "European Jewish Congress – Poland". Eurojewcong.org. Retrieved 2009-02-01. [permanent dead link]
^ Thus, at the time of the first partition in 1772, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth consisted of 43 per cent Latin Catholics, 33 per cent Greek Catholics, 10 per cent Christian Orthodox, 9 per cent Jews and 4 per cent Protestant Willfried Spohn, Anna Triandafyllidou (2003). Europeanisation, national identities, and migration: changes in boundary constructions between Western and Eastern Europe. Routledge. p. 127. ISBN 0-415-29667-6. 
^ a b Artūras Tereškinas (2005). Imperfect communities: identity, discourse and nation in the seventeenth-century Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Lietuvių literatūros ir tautosakos institutas. p. 31. ISBN 9955-475-94-3. 
^ a b Aleksander Gieysztor, ed. (1988). Rzeczpospolita w dobie Jana III (Commonwealth during the reign of John III). Royal Castle in Warsaw. p. 45. 
^ a b c d e f g h Anatol Lieven, The Baltic Revolution: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the Path to Independence, Yale University Press, 1994, ISBN 0-300-06078-5, Google Print, p.48
^ Stephen Barbour, Cathie Carmichael, Language and Nationalism in Europe, Oxford University Press, 2000, ISBN 0-19-925085-5, Google Print p.184
^ Östen Dahl, Maria Koptjevskaja-Tamm, The Circum-Baltic Languages: Typology and Contact, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2001, ISBN 90-272-3057-9, Google Print, p.45
^ Glanville Price, Encyclopedia of the Languages of Europe, Blackwell Publishing, 1998, ISBN 0-631-22039-9, Google Print, p.30
^ a b c d Mikulas Teich, The National Question in Europe in Historical Context, Cambridge University Press, 1993, ISBN 0-521-36713-1, Google Print, p.295
^ a b c d e Kevin O'Connor, Culture And Customs of the Baltic States, Greenwood Press, 2006, ISBN 0-313-33125-1, Google Print, p.115
^ a b Daniel. Z Stone, A History of East Central Europe, p.46
^ Karin Friedrich et al., The Other Prussia: Royal Prussia, Poland and Liberty, 1569–1772, Cambridge University Press, 2000, ISBN 0-521-58335-7, Google Print, p.88
^ Tomasz Kamusella (2008). The Politics of Language and Nationalism in Modern Central Europe. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 115. ISBN 0-230-55070-3. 
^ L'union personnelle polono-saxonne contribua davantage à faire connaître en Pologne le français que l'allemand. Cette fonction de la langue française, devenue l'instrument de communication entre les groupes dirigeants des deux pays. Polish Academy of Sciences Institute of History (1970). "Volume 22". Acta Poloniae historica (in French). National Ossoliński Institute. p. 79. 
^ They were the first Catholic schools in which one of the main languages of instruction was Polish. [...] Although he followed Locke in attaching weight to the native language, in general Latin lost ground to French rather than Polish. Richard Butterwick (1998). Poland's last king and English culture: Stanisław August Poniatowski, 1732–1798. Oxford University Press. p. 70. ISBN 0-19-820701-8. 
^ Piotr Eberhardt, Jan Owsinski, Ethnic Groups and Population Changes in Twentieth-century Central-Eastern Europe: History, Data, Analysis, M.E. Sharpe, 2003, ISBN 0-7656-0665-8, Google Print, p.177
^ Östen Dahl, Maria Koptjevskaja-Tamm, The Circum-Baltic Languages: Typology and Contact, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2001, ISBN 90-272-3057-9, Google Print, p.41
^ Zinkevičius, Z. (1993). Rytų Lietuva praeityje ir dabar. Vilnius: Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidykla. p. 70. ISBN 5-420-01085-2. Official usage of Lithuanian language in the 16th century Lithuania's cities proves magistrate's decree of Wilno city, which was sealed by Žygimantas Augustas' in 1552...//Courts juratory were written in Lithuanian language. In fact, such [courts juratory written in Lithuanian] survived from the 17th century... 
^ ""Mes Wladislaus..." a letter from Wladyslaw Vasa issued in 1639 written in Lithuanian language". Retrieved 2006-09-03. 
^ Ališauskas, V.; L. Jovaiša; M. Paknys; R. Petrauskas; E. Raila; et al. (2001). Lietuvos Didžiosios Kunigaikštijos kultūra. Tyrinėjimai ir vaizdai. Vilnius. p. 500. ISBN 9955-445-26-2. In 1794 Government's declarations were carried out and in Lithuanian. 
^ Daniel. Z Stone, A History of East Central Europe, p.4
^ Czesław Miłosz, The History of Polish Literature, University of California Press, 1983, ISBN 0-520-04477-0, Google Print, p.108
^ Jan K. Ostrowski, Land of the Winged Horsemen: Art in Poland, 1572–1764, Yale University Press, 1999, ISBN 0-300-07918-4, Google Print, p.27
^ a b Joanna B. Michlic (2006). Poland's threatening other: the image of the Jew from 1880 to the present. U of Nebraska Press. p. 42. ISBN 0-8032-3240-3. 
^ Karol Zierhoffer, Zofia Zierhoffer (2000). Nazwy zachodnioeuropejskie w języku polskim a związki Polski z kulturą Europy (in Polish). Wydawnictwo Poznańskiego Towarzystwa Przyjaciół Nauk. p. 79. ISBN 83-7063-286-6.  Podobną opinię przekazał nieco późnej, w 1577 r. Marcin Kromer "Za naszej pamięci weszli [...] do głównych miast Polski kupcy i rzemieślnicy włoscy, a język ich jest także częściowo w użyciu, mianowicie wśród wytworniejszych Polaków, którzy chętnie podróżują do Włoch".
^ Rosemary A. Chorzempa (1993). Polish roots. Genealogical Pub. ISBN 0-8063-1378-1. 
^ Jan K. Ostrowski, ed. (1999). Art in Poland, 1572–1764: land of the winged horsemen. Art Services International. p. 32. ISBN 0-88397-131-3.  In 1600 the son of the chancellor of Poland was learning four languages: Latin, Greek, Turkish, and Polish. By the time he had completed his studies, he was fluent not only in Turkish but also in Tatar and Arabic.
^ Lola Romanucci-Ross; George A. De Vos; Takeyuki Tsuda (2006). Ethnic identity: problems and prospects for the twenty-first century. Rowman Altamira. p. 84. ISBN 0-7591-0973-7. 
^ A. stated, for instance by the preamble of the Constitution of the Republic of Poland of 1997.
^ Alfonsas Eidintas, Vytautas Zalys, Lithuania in European Politics: The Years of the First Republic, 1918–1940, Palgrave, 1999, ISBN 0-312-22458-3. Print, p78
^ ""Zobaczyć Kresy". Grzegorz Górny. Rzeczpospolita 23-08-2008 (in Polish)" (in Polish). Rp.pl. August 23, 2008. Retrieved 2009-02-01. 
^ Sarah Johnstone (2008). Ukraine. Lonely Planet. p. 27. ISBN 1-74104-481-2. 
^ Stephen K. Batalden, Sandra L. Batalden (1997). The newly independent states of Eurasia: handbook of former Soviet republics. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 45. ISBN 0-89774-940-5. 
^ Richard M. Golden (2006). "Volume 4". Encyclopedia of witchcraft: the Western tradition. ABC-CLIO. p. 1039. ISBN 1-57607-243-6. 
^ Daniel H. Cole (2002). Pollution and property: comparing ownership institutions for environmental protection. Cambridge University Press. p. 106. ISBN 0-521-00109-9. 
^ (in English) Gordon Campbell (2006). The Grove encyclopedia of decorative arts. Oxford University Press US. p. 13. ISBN 01-95189-48-5. 
^ Gwei-Djen Lu; Joseph Needham; Vivienne Lo (2002). Celestial lancets: a history and rationale of acupuncture and moxa. Routledge. p. 284. ISBN 07-00714-58-8. 
^ (in English) Ian Ridpath. "Taurus Poniatovii - Poniatowski's bull". www.ianridpath.com. Retrieved 2009-05-18. 
^ "Old City of Zamość". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. 2009-09-23. Retrieved 2011-09-15. 
^ After a fire had destroyed a wooden synagogue in 1733 Stanislaw Lubomirski decided to found a new bricked synagogue building. (in English) Polin Travel. "Lancut". www.jewish-guide.pl. Retrieved 2010-09-02. 
^ Guillaume de Lamberty (1735). "Volume 3". Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire du XVIIIe siècle, contenant les négociations, traitez, résolutions et autres documents authentiques concernant les affaires d'état: avec le supplément aux années MDCXCVI-MDCCIII (in French). p. 343. Généreux et Magnifiques Seigneurs les Sénateurs et autres Ordres de la Sérénissime République de Pologne et du grand Duché de Lithuanie 
^ a b c Francis W. Carter (1994). Trade and urban development in Poland: an economic geography of Cracow, from its origins to 1795 – Volume 20 of Cambridge studies in historical geography. Cambridge University Press. pp. 186, 187. ISBN 978-0-521-41239-1. 
^ Daniel Stone (2001). The Polish–Lithuanian state, 1386–1795. University of Washington Press. p. 221. ISBN 978-0-295-98093-5. 
^ Robert Bideleux, Ian Jeffries (1998). A history of eastern Europe: crisis and change. Routledge. p. 126. ISBN 978-0-415-16111-4. 
^ Politics and reformations: communities, polities, nations, and empires.2007 p.206
^ Zeitschrift für Ostmitteleuropa-Forschung. 2006, Vol.55; p.2
^ Thomas A. Brady, Christopher Ocker; entry by David Frick (2007). Politics and reformations: communities, polities, nations, and empires : essays in honor of Thomas A. Brady, Jr. Brill Publishers. p. 206. ISBN 978-90-04-16173-3. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Marcel Cornis-Pope, John Neubauer; essay by Tomas Venclova (2004). History of the literary cultures of East-Central Europe: junctures and disjunctures in the 19th and 20th centuries (Volume 2). John Benjamins Publishing Company. p. 11. ISBN 978-90-272-3453-7. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)


Sources[edit]

Bardach, Juliusz; Lesnodorski, Boguslaw; Pietrzak, Michal (1987). Historia panstwa i prawa polskiego. Warsaw: Paristwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe. 
Brzezinski, Richard (1987). Polish Armies (1): 1569–1696 (Men-At-Arms Series, 184). Osprey Publishing. ISBN 0-85045-736-X. 
Brzezinski, Richard (1988). Polish Armies (2): 1569–1696 (Men-At-Arms Series, 188). Osprey Publishing. ISBN 0-85045-744-0. 
Suziedelis, Saulius A. (2011). Historical Dictionary of Lithuania (2 ed.). Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0810875364. 
Henryk Litwin, Central European Superpower, BUM Magazine, October 2016.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.



(in Polish) (in English) Commonwealth of Diverse Cultures: Poland's Heritage
(in Polish) Knowledge passage
(in Polish) The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth–Maps, history of cities in Poland, Ukraine, Belarus and Lithuania








v
t
e


Former monarchies






List of monarchs who lost their thrones in the 20th and 21st centuries
List of monarchs who lost their thrones in the 19th century









Africa



 Ethiopia
 Libya
 Tunisia
 Egypt
 Madagascar
 South Africa
 Burundi
 Central Africa
 Zanzibar
 Ghana
 Nigeria
 Sierra Leone
 Tanganyika
 Uganda
 Kenya
 Rhodesia
 The Gambia
 Mauritius
 Wituland





Asia



 China
 Korea
 Vietnam
 Georgia
 India
 Manchukuo
 Iran
 Iraq
 Syria
 Yemen
 Afghanistan
 Turkey
 Pakistan
 Philippines
 Sri Lanka
 Tibet
 Nepal
 Mongolia





Europe



 Germany

 Bavaria
 Prussia
 Saxony
 Württemberg


 Austria-Hungary
 Russia
 France
 Portugal
 Italy
 Two Sicilies
 Hungary
 Bulgaria
 Romania
 Yugoslavia
 Serbia
 Montenegro
 Greece
 Albania
 Lithuania
 Hanover
 Iceland
 Tuscany
 Polish-Lithuania
 Malta
 Papal States
 Finland





Oceania



 Bora Bora
 Fiji
 Hawaii
 Rarotonga
 Tahiti





Americas



 Brazil
 Mexico
 Haiti
 Trinidad and Tobago
 Guyana
 Suriname















v
t
e


Lithuania articles



History




Early



Balts
Lithuania proper
Grand Duchy

1219–95
Duchy
Kingdom
Christianization
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth







Revival and
independence



Press ban
National Revival

Great Seimas of Vilnius


Act of Independence
Wars of Independence

Lithuanian–Soviet War
Polish–Lithuanian War


1919 Polish coup d'état attempt
First Soviet republic
1926 coup d'état





WWII and
occupations



Occupation of the Baltic states

by the Soviet Union (1940)
by Nazi Germany
by the Soviet Union (1944)


Holocaust
Resistance
Second Soviet republic
Baltic states under Soviet rule (1944–91)
Government-in-exile





Restoration



Reform Movement (Sąjūdis)
Singing Revolution
Baltic Way
Act of Re-Establishment
January Events
August Putsch











Geography







Cities

capital


Climate
Extreme points
Flora
Forests
Lakes
Regional parks
Rivers
Towns








Politics







Administrative divisions

counties
municipalities
elderships


Constitution

Constitutional Court


Elections
Foreign relations
Government

Prime Minister


Law

Law enforcement


Seimas parliament

Speaker
Political parties


President





Military



Land Force
Naval Force
Air Force
Special Operations Force








Economy







Agriculture
Banks

Central bank


Energy
Euro
Litas (former currency)
Telecommunications
Transport

airports
rail
roads
seaport


Tourism








Society







Demographics
Education

universities


Ethnic minorities
Ethnographic regions
Language
Lithuanians
Religion





Culture



Calendar
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural history
Ethnographic Lithuania
Literature
Music
Mythology
Name
Public holidays
Sport
Symbols

anthem
coat of arms
flag














Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Poland articles



History



Timeline
Prehistory and protohistory
Middle Ages
Monarchs
Early Modern (1569–1795)
Partitions, duchies and kingdoms (1795–1918)
World War I
Interwar years
World War II
Communist Poland
Poland since 1989










Geography







Cities and towns
Forests
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
National parks
Poland A and B
Protected areas
Regions
Rivers








Politics







Administrative divisions
Constitution
Human rights
Judiciary
Law
Law enforcement
LGBT history
Military
Politicians
Elections
Foreign relations
Parliament
Political parties
Central European Initiative
Visegrád Group








Economy







Agriculture
Balcerowicz Plan
Central bank
Currency
Economic history
EEZ
Energy
Exports
Regional GDP per capita
Merchant Navy
Mining
Stock exchange
Tourism
Transport
Unemployment
Upper Silesian Industrial Region








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Health care
Languages
Religion





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema
Coat of arms
Polish cuisine

Silesian cuisine


Cultural history
Flags
Folk beliefs
Folk dances
Literature
Media
Music
Name
Orders and decorations
Polish names
Public holidays
Sport
Theatre
Traditions












Outline



Category
Portal












v
t
e


History of Europe



Prehistory



Paleolithic Europe
Neolithic Europe
Bronze Age Europe
Iron Age Europe





Classical antiquity



Classical Greece
Roman Republic
Hellenistic period
Roman Empire
Early Christianity
Crisis of the Third Century
Fall of the Western Roman Empire
Late antiquity





Middle Ages



Early Middle Ages
Migration Period
Christianization
Francia
Byzantine Empire
Maritime republics
Viking Age
Kievan Rus'
Holy Roman Empire
High Middle Ages
Feudalism
Crusades
Mongol invasion
Late Middle Ages
Hundred Years' War
Kalmar Union
Renaissance





Early modern



Reformation
Age of Discovery
Baroque
Thirty Years' War
Absolute monarchy
Ottoman Empire
Portuguese Empire
Spanish Empire
Early modern France
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
Swedish Empire
Dutch Republic
British Empire
Habsburg Monarchy
Russian Empire
Age of Enlightenment





Modern



Great Divergence
Industrial Revolution
French Revolution
Napoleonic Wars
Nationalism
Revolutions of 1848
World War I
Russian Revolution
Interwar period
World War II
Cold War
European integration





See also



Art of Europe
Genetic history of Europe
History of the Mediterranean region
History of the European Union
History of Western civilization
Maritime history of Europe
Military history of Europe






Coordinates: 50°03′N 19°56′E﻿ / ﻿50.050°N 19.933°E﻿ / 50.050; 19.933



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 311450023
GND: 1060577984











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polish–Lithuanian_Commonwealth&oldid=818424530"					Categories: Former countries in EuropeFormer state unionsStates and territories established in 1569States and territories disestablished in 1795Polish–Lithuanian CommonwealthEarly Modern history of LithuaniaEarly Modern history of PolandEarly Modern history of UkraineFormer Slavic countriesFormer monarchies of EuropeHistory of Lithuania (1569–1795)Political history of LithuaniaPolitical history of PolandPolitical history of UkraineLithuania–Poland relationsDiarchiesFormer republicsDuchy of LivoniaHistory of Transnistria1569 establishments in Poland1795 disestablishments in Poland16th century in Lithuania17th century in Lithuania18th century in Lithuania16th century in Poland17th century in Poland18th century in Poland16th century in Ukraine17th century in Ukraine18th century in UkraineHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 Polish-language sources (pl)CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listUse mdy dates from December 2014Former country articles requiring maintenancePages using infobox former country with unknown parametersPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parametersPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parametersArticles containing Polish-language textArticles containing Lithuanian-language textArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing French-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2017Articles containing Belarusian-language textArticles containing Ukrainian-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles with Polish-language external linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers