For other uses, see Pollution (disambiguation).
For the academic journal, see Environmental Pollution (journal).




Thermal oxidizers purify industrial air flows.






The litter problem on the coast of Guyana, 2010


Pollution is the introduction of contaminants into the natural environment that cause adverse change.[1] Pollution can take the form of chemical substances or energy, such as noise, heat or light. Pollutants, the components of pollution, can be either foreign substances/energies or naturally occurring contaminants. Pollution is often classed as point source or nonpoint source pollution. In 2015, pollution killed 9 million people in the world.[2][3]



Contents


1 History
2 Urban pollution
3 Forms of pollution
4 Pollutants
5 Cost of pollution
6 Sources and causes
7 Effects

7.1 Human health
7.2 Environment
7.3 Environmental health information
7.4 Worker productivity


8 Regulation and monitoring
9 Pollution control

9.1 Practices
9.2 Pollution control devices


10 Perspectives
11 Greenhouse gases and global warming
12 Most polluting industries
13 World’s worst polluted places
14 See also
15 References
16 External links



History
Air pollution has always accompanied civilizations. Pollution started from prehistoric times when man created the first fires. According to a 1983 article in the journal Science, "soot" found on ceilings of prehistoric caves provides ample evidence of the high levels of pollution that was associated with inadequate ventilation of open fires."[4] Metal forging appears to be a key turning point in the creation of significant air pollution levels outside the home. Core samples of glaciers in Greenland indicate increases in pollution associated with Greek, Roman and Chinese metal production,[5] but at that time the pollution was comparatively small and could be handled by nature.[citation needed]
Urban pollution




Air pollution in the US, 1973


The burning of coal and wood, and the presence of many horses in concentrated areas made the cities the primary sources of pollution. The Industrial Revolution brought an infusion of untreated chemicals and wastes into local streams that served as the water supply. King Edward I of England banned the burning of sea-coal by proclamation in London in 1272, after its smoke became a problem.[6][7] But the fuel was so common in England that this earliest of names for it was acquired because it could be carted away from some shores by the wheelbarrow.
It was the industrial revolution that gave birth to environmental pollution as we know it today. London also recorded one of the earlier extreme cases of water quality problems with the Great Stink on the Thames of 1858, which led to construction of the London sewerage system soon afterward. Pollution issues escalated as population growth far exceeded view ability of neighborhoods to handle their waste problem. Reformers began to demand sewer systems, and clean water.[8]
In 1870, the sanitary conditions in Berlin were among the worst in Europe. August Bebel recalled conditions before a modern sewer system was built in the late 1870s:

"Waste-water from the houses collected in the gutters running alongside the curbs and emitted a truly fearsome smell. There were no public toilets in the streets or squares. Visitors, especially women, often became desperate when nature called. In the public buildings the sanitary facilities were unbelievably primitive....As a metropolis, Berlin did not emerge from a state of barbarism into civilization until after 1870."[9]

The primitive conditions were intolerable for a world national capital, and the Imperial German government brought in its scientists, engineers and urban planners to not only solve the deficiencies but to forge Berlin as the world's model city. A British expert in 1906 concluded that Berlin represented "the most complete application of science, order and method of public life," adding "it is a marvel of civic administration, the most modern and most perfectly organized city that there is."[10]
The emergence of great factories and consumption of immense quantities of coal gave rise to unprecedented air pollution and the large volume of industrial chemical discharges added to the growing load of untreated human waste. Chicago and Cincinnati were the first two American cities to enact laws ensuring cleaner air in 1881. Pollution became a major issue in the United States in the early twentieth century, as progressive reformers took issue with air pollution caused by coal burning, water pollution caused by bad sanitation, and street pollution caused by the 3 million horses who worked in American cities in 1900, generating large quantities of urine and manure. As historian Martin Melosi notes, The generation that first saw automobiles replacing the horses saw cars as "miracles of cleanliness.".[11] By the 1940s, however, automobile-caused smog was a major issue in Los Angeles.[12]
Other cities followed around the country until early in the 20th century, when the short lived Office of Air Pollution was created under the Department of the Interior. Extreme smog events were experienced by the cities of Los Angeles and Donora, Pennsylvania in the late 1940s, serving as another public reminder.[13] Air pollution would continue to be a problem in England, especially later during the industrial revolution, and extending into the recent past with the Great Smog of 1952.
Awareness of atmospheric pollution spread widely after World War II, with fears triggered by reports of radioactive fallout from atomic warfare and testing.[14] Then a non-nuclear event, The Great Smog of 1952 in London, killed at least 4000 people.[15] This prompted some of the first major modern environmental legislation, The Clean Air Act of 1956.
Pollution began to draw major public attention in the United States between the mid-1950s and early 1970s, when Congress passed the Noise Control Act, the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act and the National Environmental Policy Act.[16]




Smog Pollution in Taiwan


Severe incidents of pollution helped increase consciousness. PCB dumping in the Hudson River resulted in a ban by the EPA on consumption of its fish in 1974. Long-term dioxin contamination at Love Canal starting in 1947 became a national news story in 1978 and led to the Superfund legislation of 1980.[17] The pollution of industrial land gave rise to the name brownfield, a term now common in city planning.
The development of nuclear science introduced radioactive contamination, which can remain lethally radioactive for hundreds of thousands of years. Lake Karachay, named by the Worldwatch Institute as the "most polluted spot" on earth, served as a disposal site for the Soviet Union throughout the 1950s and 1960s. Chelyabinsk, Russia, is considered the "Most polluted place on the planet".[18]
Nuclear weapons continued to be tested in the Cold War, especially in the earlier stages of their development. The toll on the worst-affected populations and the growth since then in understanding about the critical threat to human health posed by radioactivity has also been a prohibitive complication associated with nuclear power. Though extreme care is practiced in that industry, the potential for disaster suggested by incidents such as those at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl pose a lingering specter of public mistrust. Worldwide publicity has been intense on those disasters.[19] Widespread support for test ban treaties has ended almost all nuclear testing in the atmosphere.[20]
International catastrophes such as the wreck of the Amoco Cadiz oil tanker off the coast of Brittany in 1978 and the Bhopal disaster in 1984 have demonstrated the universality of such events and the scale on which efforts to address them needed to engage. The borderless nature of atmosphere and oceans inevitably resulted in the implication of pollution on a planetary level with the issue of global warming. Most recently the term persistent organic pollutant (POP) has come to describe a group of chemicals such as PBDEs and PFCs among others. Though their effects remain somewhat less well understood owing to a lack of experimental data, they have been detected in various ecological habitats far removed from industrial activity such as the Arctic, demonstrating diffusion and bioaccumulation after only a relatively brief period of widespread use.
A much more recently discovered problem is the Great Pacific Garbage Patch, a huge concentration of plastics, chemical sludge and other debris which has been collected into a large area of the Pacific Ocean by the North Pacific Gyre. This is a less well known pollution problem than the others described above, but nonetheless has multiple and serious consequences such as increasing wildlife mortality, the spread of invasive species and human ingestion of toxic chemicals. Organizations such as 5 Gyres have researched the pollution and, along with artists like Marina DeBris, are working toward publicizing the issue.
Pollution introduced by light at night is becoming a global problem, more severe in urban centres, but nonetheless contaminating also large territories, far away from towns.[21]
Growing evidence of local and global pollution and an increasingly informed public over time have given rise to environmentalism and the environmental movement, which generally seek to limit human impact on the environment.
Forms of pollution




The Lachine Canal in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.






Blue drain and yellow fish symbol used by the UK Environment Agency to raise awareness of the ecological impacts of contaminating surface drainage.


The major forms of pollution are listed below along with the particular contaminant relevant to each of them:

Air pollution: the release of chemicals and particulates into the atmosphere. Common gaseous pollutants include carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and nitrogen oxides produced by industry and motor vehicles. Photochemical ozone and smog are created as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons react to sunlight. Particulate matter, or fine dust is characterized by their micrometre size PM10 to PM2.5.



Light pollution: includes light trespass, over-illumination and astronomical interference.
Littering: the criminal throwing of inappropriate man-made objects, unremoved, onto public and private properties.
Noise pollution: which encompasses roadway noise, aircraft noise, industrial noise as well as high-intensity sonar.
Soil contamination occurs when chemicals are released by spill or underground leakage. Among the most significant soil contaminants are hydrocarbons, heavy metals, MTBE,[22] herbicides, pesticides and chlorinated hydrocarbons.
Radioactive contamination, resulting from 20th century activities in atomic physics, such as nuclear power generation and nuclear weapons research, manufacture and deployment. (See alpha emitters and actinides in the environment.)
Thermal pollution, is a temperature change in natural water bodies caused by human influence, such as use of water as coolant in a power plant.
Visual pollution, which can refer to the presence of overhead power lines, motorway billboards, scarred landforms (as from strip mining), open storage of trash, municipal solid waste or space debris.
Water pollution, by the discharge of wastewater from commercial and industrial waste (intentionally or through spills) into surface waters; discharges of untreated domestic sewage, and chemical contaminants, such as chlorine, from treated sewage; release of waste and contaminants into surface runoff flowing to surface waters (including urban runoff and agricultural runoff, which may contain chemical fertilizers and pesticides); waste disposal and leaching into groundwater; eutrophication and littering.
Plastic pollution: involves the accumulation of plastic products in the environment that adversely affects wildlife, wildlife habitat, or humans.

Pollutants
Main article: Pollutant
A pollutant is a waste material that pollutes air, water or soil. Three factors determine the severity of a pollutant: its chemical nature, the concentration and the persistence.
Cost of pollution
Pollution has cost.[23][24][25] Manufacturing activities that cause air pollution impose health and clean-up costs on the whole society, whereas the neighbors of an individual who chooses to fire-proof his home may benefit from a reduced risk of a fire spreading to their own houses. If external costs exist, such as pollution, the producer may choose to produce more of the product than would be produced if the producer were required to pay all associated environmental costs. Because responsibility or consequence for self-directed action lies partly outside the self, an element of externalization is involved. If there are external benefits, such as in public safety, less of the good may be produced than would be the case if the producer were to receive payment for the external benefits to others.
Sources and causes


Play media


Air pollution produced by ships may alter clouds, affecting global temperatures.


Air pollution comes from both natural and human-made (anthropogenic) sources. However, globally human-made pollutants from combustion, construction, mining, agriculture and warfare are increasingly significant in the air pollution equation.[26]
Motor vehicle emissions are one of the leading causes of air pollution.[27][28][29] China, United States, Russia, India[30] Mexico, and Japan are the world leaders in air pollution emissions. Principal stationary pollution sources include chemical plants, coal-fired power plants, oil refineries,[31] petrochemical plants, nuclear waste disposal activity, incinerators, large livestock farms (dairy cows, pigs, poultry, etc.), PVC factories, metals production factories, plastics factories, and other heavy industry. Agricultural air pollution comes from contemporary practices which include clear felling and burning of natural vegetation as well as spraying of pesticides and herbicides[32]
About 400 million metric tons of hazardous wastes are generated each year.[33] The United States alone produces about 250 million metric tons.[34] Americans constitute less than 5% of the world's population, but produce roughly 25% of the world’s CO2,[35] and generate approximately 30% of world’s waste.[36][37] In 2007, China has overtaken the United States as the world's biggest producer of CO2,[38] while still far behind based on per capita pollution - ranked 78th among the world's nations.[39]




An industrial area, with a power plant, south of Yangzhou's downtown, China


In February 2007, a report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), representing the work of 2,500 scientists, economists, and policymakers from more than 120 countries, said that humans have been the primary cause of global warming since 1950. Humans have ways to cut greenhouse gas emissions and avoid the consequences of global warming, a major climate report concluded. But to change the climate, the transition from fossil fuels like coal and oil needs to occur within decades, according to the final report this year from the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).[40]
Some of the more common soil contaminants are chlorinated hydrocarbons (CFH), heavy metals (such as chromium, cadmium–found in rechargeable batteries, and lead–found in lead paint, aviation fuel and still in some countries, gasoline), MTBE, zinc, arsenic and benzene. In 2001 a series of press reports culminating in a book called Fateful Harvest unveiled a widespread practice of recycling industrial byproducts into fertilizer, resulting in the contamination of the soil with various metals. Ordinary municipal landfills are the source of many chemical substances entering the soil environment (and often groundwater), emanating from the wide variety of refuse accepted, especially substances illegally discarded there, or from pre-1970 landfills that may have been subject to little control in the U.S. or EU. There have also been some unusual releases of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins, commonly called dioxins for simplicity, such as TCDD.[41]
Pollution can also be the consequence of a natural disaster. For example, hurricanes often involve water contamination from sewage, and petrochemical spills from ruptured boats or automobiles. Larger scale and environmental damage is not uncommon when coastal oil rigs or refineries are involved. Some sources of pollution, such as nuclear power plants or oil tankers, can produce widespread and potentially hazardous releases when accidents occur.
In the case of noise pollution the dominant source class is the motor vehicle, producing about ninety percent of all unwanted noise worldwide.
Effects
Human health
Further information: Soil pollution § Health effects, Toxic hotspots, and List of pollution-related diseases




Overview of main health effects on humans from some common types of pollution.[42][43][44]


Adverse air quality can kill many organisms including humans. Ozone pollution can cause respiratory disease, cardiovascular disease, throat inflammation, chest pain, and congestion. Water pollution causes approximately 14,000 deaths per day, mostly due to contamination of drinking water by untreated sewage in developing countries. An estimated 500 million Indians have no access to a proper toilet,[45][46] Over ten million people in India fell ill with waterborne illnesses in 2013, and 1,535 people died, most of them children.[47] Nearly 500 million Chinese lack access to safe drinking water.[48] A 2010 analysis estimated that 1.2 million people died prematurely each year in China because of air pollution.[49] The WHO estimated in 2007 that air pollution causes half a million deaths per year in India.[50] Studies have estimated that the number of people killed annually in the United States could be over 50,000.[51]
Oil spills can cause skin irritations and rashes. Noise pollution induces hearing loss, high blood pressure, stress, and sleep disturbance. Mercury has been linked to developmental deficits in children and neurologic symptoms. Older people are majorly exposed to diseases induced by air pollution. Those with heart or lung disorders are at additional risk. Children and infants are also at serious risk. Lead and other heavy metals have been shown to cause neurological problems. Chemical and radioactive substances can cause cancer and as well as birth defects.
An October 2017 study by the Lancet Commission on Pollution and Health found that global pollution, specifically toxic air, water, soils and workplaces, kill nine million people annually, which is triple the number of deaths caused by AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria combined, and 15 times higher than deaths caused by wars and other forms of human violence.[52] The study concluded that "pollution is one of the great existential challenges of the Anthropocene era. Pollution endangers the stability of the Earth’s support systems and threatens the continuing survival of human societies."[3]
Environment
Pollution has been found to be present widely in the environment. There are a number of effects of this:

Biomagnification describes situations where toxins (such as heavy metals) may pass through trophic levels, becoming exponentially more concentrated in the process.
Carbon dioxide emissions cause ocean acidification, the ongoing decrease in the pH of the Earth's oceans as CO2 becomes dissolved.
The emission of greenhouse gases leads to global warming which affects ecosystems in many ways.
Invasive species can out compete native species and reduce biodiversity. Invasive plants can contribute debris and biomolecules (allelopathy) that can alter soil and chemical compositions of an environment, often reducing native species competitiveness.
Nitrogen oxides are removed from the air by rain and fertilise land which can change the species composition of ecosystems.
Smog and haze can reduce the amount of sunlight received by plants to carry out photosynthesis and leads to the production of tropospheric ozone which damages plants.
Soil can become infertile and unsuitable for plants. This will affect other organisms in the food web.
Sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides can cause acid rain which lowers the pH value of soil.

Environmental health information
The Toxicology and Environmental Health Information Program (TEHIP)[53] at the United States National Library of Medicine (NLM) maintains a comprehensive toxicology and environmental health web site that includes access to resources produced by TEHIP and by other government agencies and organizations. This web site includes links to databases, bibliographies, tutorials, and other scientific and consumer-oriented resources. TEHIP also is responsible for the Toxicology Data Network (TOXNET)[54] an integrated system of toxicology and environmental health databases that are available free of charge on the web.
TOXMAP is a Geographic Information System (GIS) that is part of TOXNET. TOXMAP uses maps of the United States to help users visually explore data from the United States Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Toxics Release Inventory and Superfund Basic Research Programs.
Worker productivity
A number of studies show that pollution has an adverse effect on the productivity of both indoor and outdoor workers.[55][56][57]
Regulation and monitoring
Main article: Regulation and monitoring of pollution
To protect the environment from the adverse effects of pollution, many nations worldwide have enacted legislation to regulate various types of pollution as well as to mitigate the adverse effects of pollution.
Pollution control




A litter trap catches floating waste in the Yarra River, east-central Victoria, Australia






Air pollution control system, known as a Thermal oxidizer, decomposes hazard gases from industrial air streams at a factory in the United States of America.






A dust collector in Pristina, Kosovo






Gas nozzle with vapor recovery






A Mobile Pollution Check Vehicle in India.


Pollution control is a term used in environmental management. It means the control of emissions and effluents into air, water or soil. Without pollution control, the waste products from overconsumption, heating, agriculture, mining, manufacturing, transportation and other human activities, whether they accumulate or disperse, will degrade the environment. In the hierarchy of controls, pollution prevention and waste minimization are more desirable than pollution control. In the field of land development, low impact development is a similar technique for the prevention of urban runoff.
Practices

Recycling
Reusing
Waste minimisation
Mitigating
Preventing
Compost

Pollution control devices

Air pollution control

Thermal oxidizer


Dust collection systems

Baghouses
Cyclones
Electrostatic precipitators


Scrubbers

Baffle spray scrubber
Cyclonic spray scrubber
Ejector venturi scrubber
Mechanically aided scrubber
Spray tower
Wet scrubber


Sewage treatment

Sedimentation (Primary treatment)
Activated sludge biotreaters (Secondary treatment; also used for industrial wastewater)
Aerated lagoons
Constructed wetlands (also used for urban runoff)


Industrial wastewater treatment

API oil-water separators[31][58]
Biofilters
Dissolved air flotation (DAF)
Powdered activated carbon treatment
Ultrafiltration


Vapor recovery systems
Phytoremediation

Perspectives
The earliest precursor of pollution generated by life forms would have been a natural function of their existence. The attendant consequences on viability and population levels fell within the sphere of natural selection. These would have included the demise of a population locally or ultimately, species extinction. Processes that were untenable would have resulted in a new balance brought about by changes and adaptations. At the extremes, for any form of life, consideration of pollution is superseded by that of survival.
For humankind, the factor of technology is a distinguishing and critical consideration, both as an enabler and an additional source of byproducts. Short of survival, human concerns include the range from quality of life to health hazards. Since science holds experimental demonstration to be definitive, modern treatment of toxicity or environmental harm involves defining a level at which an effect is observable. Common examples of fields where practical measurement is crucial include automobile emissions control, industrial exposure (e.g. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) PELs), toxicology (e.g. LD50), and medicine (e.g. medication and radiation doses).
"The solution to pollution is dilution", is a dictum which summarizes a traditional approach to pollution management whereby sufficiently diluted pollution is not harmful.[59][60] It is well-suited to some other modern, locally scoped applications such as laboratory safety procedure and hazardous material release emergency management. But it assumes that the dilutant is in virtually unlimited supply for the application or that resulting dilutions are acceptable in all cases.
Such simple treatment for environmental pollution on a wider scale might have had greater merit in earlier centuries when physical survival was often the highest imperative, human population and densities were lower, technologies were simpler and their byproducts more benign. But these are often no longer the case. Furthermore, advances have enabled measurement of concentrations not possible before. The use of statistical methods in evaluating outcomes has given currency to the principle of probable harm in cases where assessment is warranted but resorting to deterministic models is impractical or infeasible. In addition, consideration of the environment beyond direct impact on human beings has gained prominence.
Yet in the absence of a superseding principle, this older approach predominates practices throughout the world. It is the basis by which to gauge concentrations of effluent for legal release, exceeding which penalties are assessed or restrictions applied. One such superseding principle is contained in modern hazardous waste laws in developed countries, as the process of diluting hazardous waste to make it non-hazardous is usually a regulated treatment process.[61] Migration from pollution dilution to elimination in many cases can be confronted by challenging economical and technological barriers.
Greenhouse gases and global warming
Main article: Global warming




Historical and projected CO2 emissions by country (as of 2005).
Source: Energy Information Administration.[62][63]


Carbon dioxide, while vital for photosynthesis, is sometimes referred to as pollution, because raised levels of the gas in the atmosphere are affecting the Earth's climate. Disruption of the environment can also highlight the connection between areas of pollution that would normally be classified separately, such as those of water and air. Recent studies have investigated the potential for long-term rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide to cause slight but critical increases in the acidity of ocean waters, and the possible effects of this on marine ecosystems.
Most polluting industries
The Pure Earth, an international non-for-profit organization dedicated to eliminating life-threatening pollution in the developing world, issues an annual list of some of the world's most polluting industries.[64]

Lead-Acid Battery Recycling
Industrial Mining and Ore Processing
Lead Smelting
Tannery Operations
Artisanal Small-Scale Gold Mining
Industrial/Municipal Dumpsites
Industrial Estates
Chemical Manufacturing
Product Manufacturing
Dye Industry
Globalisation

World’s worst polluted places
The Pure Earth issues an annual list of some of the world's worst polluted places.[65]

Agbogbloshie, Ghana
Chernobyl*, Ukraine
Citarum River, Indonesia
Dzershinsk*, Russia
Hazaribagh, Bangladesh
Kabwe*, Zambia
Kalimantan, Indonesia
Matanza Riachuelo, Argentina
Niger River Delta, Nigeria
Norilsk*, Russia

See also





Book: Pollution





Environmental health
Environmental racism
Marine pollution
Pollutants
Hazardous Substances Data Bank
Regulation of greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act
Biological contamination
Chemical contamination




Air pollution


Air dispersion modeling
Arden Pope
Atmospheric chemistry observational databases - links to freely available data.
Climate change
Emission standard
Light pollution
Greenhouse gas



Soil contamination


Environmental soil science
List of solid waste treatment technologies
List of waste management companies
List of waste management topics



Water pollution


Cruise ship pollution
Marine debris
Marine pollution
Ship pollution
Stormwater
Wastewater
Wastewater quality indicators



Other


Contamination control
Earth Day
Externality
Genetic pollution
Global warming
Heat pollution
List of environmental issues
Noise health effects
Space debris
radioactivity




References


^ "Pollution - Definition from the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. 2010-08-13. Retrieved 2010-08-26. 
^ Beil, Laura (15 November 2017). "Pollution killed 9 million people in 2015". Sciencenews.org. Retrieved 1 December 2017. 
^ a b Carrington, Damian (October 20, 2017). "Global pollution kills 9m a year and threatens 'survival of human societies'". The Guardian. Retrieved October 20, 2017. 
^ Spengler, John D.; Sexton, K. A. (1983). "Indoor Air Pollution: A Public Health Perspective". Science. 221 (4605): 9–17 [p. 9]. doi:10.1126/science.6857273. 
^ Hong, Sungmin; et al. (1996). "History of Ancient Copper Smelting Pollution During Roman and Medieval Times Recorded in Greenland Ice". Science. 272 (5259): 246–249 [p. 248]. doi:10.1126/science.272.5259.246. 
^ David Urbinato (Summer 1994). "London's Historic "Pea-Soupers"". United States Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved 2006-08-02. 
^ "Deadly Smog". PBS. 2003-01-17. Retrieved 2006-08-02. 
^ Lee Jackson, Dirty Old London: The Victorian Fight Against Filth (2014)
^ Cited in David Clay Large, Berlin (2000) pp 17-18
^ Hugh Chisholm (1910). The Encyclopædia Britannica: A Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, Literature and General Information. Encyclopædia Britannica, 11th edition. p. 786. 
^ Patrick Allitt, A Climate of Crisis: America in the Age of Environmentalism (2014) p 206
^ Jeffry M. Diefendorf; Kurkpatrick Dorsey (2009). City, Country, Empire: Landscapes in Environmental History. University of Pittsburgh Press. pp. 44–49. 
^ Fleming, James R.; Knorr, Bethany R. "History of the Clean Air Act". American Meteorological Society. Retrieved 2006-02-14. 
^ Patrick Allitt, A Climate of Crisis: America in the Age of Environmentalism (2014) pp 15-21
^ 1952: London fog clears after days of chaos (BBC News)
^ John Tarantino. "Environmental Issues". The Environmental Blog. Archived from the original on 2012-01-11. Retrieved 2011-12-10. 
^ Judith A. Layzer, "Love Canal: hazardous waste and politics of fear" in Layzer, The Environmental Case (CQ Press, 2012) pp: 56-82.
^ Lenssen, "Nuclear Waste: The Problem that Won't Go Away", Worldwatch Institute, Washington, D.C., 1991: 15.
^ Friedman, Sharon M. (2011). "Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, and Fukushima: An analysis of traditional and new media coverage of nuclear accidents and radiation". Bulletin of the atomic scientists. 67 (5): 55–65. doi:10.1177/0096340211421587. 
^ Jonathan Medalia, Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty: Background and Current Developments (DIANE Publishing, 2013.)
^ Falchi, Fabio; Cinzano, Pierantonio; Duriscoe, Dan; Kyba, Christopher C. M.; Elvidge, Christopher D.; Baugh, Kimberly; Portnov, Boris A.; Rybnikova, Nataliya A.; Furgoni, Riccardo (2016-06-01). "The new world atlas of artificial night sky brightness". Science Advances. 2 (6): e1600377. doi:10.1126/sciadv.1600377. ISSN 2375-2548. PMC 4928945 . PMID 27386582. 
^ Concerns about MTBE from U.S. EPA website
^ The staggering economic cost of air pollution By Chelsea Harvey, Washington Post, January 29, 2016
^ Freshwater Pollution Costs US At Least $4.3 Billion A Year, Science Daily, November 17, 2008
^ The human cost of China's untold soil pollution problem, The Guardian, Monday 30 June 2014 11.53 EDT
^ Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, 1972
^ Environmental Performance Report 2001 Archived 2007-11-12 at the Wayback Machine. (Transport, Canada website page)
^ State of the Environment, Issue: Air Quality (Australian Government website page)
^ "Pollution". Web.archive.org. 11 April 2007. Retrieved 1 December 2017. 
^ Laboratory, Oak Ridge National. "Top 20 Emitting Countries by Total Fossil-Fuel CO2 Emissions for 2009". Cdiac.ornl.gov. Retrieved 1 December 2017. 
^ a b Beychok, Milton R. (1967). Aqueous Wastes from Petroleum and Petrochemical Plants (1st ed.). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-07189-7. LCCN 67019834. 
^ Silent Spring, R Carlson, 1962
^ "Pollution Archived 2009-10-21 at the Wayback Machine.". Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2009.
^ "Solid Waste – The Ultimate Guide". Ppsthane.com. Retrieved 1 December 2017. 
^ "Revolutionary CO2 maps zoom in on greenhouse gas sources". Purdue University. April 7, 2008.
^ "Waste Watcher" (PDF). Retrieved 2010-08-26. 
^ Alarm sounds on US population boom. August 31, 2006. The Boston Globe.
^ "China overtakes US as world's biggest CO2 emitter". Guardian.co.uk. June 19, 2007.
^ "Ranking of the world's countries by 2008 per capita fossil-fuel CO2 emission rates.". CDIAC. 2008.
^ "Global Warming Can Be Stopped, World Climate Experts Say". News.nationalgeographic.com. Retrieved 2010-08-26. 
^ Beychok, Milton R. (January 1987). "A data base for dioxin and furan emissions from refuse incinerators". Atmospheric Environment. 21 (1): 29–36. doi:10.1016/0004-6981(87)90267-8. 
^ World Resources Institute: August 2008 Monthly Update: Air Pollution's Causes, Consequences and Solutions Archived 2009-05-01 at the Wayback Machine. Submitted by Matt Kallman on Wed, 2008-08-20 18:22. Retrieved on April 17, 2009
^ waterhealthconnection.org Overview of Waterborne Disease Trends Archived 2008-09-05 at the Wayback Machine. By Patricia L. Meinhardt, MD, MPH, MA, Author. Retrieved on April 16, 2009
^ Pennsylvania State University > Potential Health Effects of Pesticides. by Eric S. Lorenz. 2007.
^ "Indian Pediatrics". Retrieved May 1, 2008. 
^ "UNICEF ROSA - Young child survival and development - Water and Sanitation". Retrieved 11 November 2011. 
^ Isalkar, Umesh (29 July 2014). "Over 1,500 lives lost to diarrhoea in 2013, delay in treatment blamed". The Times of India. Indiatimes. Retrieved 29 July 2014. 
^ "As China Roars, Pollution Reaches Deadly Extremes". The New York Times. August 26, 2007.
^ Wong, Edward (1 April 2013). "Air Pollution Linked to 1.2 Million Deaths in China". Nytimes.com. Retrieved 1 December 2017. 
^ Chinese Air Pollution Deadliest in World, Report Says. National Geographic News. July 9, 2007.
^ David, Michael, and Caroline. "Air Pollution – Effects". Library.thinkquest.org. Retrieved 2010-08-26. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Stanglin, Doug (October 20, 2017). "Global pollution is the world's biggest killer and a threat to survival of mankind, study finds". USA Today. Retrieved October 20, 2017. 
^ "SIS.nlm.nih.gov". SIS.nlm.nih.gov. 2010-08-12. Retrieved 2010-08-26. 
^ "Toxnet.nlm.nih.gov". Toxnet.nlm.nih.gov. Retrieved 2010-08-26. 
^ Zivin, Joshua Graff; Neidell, Matthew (2012-12-01). "The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity". American Economic Review. 102 (7): 3652–3673. doi:10.1257/aer.102.7.3652. ISSN 0002-8282. PMC 4576916 . PMID 26401055. 
^ Chang, Tom; Zivin, Joshua Graff; Gross, Tal; Neidell, Matthew (2016-06-01). "The Effect of Pollution on Worker Productivity: Evidence from Call-Center Workers in China". National Bureau of Economic Research. hdl:10419/145161. 
^ Li, Teng; Liu, Haoming; Salvo, Alberto (2015-05-29). "Severe Air Pollution and Labor Productivity". Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. SSRN 2581311 . 
^ American Petroleum Institute (API) (February 1990). Management of Water Discharges: Design and Operations of Oil-Water Separators (1st ed.). American Petroleum Institute. 
^ The 'Solution' to Pollution Is Still 'Dilution', Archived from the original on May 4, 2008, retrieved 2013-07-22 CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
^ "What is required". Clean Ocean Foundation. 2001. Archived from the original on 2006-05-19. Retrieved 2006-02-14. 
^ "The Mixture Rule under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" (PDF). U.S. Dept. of Energy. 1999. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-10-26. Retrieved 2012-04-10. 
^ World Carbon Dioxide Emissions Archived 2008-03-26 at the Wayback Machine. (Table 1, Report DOE/EIA-0573, 2004, Energy Information Administration)
^ Carbon dioxide emissions chart (graph on Mongabay website page based on Energy Information Administration's tabulated data)
^ "WORLD'S WORST POLLUTION PROBLEMS" (PDF). 
^ The World's Most Polluted Places: The Top Ten of the Dirty Thirty (PDF), archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-10-11, retrieved 2013-12-10 


External links
 Media related to Pollution at Wikimedia Commons



Look up pollution in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



OEHHA proposition 65 list
National Toxicology Program – from USA National Institutes of Health. Reports and studies on how pollutants affect people
TOXNET – NIH databases and reports on toxicology
TOXMAP – Geographic Information System (GIS) that uses maps of the United States to help users visually explore data from the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Toxics Release Inventory and Superfund Basic Research Programs
EPA.gov – manages Superfund sites and the pollutants in them (CERCLA). Map the EPA Superfund
Toxic Release Inventory – tracks how much waste USA companies release into the water and air. Gives permits for releasing specific quantities of these pollutants each year. Map EPA's Toxic Release Inventory
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry – Top 20 pollutants, how they affect people, what USA industries use them and the products in which they are found
Toxicology Tutorials from the National Library of Medicine – resources to review human toxicology.
World's Worst Polluted Places 2007, according to the Blacksmith Institute
The World's Most Polluted Places at Time.com (a division of Time Magazine)
Chelyabinsk: The Most Contaminated Spot on the Planet Documentary Film by Slawomir Grünberg (1996)
Nieman Reports | Tracking Toxics When the Data Are Polluted







v
t
e


Pollution



Air pollution



Acid rain
Air quality index
Atmospheric dispersion modeling
Chlorofluorocarbon
Indoor air quality
Global dimming
Global distillation
Global warming
Ozone depletion
Atmospheric particulate matter
Smog





Water pollution



Environmental impact of pharmaceuticals and personal care products
Environmental impact of shipping
Environmental monitoring
Eutrophication
Freshwater environmental quality parameters
Groundwater pollution
Hypoxia
Marine debris
Marine pollution
Ocean acidification
Oil spill
Septic tank
Surface runoff
Thermal pollution
Turbidity
Urban runoff
Wastewater
Water quality
Water stagnation
Waterborne diseases





Soil contamination



Bioremediation
Electrical resistance heating
Herbicide
Open defecation
Pesticide
Phytoremediation
Soil Guideline Values (SGVs)





Radioactive contamination



Actinides in the environment
Bioremediation of radioactive waste
Environmental radioactivity
Fission product
Nuclear fallout
Plutonium in the environment
Radiation poisoning
Radium in the environment
Uranium in the environment





Other types of pollution



Land degradation
Light pollution
Pollution from nanomaterials
Noise pollution
Radio spectrum pollution
Urban heat island
Visual pollution





Inter-government treaties



Basel Convention
CLRTAP
Kyoto Protocol
MARPOL Convention
Montreal Protocol
OSPAR
Rotterdam Convention
Stockholm Convention





Major organizations



Basel Action Network
Central Pollution Control Board (India)
DEFRA
Environment Agency (England and Wales)
Scottish Environment Protection Agency
U.S. EPA
European Environment Agency
Greenpeace












v
t
e


Environmental science



Main fields



Atmospheric sciences
Biogeochemistry
Ecology
Environmental chemistry
Geosciences
Hydrology
Limnology
Oceanography
Soil science








Related fields



Biology
Chemistry

green


Ecological economics
Environmental design
Environmental economics
Environmental engineering
Environmental health

epidemiology


Environmental studies
Environmental toxicology
Geodesy
Physics
Sustainability science
Systems ecology
Urban ecology





Applications



Energy conservation
Environmental technology
Natural resource management
Pollution control
Recycling
Remediation
Renewable energy
Road ecology
Sewage treatment
Urban metabolism
Water purification
Waste management





See also



Human impact on the environment
Sustainability








 Environment portal
 Category

scientists


Glossary
Degrees
Institutions
Journals
Research institutes












v
t
e


Global human population



Major topics



Biocapacity
Optimum population
Overpopulation

Malthusian catastrophe


Population
Population ethics
Population momentum
Sustainable development
Women's reproductive rights
Zero population growth





Biological and
related topics



Family planning

Pledge two or fewer


Human population planning

One-child policy
Two-child policy


Population biology
Population decline
Population density

Physiological density


Population dynamics
Population growth
Population model
Population pyramid
Projections of population growth





Human impact on
the environment



Deforestation
Desalination
Desertification
Environmental impact

of agriculture
of aviation
of biodiesel
of concrete
of electricity generation
of the energy industry
of fishing
of irrigation
of mining
of off-roading
of oil shale industry
of palm oil
of paper
of the petroleum industry
of reservoirs
of shipping
of war


Industrialisation
Land degradation
Land reclamation
Overconsumption
Pollution
Quarrying
Urbanization

Loss of green belts
Urban sprawl


Waste
Water scarcity

Overdrafting








Population
ecology




Carrying capacity
Deep ecology
Earth's energy budget
Food security
Habitat destruction
I = P × A  × T
Malthusian growth model
Overshoot (population)
World energy consumption
World energy resources
World3 model





Literature



A Modest Proposal
Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.
An Essay on the Principle of Population
"How Much Land Does a Man Need?"
Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth
Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits
The Limits to Growth
The Population Bomb
The Skeptical Environmentalist
The Ultimate Resource





Publications



Population and Environment
Population and Development Review





Lists



Population and housing censuses by country
Metropolitan areas by population
Population milestone babies






Events and
organizations




7 Billion Actions
International Conference on Population and Development
Population Action International
Population Connection
Population Matters
Population Research Institute
United Nations Population Fund
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
World Population Day
World Population Foundation





Related topics



Classic Maya collapse
Fertility and intelligence
Green Revolution
Holocene extinction
Migration








 Commons
 Human overpopulation
Human activities with impact on the environment
Human migration












v
t
e


Lists of countries by population statistics



World population



Current population
Current population (United Nations)





Continental



Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe
Oceania





Regional



Arab world
Caribbean
Commonwealth of Nations
Eurasia
European Union
Islands
Latin America
North America
Middle East
South America





Cities



National capitals
Cities proper
Metropolitan areas
Urban areas
Megacities
Megalopolises





Past and future
population



Past population (United Nations)
Past and future population
1
1000
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
1907
1939
1989
2000
2005
2010
Future population





Population density



Current density
Current real density based on food growing capacity





Growth indicators



Population growth rate
Natural increase
Birth rate
Mortality rate
Fertility rate





Other
demographics



Age at first marriage
Divorce rate
Domestic citizens
Ethnic and cultural diversity level
Foreign-born population
Immigrant population
Linguistic diversity
Median age
Net migration rate
Number of households
Sex ratio
Urban population
Urbanization





Health



Antiviral medications for pandemic influenza
HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate
Infant mortality rate
Life expectancy
Percentage suffering from undernourishment
Health expenditure covered by government
Suicide rate
Total health expenditure (PPP) per capita
Body Mass Index (BMI)





Education
and innovation



Bloomberg Innovation Index
Education Index
International Innovation Index
Innovation Union Scoreboard
Literacy rate
Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies
Progress in International Reading Literacy Study
Student skills
Tertiary education attainment
Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
Women's average years in school
World Intellectual Property Indicators





Economic



Development aid given

Official Development Assistance received


Employment rate
Irrigated land area
Human Development Index

by country
inequality-adjusted


Human Poverty Index
Imports
Income equality
Job security
Labour force
Number of millionaires (US dollars)
Number of billionaires (US dollars)
Percentage living in poverty
Public sector
Sen social welfare function
Unemployment rate









List of international rankings
List of top international rankings by country
Lists by country










Authority control



GND: 4186812-2
NDL: 00566135








Environment portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pollution&oldid=815358064"					Categories: PollutionEnvironmental toxicologyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 maint: Unfit urlWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles containing video clips