For Polygamy in animals, see Animal sexual behaviour § Polygamy and polygyny. For Polygamy in plants, see Plant reproductive morphology.






This article is missing information about Polygamy in history. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (December 2015)







Jacob Peeling the Rods by Guido Cagnacci, Royal Collection Trust, circa 1665




Relationships




Types



Genetic




Kinship
Family
Sibling
Cousin




By marriage





Husband
Wife
Open marriage




Polyandry
Polygamy
Polygyny





Partner · Partners







Significant other
Boyfriend
Girlfriend
Cohabitation
Same-sex
Life partner
Friendship (romantic)




Sexual





Casual
Monogamy
Non-monogamy
Mutual monogamy
Polyamory
Polyfidelity




Cicisbeo
Concubinage
Courtesan
Mistress















Activities


Bonding
Courtship
Dating
Engagement
Mating
Meet market
Romance
Singles event
Wedding








Endings


Breakup
Separation
Annulment
Divorce
Widowhood








Emotions and feelings


Affinity
Attachment
Intimacy
Jealousy
Limerence
Love

Platonic
unconditional


Passion
Sexuality








Practices


Bride price

dower
dowry
service


Hypergamy
Infidelity
Sexual activity
Transgression
Repression








Abuse


Child
Dating
Disengaging from an abuser
Domestic
Elderly
Narcissistic parent
Power and control









v
t
e







Part of a series on the


Anthropology of kinship




Basic concepts





Affinity
Consanguinity
Marriage
Incest taboo
Endogamy
Exogamy
Moiety
Monogamy
Polygyny
Polygamy
Concubinage
Polyandry
Bride price
Bride service
Dowry
Parallel / cross cousins
Cousin marriage
Levirate
Ghost marriage
Joking relationship
Family
Lineage
Clan
Cohabitation
Fictive / Milk / Nurture kinship




Descent







Cognatic / Bilateral
Matrilateral
House society
Avunculate




Linealities




Ambilineality
Unilineality
Matrilineality
Patrilineality







Household forms and residence




Extended
Matrifocal
Matrilocal

Nuclear
Patrilocal











Terminology





Kinship terminology
Classificatory terminologies




By group





Iroquois
Crow
Omaha
Eskimo
Hawaiian
Sudanese
Dravidian












Case studies






Australian Aboriginal
Burmese
Chinese
Philippine
Polyandry in Tibet / in India





Feminist





Chambri
Mosuo





Sexuality




Coming of Age in Samoa











Major theorists



Diane Bell
Tom Boellstorff
Jack Goody
Gilbert Herdt
Don Kulick
Roger Lancaster
Louise Lamphere
Eleanor Leacock
Claude Lévi-Strauss
Bronisław Malinowski
Margaret Mead
Henrietta Moore
Lewis H. Morgan
Stephen O. Murray
Michelle Rosaldo
David M. Schneider
Marilyn Strathern









Related articles


Alliance theory
Matrilineal / matrilocal societies
Feminist anthropology

Sex and Repression in Savage Society


Social Bonding and Nurture Kinship







Social anthropology
Cultural anthropology





v
t
e





Polygamy (from Late Greek πολυγαμία, polygamía, "state of marriage to many spouses")[1][2][3][4] is the practice of marrying multiple spouses. When a man is married to more than one wife at a time, sociologists call this polygyny. When a woman is married to more than one husband at a time, it is called polyandry. If a marriage includes multiple husbands and wives, it can be called a group marriage.
In contrast, monogamy is marriage consisting of only two parties. Like "monogamy", the term "polygamy" is often used in a de facto sense, applied regardless of whether the state recognises the relationship.[n 1] In sociobiology and zoology, researchers use polygamy in a broad sense to mean any form of multiple mating.
Worldwide, different societies variously encourage, accept or outlaw polygamy. Of societies which allow or tolerate polygamy, in the vast majority of cases the form accepted in polygyny. According to the Ethnographic Atlas (1998), of 1,231 societies noted, 588 had frequent polygyny, 453 had occasional polygyny, 186 were monogamous and 4 had polyandry;[5] although more recent research suggests polyandry may be more common than previously thought.[6] From a religious point of view, in contemporary society polygyny is associated with the Muslim religion, although not all Muslim cultures practice it, and neither is it restricted to this religion. In cultures which practice polygamy, its prevalence among that population is often connected to class and socioeconomic status.[7]
From a legal point of view, in many countries, although marriage is legally monogamous (a person can only have one spouse, and bigamy is illegal), adultery is not illegal, leading to a situation of de facto polygamy being allowed, although without legal recognition for non-official "spouses".
According to scientific studies, the human mating system is considered to be moderately polygynous, based on both surveys of world populations,[8][9] and on characteristics of human reproductive physiology.[10][11][12]



Contents


1 Forms

1.1 Polygyny

1.1.1 Incidence
1.1.2 Types
1.1.3 Household organization


1.2 Polyandry

1.2.1 Incidence
1.2.2 Types


1.3 Serial monogamy
1.4 Group marriage


2 Contemporary religious attitudes to polygamy

2.1 Hinduism
2.2 Buddhism
2.3 Celtic traditions
2.4 Judaism
2.5 Christianity

2.5.1 Roman Catholic Church
2.5.2 Latter Day Saint Movement

2.5.2.1 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church)

2.5.2.1.1 Mormon fundamentalism


2.5.2.2 Community of Christ




2.6 Islam


3 Legalization

3.1 International law
3.2 United Kingdom
3.3 United States
3.4 Canada
3.5 Russia


4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 Bibliography
8 External links



Forms[edit]
Polygamy exists in three specific forms:

Polygyny, wherein a man has multiple simultaneous wives
Polyandry, wherein a woman has multiple simultaneous husbands
Group marriage, wherein the family unit consists of multiple husbands and multiple wives

Polygamy is also common among some animals, such as the common fruit-fly, Drosophila melanogaster.
Polygyny[edit]
Main article: Polygyny
Incidence[edit]
Main article: Legal status of polygamy




Prince Manga Bell and favorite wives






Polygyny is very common across West Africa


Polygyny is the practice wherein a man has more than one wife at the same time. The vast majority of polygamous marriages are polygynous. Polygyny is legally accepted in many Muslim majority countries and some countries with a sizeable Muslim minority; it is also accepted in some secular countries in varying degrees.
Polygyny is more widespread in Africa than in any other continent,[13] especially in West Africa, and some scholars see the slave trade's impact on the male-to-female sex ratio as a key factor in the emergence and fortification of polygynous practices in regions of Africa.
Anthropologist Jack Goody's comparative study of marriage around the world utilizing the Ethnographic Atlas demonstrated an historical correlation between the practice of extensive shifting horticulture and polygamy in the majority of sub-Saharan African societies.[14] Drawing on the work of Ester Boserup, Goody notes that the sexual division of labour varies between the male-dominated intensive plough-agriculture common in Eurasia and the extensive shifting horticulture found in sub-Saharan Africa. In some of the sparsely populated regions where shifting cultivation takes place in Africa, women do much of the work. This favours polygamous marriages in which men sought to monopolize the production of women "who are valued both as workers and as child bearers". Goody however, observes that the correlation is imperfect and varied. He also discusses more male-dominated though relatively extensive farming systems such as those that exist in much of West Africa, in particular the West African savannah, where polygyny is desired more for the creation of sons, whose labor is valued.[15][16]
Anthropologists Douglas R. White and Michael L. Burton discuss and support Jack Goody's observation regarding African male farming systems in "Causes of Polygyny: Ecology, Economy, Kinship, and Warfare"[17] where these authors note: "Goody (1973) argues against the female contributions hypothesis. He notes Dorjahn's (1959) comparison of East and West Africa, showing higher female agricultural contributions in East Africa and higher polygyny rates in West Africa, especially in the West African savannah, where one finds especially high male agricultural contributions. Goody says, "The reasons behind polygyny are sexual and reproductive rather than economic and productive" (1973:189), arguing that men marry polygynously to maximize their fertility and to obtain large households containing many young dependent males."[18]
Types[edit]
Polygynous marriages can be distinguished between sororal polygyny, in which the co-wives are sisters, and non-sororal, where the co-wives are not related. For men, the benefits of polygyny are that it allows them to have more children, may provide them with more productive workers (where workers are family), and allows them to establish politically useful ties with a greater number of kin groups.[19] Senior wives can benefit as well when their work load is lightened by the addition of junior wives to the family. Wives', especially senior wives', status in the community can be increased by the addition of other wives, who add to the family's prosperity or are a sign of conspicuous consumption (much like a large house, domestic help, or expensive vacations would be in a western country). For such reasons, senior wives sometimes work hard or contribute from their own resources to enable their husbands to accumulate the bride price for a second wife.[20]
Polygyny may also result from the practice of levirate marriage. In such cases, the deceased man's heir may inherit his assets and wife; or, more usually, his brothers may marry the widow. This provides support for the widow and her children (usually also members of the brothers' kin group) and maintains the tie between the husband and wives' kin groups. The sororate is like the levirate, in that a widower must marry the sister of his dead wife. The wife's family, in other words, must provide a replacement for her thus maintaining the ties between them. Both levirate and sororate may result in a man having multiple wives.[19]
In monogamous societies, wealthy and powerful men established enduring relationships with, and established separate household for, multiple female partners, aside from their legitimate wives; a practice that was accepted in Imperial China up until the Qing Dynasty. This is a form of de facto polygyny that is referred to as concubinage.[21]
Household organization[edit]
Marriage is the moment at which a new household is formed, but different arrangements may occur depending upon the type of marriage and some polygamous marriages do not result in the formation of a single household. In many polygynous marriages the husband's wives may live in separate households often at a great distance[citation needed]. They can thus be described as a "series of linked nuclear families with a 'father' in common".[22]
Polyandry[edit]
Incidence[edit]
Main article: Polyandry
Polyandry is the practice wherein a woman has more than one husband at the same time. Polyandry is much less popular than polygyny and is illegal in virtually every state in the world. It occurs only in remote communities.
Polyandry is believed to be more likely in societies with scarce environmental resources, as it is believed to limit human population growth and enhance child survival.[23] It is a rare form of marriage that exists not only among poor families, but also the elite.[24] For example, in the Himalayan Mountains polyandry is related to the scarcity of land; the marriage of all brothers in a family to the same wife allows family land to remain intact and undivided. If every brother married separately and had children, family land would be split into unsustainable small plots. In Europe, this was prevented through the social practice of impartible inheritance (the disinheriting of most siblings, many of whom went on to become celibate monks and priests).[25]
Types[edit]
Fraternal polyandry was traditionally practiced among nomadic Tibetans in Nepal, parts of China and part of northern India, in which two or more brothers are married to the same wife. It is most common in societies marked by high male mortality. It is associated with partible paternity, the cultural belief that a child can have more than one father.[26]
Non-fraternal polyandry occurs when the wives' husbands are unrelated, as among the Nayar tribe of India. It happens sparsely among tribes in separate worldwide locations. In this case, a woman undergoes a ritual marriage before puberty, and he is acknowledged as the father of all her children. She, however, may never cohabit with him, taking multiple lovers instead; these men must acknowledge the paternity of their children (and hence demonstrate that no caste prohibitions have been breached) by paying the midwife. The women remain in their maternal home, living with their brothers, and property is passed matrilineally.[27] A similar form of matrilineal, de facto polyandry can be found in the institution of walking marriage among the Mosuo tribe of China.
Serial monogamy[edit]
Serial monogamy refers to remarriage after divorce or death of a spouse from a monogamous marriage, i.e. multiple marriages but only one legal spouse at a time (a series of monogamous relationships).[28]
According to Danish scholar Miriam K. Zeitzen, anthropologists treat serial monogamy, in which divorce and remarriage occur, as a form of polygamy as it also can establish a series of households that may continue to be tied by shared paternity and shared income.[19] As such, they are similar to the household formations created through divorce and serial monogamy.[citation needed]
Many societies considered monogamous allow divorce without partner consent.[citation needed] In many Western countries, divorce rates roughly approach 50%.[citation needed] Those who remarry do so on average three times.[citation needed] Divorce and remarriage can thus result in serial monogamy. Serial monogamy creates a new kind of relative, the "ex-".[citation needed] The "ex-wife", for example, can remain an active part of her "ex-husband's" life, as they may be[according to whom?] tied together by legally or informally mandated economic support, which can last for years, including by alimony, child support, and joint custody. Bob Simpson[who?] notes that in the British case, it creates an "extended family", that is, a number of households tied together in this way, including mobile children, noting that Britons may have ex‑wives or ex‑brothers‑in‑law, but not an ex‑child. According to him, these "unclear families" do not fit the mould of the monogamous nuclear family.[29]
Group marriage[edit]
Main article: Group marriage
Group marriage is a marriage[when defined as?] wherein the family unit consists of more than two partners, any of whom share parental responsibility for any children arising from the marriage.[30] Group marriage is a form of non-monogamy and polyamory.
Contemporary religious attitudes to polygamy[edit]
Hinduism[edit]
The Rig Veda mentions that during the Vedic period, a man could have more than one wife.[31] The practice is attested in epics like Ramayana and Mahabharata. The Dharmashastras permit a man to marry women of lower castes provided that the first wife was of equal caste. Despite its existence, it was most usually practiced by men of higher castes and higher status. Common people were only allowed a second marriage if the first wife could not bear a son.[32]
According to Vishnu Smriti, the number of wives is linked to the caste system:

Now a Brāhmaṇa may take four wives in the direct order of the (four) castes;
A Kshatriya, three;.
A Vaishya, two
A Shudra, one only[33]

This linkage of the number of permitted wives to the caste system is also supported by Baudhayana Dharmasutra and Paraskara Grihyasutra.[34][35]
The Apastamba Dharmasutra and Manusmriti allow a second wife if the first one is unable to discharge her religious duties or is unable to bear a son.[34]
For a Brahmana, only one wife could rank as the chief consort who performed the religious rites (dharma-patni) along with the husband. The chief consort had to be of an equal caste. If a man married several women from the same caste, then eldest wife is the chief consort.[36] Hindu kings commonly had more than one wife and are regularly attributed four wives by the scriptures. They were: Mahisi who was the chief consort, Parivrkti who had no son, Vaivata who is considered the favorite wife and the Palagali who was the daughter of the last of the court officials.[31]
The other practice though not well documented is polyandry, where a woman marries more than one man. Draupadi in the epic Mahabharat had five husbands: the Pandavas.
Traditional Hindu law allowed polygamy if the first wife could not bear a son.[37]
The Hindu Marriage Act was enacted in 1955 by the Indian Parliament and made polygamy illegal for everyone in India except for Muslims. Prior to 1955, polygamy was permitted for Hindus. Marriage laws in India are dependent upon the religion of the parties in question.[38]
Buddhism[edit]
In Buddhism, marriage is not a sacrament. It is purely a secular affair and the monks do not participate in it, though in some sects priests and monks do marry. Hence it receives no religious sanction.[39] Forms of marriage consequently vary from country to country. It is said in the Parabhava Sutta that "a man who is not satisfied with one woman and seeks out other women is on the path to decline". Other fragments in the Buddhist scripture can be found that seem to treat polygamy unfavorably, leading some authors to conclude that Buddhism generally does not approve of it[40] or alternatively that it is a tolerated, but subordinate marital model.[41]
Until 2010, polygyny was legally recognized in Thailand. In Myanmar, polygyny was also frequent. In Sri Lanka, polyandry was practiced (though not widespread) until recent[when?] times.[39] When the Buddhist texts were translated into Chinese, the concubines of others were added to the list of inappropriate partners. Polyandry in Tibet as well was common traditionally,[clarification needed] as was polygyny, and having several wives or husbands was never regarded as having sex with inappropriate partners.[42] Tibet is home to the largest and most flourishing polyandrous community in the world today.[citation needed] Most typically, fraternal polyandry is practiced, but sometimes father and son have a common wife, which is a unique family structure in the world. Other forms of marriage are also present, like group marriage and monogamous marriage.[19] Polyandry (especially fraternal polyandry) is also common among Buddhists in Bhutan, Ladakh, and other parts of the Indian subcontinent.
Celtic traditions[edit]
Some pre-Christian Celtic pagans were known to practice polygamy, although the Celtic peoples wavered between it, monogamy and polyandry depending on the time period and area.[43] In some areas this continued even after Christianisation began, for instance the Brehon Laws of Gaelic Ireland explicitly allowed for polygamy,[44][45] especially amongst the noble class.[46] Some modern Celtic pagan religions accept the practice of polygamy to varying degrees,[47] though how widespread the practice is within these religions is unknown.
Judaism[edit]
See also: Pilegesh
The Torah contains a few specific regulations that apply to polygamy,[48] such as Exodus 21:10: "If he take another wife for himself; her food, her clothing, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish".[49] Deut 21:15–17, states that a man must award the inheritance due to a first-born son to the son who was actually born first, even if he hates that son's mother and likes another wife more;[50] and Deut 17:17 states that the king shall not have too many wives.[51]
The Torah may distinguish concubines and "sub-standard" wives with the prefix "to" (e.g., lit. "took to wives").[52] Despite these nuances to the biblical perspective on polygamy, many important figures had more than one wife, such as in the instances of Esau (Gen 26:34; 28:6-9),[49] Jacob (Gen 29:15-28),[49] Elkanah (1 Samuel 1:1-8),[49] David (1 Samuel 25:39-44; 2 Samuel 3:2-5; 5:13-16),[49] and Solomon (1 Kings 11:1-3).[49]
Multiple marriage was considered a realistic alternative in the case of famine, widowhood, or female infertility[53] like in the practice of levirate marriage, wherein a man was required to marry and support his deceased brother's widow, as mandated by Deuteronomy 25:5–10. Despite its prevalence in the Hebrew Bible, scholars do not believe that polygyny was commonly practiced in the biblical era because it required a significant amount of wealth.[54] Michael Coogan, in contrast, states that "Polygyny continued to be practised well into the biblical period, and it is attested among Jews as late as the second century CE".[55]
The monogamy of the Roman Empire was the cause of two explanatory notes in the writings of Josephus describing how the polygamous marriages of Herod the Great were permitted under Jewish custom.[56][57]
The Rabbinical era that began with the destruction of the second temple in Jerusalem in 70 CE saw a continuation of some degree of legal acceptance for polygamy. In the Babylonian Talmud (BT), Kiddushin 7a, its states, "Raba said: [If a man declares,] 'Be thou betrothed to half of me,' she is betrothed: 'half of thee be betrothed to me,' she is not betrothed."[58] The BT during a discussion of Levirate marriage in Yevamot 65a appears to repeat the precedent found in Exodus 21:10: "Raba said: a man may marry wives in addition to the first wife; provided only that he possesses the means to maintain them".[59] The Jewish Codices began a process of restricting polygamy in Judaism.
Maimonides, in his Mishneh Torah maintained that polygamous unions were permissible from a legal point of view, which was contrary to his personal opinion. The Mishneh Torah, while maintaining the right to multiple spouses, and the requirement to provide fully for each as indicated in previously cited sources, went further: "He may not, however, compel his wives to live in the same courtyard. Instead, each one is entitled to her own household".[60]
The only case of a polygamous rabbi recorded in the Talmud[null 5] provides an excellent illustration: Rabbi Tarfon married 300 women. Why? Because there was a famine in the land. But Rabbi Tarfon had plenty of food, since he was a kohen and received the priestly tithes. The wife of a kohen is also permitted to eat those tithes. Those 300 women were very happy that the Torah permitted polygamy.[61]
The Shulchan Aruch, builds on all of the previous works by adding further nuances: "...but in any event, our sages have advised well not to marry more than four wives, in order that he can meet their conjugal needs at least once a month. And in a place where it is customary to marry only one wife, he is not permitted to take another wife on top of his present wife."[62] As can be seen, while the tradition of the Rabbinic period began with providing legal definition for the practice of polygamy (although this does not indicate the frequency with which polygamy in fact occurred) that corresponded to precedents in the tanakh, by the time of the Codices the Rabbis had greatly reduced or eliminated sanction of the practice.
Most notable in the Rabbinic period on the issue of polygamy, though more specifically for Ashkenazi Jews, was the synod of Rabbeinu Gershom. About 1000 CE he called a synod which decided the following particulars: (1) prohibition of polygamy; (2) necessity of obtaining the consent of both parties to a divorce; (3) modification of the rules concerning those who became apostates under compulsion; (4) prohibition against opening correspondence addressed to another.[citation needed]
In the modern day, polygamy is almost nonexistent in Rabbinic Judaism.[63] Ashkenazi Jews have continued to follow Rabbenu Gershom's ban since the 11th century.[64] Some Mizrahi Jewish communities (particularly Yemenite Jews and Persian Jews) discontinued polygyny more recently, after they immigrated to countries where it was forbidden or illegal. Israel prohibits polygamy by law.[65][66] In practice, however, the law is loosely enforced, primarily to avoid interference with Bedouin culture, where polygyny is practiced.[67] Pre-existing polygynous unions among Jews from Arab countries (or other countries where the practice was not prohibited by their tradition and was not illegal) are not subject to this Israeli law. But Mizrahi Jews are not permitted to enter into new polygamous marriages in Israel. However polygamy may still occur in non-European Jewish communities that exist in countries where it is not forbidden, such as Jewish communities in Yemen and the Arab world.
Among Karaite Jews, who do not adhere to Rabbinic interpretations of the Torah, polygamy is almost non-existent today. Like other Jews, Karaites interpret Leviticus 18:18 to mean that a man can only take a second wife if his first wife gives her consent (Keter Torah on Leviticus, pp. 96–97) and Karaites interpret Exodus 21:10 to mean that a man can only take a second wife if he is capable of maintaining the same level of marital duties due to his first wife; the marital duties are 1) food, 2) clothing, and 3) sexual gratification. Because of these two biblical limitations and because most countries outlaw it, polygamy is considered highly impractical, and there are only a few known cases of it among Karaite Jews today.
Israel has made polygamy illegal.[68][69] Provisions were instituted to allow for existing polygamous families immigrating from countries where the practice was legal. Furthermore, former chief rabbi Ovadia Yosef[70] has come out in favor of legalizing polygamy and the practice of pilegesh (concubine) by the Israeli government.
Tzvi Zohar, a professor from the Bar-Ilan University, recently suggested that based on the opinions of leading halachic authorities, the concept of concubines may serve as a practical Halachic justification for premarital or non-marital cohabitation.[71][72]
Christianity[edit]
Main article: Polygamy in Christianity
Polygamy is not forbidden in the Old Testament. Although the New Testament is largely silent on polygamy, some point to Jesus's repetition of the earlier scriptures, noting that a man and a wife "shall become one flesh".[73] However, some look to Paul's writings to the Corinthians: "Do you not know that he who is joined to a prostitute becomes one body with her? For, as it is written, 'The two will become one flesh.'" Supporters of polygamy claim this indicates that the term refers to a physical, rather than spiritual,[clarification needed] union.[74]
Some Christian theologians argue that in Matthew 19:3-9 and referring to Genesis 2:24 Jesus explicitly states a man should have only one wife:

Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?

The Bible states in the New Testament that polygamy should not be practiced by certain church leaders. 1 Timothy states that certain Church leaders should have but one wife: "A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach" (chapter 3, verse 2; see also verse 12 regarding deacons having only one wife). Similar counsel is repeated in the first chapter of the Epistle to Titus.[75]
Periodically, Christian reform movements that have aimed at rebuilding Christian doctrine based on the Bible alone (sola scriptura) have at least temporarily accepted polygyny as a Biblical practice. For example, during the Protestant Reformation, in a document referred to simply as "Der Beichtrat" (or "The Confessional Advice" ),[76] Martin Luther granted the Landgrave Philip of Hesse, who, for many years, had been living "constantly in a state of adultery and fornication",[77] a dispensation to take a second wife. The double marriage was to be done in secret, however, to avoid public scandal.[78] Some fifteen years earlier, in a letter to the Saxon Chancellor Gregor Brück, Luther stated that he could not "forbid a person to marry several wives, for it does not contradict Scripture." ("Ego sane fateor, me non posse prohibere, si quis plures velit uxores ducere, nec repugnat sacris literis.")[79]
In Sub-Saharan Africa, there has often been a tension between the Christian insistence on monogamy and traditional polygamy. In some instances in recent times there have been moves for accommodation; in other instances, churches have resisted such moves strongly. African Independent Churches have sometimes referred to those parts of the Old Testament that describe polygamy in defending the practice.
Roman Catholic Church[edit]
The Roman Catholic Church condemns polygamy; the Catechism of the Catholic Church lists it in paragraph 2387 under the head "Other offenses against the dignity of marriage" and states that it "is not in accord with the moral law." Also in paragraph 1645 under the head "The Goods and Requirements of Conjugal Love" states "The unity of marriage, distinctly recognized by our Lord, is made clear in the equal personal dignity which must be accorded to husband and wife in mutual and unreserved affection. Polygamy is contrary to conjugal love which is undivided and exclusive."
Saint Augustine saw a conflict with Old Testament polygamy. He refrained from judging the patriarchs, but did not deduce from their practice the ongoing acceptability of polygyny. On the contrary, he argued that the polygamy of the Fathers, which was tolerated by the Creator because of fertility, was a diversion from His original plan for human marriage. Augustine wrote: "That the good purpose of marriage, however, is better promoted by one husband with one wife, than by a husband with several wives, is shown plainly enough by the very first union of a married pair, which was made by the Divine Being Himself."[80]
Augustine taught that the reason patriarchs had many wives was not because of fornication, but because they wanted more children. He supported his premise by showing that their marriages, in which husband was the head, were arranged according to the rules of good management: those who are in command (quae principantur) in their society were always singular, while subordinates (subiecta) were multiple. He gave two examples of such relationships: dominus-servus - master-servant (in older translation: slave) and God-soul. The Bible often equates worshiping multiple gods, i.e. idolatry to fornication.[81] Augustine relates to that: "On this account there is no True God of souls, save One: but one soul by means of many false gods may commit fornication, but not be made fruitful."[82]
As tribal populations grew, fertility was no longer a valid justification of polygamy: it "was lawful among the ancient fathers: whether it be lawful now also, I would not hastily pronounce (utrum et nunc fas sit, non temere dixerim). For there is not now necessity of begetting children, as there then was, when, even when wives bear children, it was allowed, in order to a more numerous posterity, to marry other wives in addition, which now is certainly not lawful."[83]
Augustine saw marriage as a covenant between one man and one woman, which may not be broken. It was the Creator who established monogamy: "Therefore, the first natural bond of human society is man and wife."[84] Such marriage was confirmed by the Saviour in the Gospel of Matthew (Mat 19:9) and by His presence at the wedding in Cana (John 2:2).[85] In the Church—the City of God—marriage is a sacrament and may not and cannot be dissolved as long as the spouses live: "But a marriage once for all entered upon in the City of our God, where, even from the first union of the two, the man and the woman, marriage bears a certain sacramental character, can in no way be dissolved but by the death of one of them."[86] In chapter 7, Augustine pointed out that the Roman Empire forbad polygamy, even if the reason of fertility would support it: "For it is in a man's power to put away a wife that is barren, and marry one of whom to have children. And yet it is not allowed; and now indeed in our times, and after the usage of Rome (nostris quidem iam temporibus ac more Romano), neither to marry in addition, so as to have more than one wife living." Further on he notices that the Church's attitude goes much further than the secular law regarding monogamy: It forbids remarrying, considering such to be a form of fornication: "And yet, save in the City of our God, in His Holy Mount, the case is not such with the wife. But, that the laws of the Gentiles are otherwise, who is there that knows not."[87]
In modern times a minority of Roman Catholic theologians have argued that polygamy, though not ideal, can be a legitimate form of Christian marriage in certain regions, in particular Africa.[88][89] The Roman Catholic Church teaches in its Catechism that

polygamy is not in accord with the moral law. [Conjugal] communion is radically contradicted by polygamy; this, in fact, directly negates the plan of God that was revealed from the beginning, because it is contrary to the equal personal dignity of men and women who in matrimony give themselves with a love that is total and therefore unique and exclusive.[90]

The illegality of polygamy in certain areas creates, according to certain Bible passages, additional arguments against it. Paul the Apostle writes "submit to the authorities, not only because of possible punishment but also because of conscience" (Romans 13:5), for "the authorities that exist have been established by God." (Romans 13:1) St Peter concurs when he says to "submit yourselves for the Lord's sake to every authority instituted among men: whether to the king, as the supreme authority, or to governors, who are sent by him to punish those who do wrong and to commend those who do right." (1 Peter 2:13,14) Pro-polygamists argue that, as long as polygamists currently do not obtain legal marriage licenses nor seek "common law marriage status" for additional spouses, no enforced laws are being broken any more than when monogamous couples similarly co-habitate without a marriage license.[91]
Latter Day Saint Movement[edit]


Mormonism and polygamy



Portrait of Ira Eldredge with his three wives: Nancy Black Eldredge, Hannah Mariah Savage Eldredge, and Helvig Marie Andersen Eldredge.





Background
Origin of Latter Day Saint polygamy • Late-19th century Mormon polygamy • 1890 Manifesto • Second Manifesto (1904) • Council of Friends






Current state of polygamy
Modern Latter Day Saint polygamy •
Mormon fundamentalism •
Leaders






Prominent practitioners
Joseph Smith • Wives of Joseph Smith • Brigham Young • Wives of Brigham Young • List of Mormon polygamists •
FLDS Church • AUB






Related legislation
Morrill Anti-Bigamy Act • Poland Act • Edmunds Act • Edmunds–Tucker Act • Reed Smoot hearings






Related case law
Reynolds v. US • Cannon v. US • Clawson v. US • Davis v. Beason • Late Corp. of the LDS Church v. US • Cleveland v. US • Brown v. Buhman • List of polygamy court cases






Related articles
Celestial marriage • Spiritual wifery • Polygamy in North America • Timeline of civil marriage in the US • Freedom of religion in the US • Mormon colonies in Mexico • Latter-day Saint settlements in Canada •
Short Creek raid • Lost boys • YFZ Ranch •
Polygamy czar • Legal status of polygamy





 Latter Day Saints portal
 Book





v
t
e





Main article: Mormonism and polygamy
See also: List of Latter Day Saint practitioners of plural marriage
In accordance with a revelation to Joseph Smith, the practice of plural marriage—the marriage of one man to two or more women—was instituted among members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the early 1840s[92] Despite Smith's revelation, the 1835 edition of the 101st Section of the Doctrine and Covenants, written after the doctrine of plural marriage began to be practiced, publicly condemned polygamy. This scripture was used by John Taylor in 1850 to quash Mormon polygamy rumors in Liverpool, England.[93] Polygamy was made illegal in the state of Illinois[94] during the 1839–44 Nauvoo era when several top Mormon leaders, including Smith,[95][96] Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball took multiple wives. Mormon elders who publicly taught that all men were commanded to enter plural marriage were subject to harsh discipline.[97] On 7 June 1844 the Nauvoo Expositor criticized Smith for plural marriage.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church)[edit]
After Joseph Smith was killed by a mob on 27 June 1844, the main body of Latter Day Saints left Nauvoo and followed Brigham Young to Utah where the practice of plural marriage continued.[98] In 1852, Brigham Young, the second president of the LDS Church, publicly acknowledged the practice of plural marriage through a sermon he gave. Additional sermons by top Mormon leaders on the virtues of polygamy followed.[99]:128 Controversy followed when polygamy became a social cause, writers began to publish works condemning polygamy. The key plank of the Republican Party's 1856 platform was "to prohibit in the territories those twin relics of barbarism, polygamy and slavery".[100] In 1862, Congress issued the Morrill Anti-Bigamy Act which clarified that the practice of polygamy was illegal in all US territories. The LDS Church believed that their religiously based practice of plural marriage was protected by the United States Constitution,[101] however, the unanimous 1878 Supreme Court decision Reynolds v. United States declared that polygamy was not protected by the Constitution, based on the longstanding legal principle that "laws are made for the government of actions, and while they cannot interfere with mere religious belief and opinions, they may with practices."[102]
Increasingly harsh anti-polygamy legislation in the US led some Mormons to emigrate to Canada and Mexico. In 1890, LDS Church president Wilford Woodruff issued a public declaration (the Manifesto) announcing that the LDS Church had discontinued new plural marriages. Anti-Mormon sentiment waned, as did opposition to statehood for Utah. The Smoot Hearings in 1904, which documented that the LDS Church was still practicing polygamy spurred the LDS Church to issue a Second Manifesto again claiming that it had ceased performing new plural marriages. By 1910 the LDS Church excommunicated those who entered into, or performed, new plural marriages. Even so, many plural husbands and wives continued to cohabit until their deaths in the 1940s and 1950s.[103]
Enforcement of the 1890 Manifesto caused various splinter groups to leave the LDS Church in order to continue the practice of plural marriage.[104] Polygamy among these groups persists today in Utah and neighboring states as well as in the spin-off colonies. Polygamist churches of Mormon origin are often referred to as "Mormon fundamentalist" even though they are not a part of the LDS Church. Such fundamentalists often use a purported 1886 revelation to John Taylor as the basis for their authority to continue the practice of plural marriage.[105] The Salt Lake Tribune stated in 2005 there were as many as 37,000 fundamentalists with less than half of them living in polygamous households.[106]
On 13 December 2013, US Federal Judge Clark Waddoups ruled in Brown v. Buhman that the portions of Utah's anti-polygamy laws which prohibit multiple cohabitation were unconstitutional, but also allowed Utah to maintain its ban on multiple marriage licenses.[107][108][109][110] Unlawful cohabitation, where prosecutors did not need to prove that a marriage ceremony had taken place (only that a couple had lived together), had been the primary tool used to prosecute polygamy in Utah since the 1882 Edmunds Act.[103]
Mormon fundamentalism[edit]
The Council of Friends (also known as the Woolley Group and the Priesthood Council)[111][112] was one of the original expressions of Mormon fundamentalism, having its origins in the teachings of Lorin C. Woolley, a dairy farmer excommunicated from the LDS Church in 1924. Several Mormon fundamentalist groups claim lineage through the Council of Friends, including but not limited to, the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (FLDS Church), the Apostolic United Brethren, the Centennial Park group, the Latter Day Church of Christ, and the Righteous Branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
Community of Christ[edit]
The Community of Christ, known as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS Church) prior to 2001, has never sanctioned polygamy since its foundation in 1860. Joseph Smith III, the first Prophet-President of the RLDS Church following the Reorganized of the church, was an ardent opponent of the practice of plural marriage throughout his life. For most of his career, Smith denied that his father had been involved in the practice and insisted that it had originated with Brigham Young. Smith served many missions to the western United States where he met with and interviewed associates and women claiming to be widows of his father, who attempted to present him with evidence to the contrary. Smith typically responded to such accusations by saying that he was "not positive nor sure that [his father] was innocent",[113] and that if, indeed, the elder Smith had been involved, it was still a false practice. However, many members of the Community of Christ, and some of the groups that were formerly associated with it are not convinced that Joseph Smith practiced plural marriage, and feel that the evidence that he did is flawed.[114][115]
Islam[edit]
Main article: Polygyny in Islam
In Islamic marital jurisprudence, under reasonable and warranted conditions, a Muslim man may have more than one wife at the same time, up to a total of four. Muslim women are not permitted to have more than one husband at the same time under any circumstances.
Based on verse 30:21 of Quran the ideal relationship is the comfort that a couple find in each other's embrace:

And among His Signs is this, that He created for you mates from among yourselves, that ye may dwell in tranquillity with them, and He has put love and mercy between your (hearts): verily in that are Signs for those who reflect.
— Qur'an, Sura 30 (Ar-Rum), Ayah 21[116]

The polygyny that is allowed in the Koran is for special situations. There are strict requirements to marrying more than one woman, as the man must treat them equally financially and in terms of support given to each wife, according to Islamic law. However, Islam advises monogamy for a man if he fears he can't deal justly with his wives. This is based on verse 4:3 of Quran which says:

If ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly with the orphans, Marry women of your choice, Two or three or four; but if ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly (with them), then only one, or one that your right hands possess, that will be more suitable, to prevent you from doing injustice.
— Qur'an, Sura 4 (An-Nisa), Ayah 3[117]

Muslim women are not allowed to marry more than one husband at once. However, in the case of a divorce or their husbands' death they can remarry after the completion of Iddah, as divorce is legal in Islamic law. A non-Muslim woman who flees from her non-Muslim husband and accepts Islam has the option to remarry without divorce from her previous husband, as her marriage with non-Muslim husband is Islamically dissolved on her fleeing.[citation needed] A non-Muslim woman captured during war by Muslims, can also remarry, as her marriage with her non-Muslim husband is Islamically dissolved at capture by Muslim soldiers.[118][119] This permission is given to such women in verse 4:24 of Quran. The verse also emphasizes on transparency, mutual agreement and financial compensation as prerequisites for matrimonial relationship as opposed to prostitution; it says:

Also (prohibited are) women already married, except those whom your right hands possess: Thus hath Allah ordained (Prohibitions) against you: Except for these, all others are lawful, provided ye seek (them in marriage) with gifts from your property,- desiring chastity, not lust, seeing that ye derive benefit from them, give them their dowers (at least) as prescribed; but if, after a dower is prescribed, agree Mutually (to vary it), there is no blame on you, and Allah is All-knowing, All-wise.
— Qur'an, Sura 4 (An-Nisa), Ayah 24[120]

Muhammad was monogamously married to Khadija, his first wife, for 25 years, until she died. After her death, he married multiple women, mostly widows,[121] for social and political reasons.[122] He had a total of nine wives, but not all at the same time, depending on the sources in his lifetime. The Qur'an does not give preference in marrying more than one wife. One reason cited for polygyny is that it allows a man to give financial protection to multiple women, who might otherwise not have any support (e.g. widows).[123] However, the wife can set a condition, in then marriage contract, that the husband cannot marry another woman during their marriage. In such a case, the husband cannot marry another woman as long as he is married to his wife.[124] According to traditional Islamic law, each of those wives keeps their property and assets separate; and are paid mahar and maintenance separately by their husband. Usually the wives have little to no contact with each other and lead separate, individual lives in their own houses, and sometimes in different cities, though they all share the same husband.
In most Muslim-majority countries, polygyny is legal with Kuwait being the only one where no restrictions are imposed on it. The practice is illegal in Muslim-majority Turkey, Tunisia, Albania, Kosovo and Central Asian countries.[125][126][127][128]
Countries that allow polygyny typically also require a man to obtain permission from his previous wives before marrying another, and require the man to prove that he can financially support multiple wives. In Malaysia and Morocco, a man must justify taking an additional wife at a court hearing before he is allowed to do so.[129] In Sudan, the government encouraged polygyny in 2001 to increase the population.[130]
Legalization[edit]
See also: Legal status of polygamy





  Polygamy is legal
  Polygamy is only legal for Muslims
  Polygamy is illegal, but practice is not criminalized
  Polygamy is illegal and practice criminalized
  Legal status unknown


In India, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Sri Lanka polygamy is only legal for Muslims.
In Nigeria and South Africa, polygamous marriages under customary law and for Muslims are legally recognized.
In Mauritius, polygamous unions have no legal recognition. Muslim men may, however, "marry" up to four women, but they do not have the legal status of wives.






International law[edit]
In 2000, the United Nations Human Rights Committee reported that polygamy violates the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), citing concerns that the lack of "equality of treatment with regard to the right to marry" meant that polygamy, restricted to polygyny in practice, violates the dignity of women and should be outlawed.[131] Specifically, the reports to UN Committees have noted violations of the ICCPR due to these inequalities[132] and reports to the General Assembly of the UN have recommended it be outlawed.[133][134] Many Muslim states are not signatories of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), including Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Malaysia, Brunei, Oman, and South Sudan; therefore the UN treaty doesn't apply to these countries.[135]
United Kingdom[edit]
Bigamy is illegal in the United Kingdom.[136] De facto polygamy (having multiple partners at the same time) is not a criminal offence, provided the person does not register more than one marriage at the same time. In the UK, adultery is not a criminal offense (it is only a ground for divorce[137]). In a written answer to the House of Commons, "In Great Britain, polygamy is only recognised as valid in law in circumstances where the marriage ceremony has been performed in a country whose laws permit polygamy and the parties to the marriage were domiciled there at the time. In addition, immigration rules have generally prevented the formation of polygamous households in this country since 1988."[138]
The 2010 Government in the UK decided that Universal Credit (UC), which replaces means-tested benefits and tax credits for working-age people and will not be completely introduced until 2021, will not recognise polygamous marriages. A House of Commons Briefing Paper states "Treating second and subsequent partners in polygamous relationships as separate claimants could in some situations mean that polygamous households receive more under Universal Credit than they do under the current rules for means-tested benefits and tax credits. This is because, as explained above, the amounts which may be paid in respect of additional spouses are lower than those which generally apply to single claimants." There is currently no official statistics data on cohabiting polygamous couples who have arranged marriage in religious ceremonies.[139]
In October 2017 there was media attention in the UK concerning website over a dating website offering Muslim men an opportunity to seek second or third wives.The website had 100 000 users of which 25 000 were in the UK. Website founder Azad Chaiwala created the website when he was seeking a second wife for himself.[140]
United States[edit]
Polygamy is currently illegal in the United States. Federal legislation to outlaw the practice was endorsed as constitutional in 1878, despite the religious objections of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), by the Supreme Court, in Reynolds v. United States.
On 13 December 2013, a federal judge, spurred by the American Civil Liberties Union and other groups,[141] struck down the parts of Utah's bigamy law that criminalized cohabitation, while also acknowledging that the state may still enforce bans on having multiple marriage licenses.[142]
Individualist feminism and advocates such as Wendy McElroy and journalist Jillian Keenan[who?] support the freedom for adults to voluntarily enter polygamous marriages.[143][144]
Authors such as Alyssa Rower[who?] and Samantha Slark[who?] argue that there is a case for legalizing polygamy on the basis of regulation and monitoring of the practice, legally protecting the polygamous partners and allowing them to join mainstream society instead of forcing them to hide from it when any public situation arises.[145][146]
In an October 2004 op-ed for USA Today, George Washington University law professor Jonathan Turley argued that, as a simple matter of equal treatment under law, polygamy ought to be legal. Acknowledging that underage girls are sometimes coerced into polygamous marriages, Turley replied that "banning polygamy is no more a solution to child abuse than banning marriage would be a solution to spousal abuse."[147]
Stanley Kurtz, a Conservative fellow at the Hudson Institute rejects the decriminalization and legalization of polygamy. He stated:

Marriage, as its ultramodern critics would like to say, is indeed about choosing one's partner, and about freedom in a society that values freedom. But that's not the only thing it is about. As the Supreme Court justices who unanimously decided Reynolds in 1878 understood, marriage is also about sustaining the conditions in which freedom can thrive. Polygamy in all its forms is a recipe for social structures that inhibit and ultimately undermine social freedom and democracy. A hard-won lesson of Western history is that genuine democratic self-rule begins at the hearth of the monogamous family.[148]

In January 2015, Pastor Neil Patrick Carrick of Detroit, Michigan, brought a case (Carrick v. Snyder) against the State of Michigan that the state's ban of polygamy violates the Free Exercise and Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution.[149][150]
Canada[edit]
Canada has taken a strong stand against polygamy, and the Department of Justice of Canada has argued that polygyny is a violation of International Human Rights Law, as a form of gender discrimination.[151] In Canada, the federal Criminal Code applies throughout the country. It extends the definition of polygamy to having any kind of conjugal union with more than one person at the same time. Also anyone who assists, celebrates, or is a part to a rite, ceremony, or contract that sanctions a polygamist relationship is guilty of polygamy. Polygamy is an offence punishable by up to five years in prison. In 2017, two Canadian religious leaders have been found guilty of practising polygamy by the Supreme Court of British Columbia.[152] Both of them are former bishops of the Mormon denomination of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (FLDS).[152]
Russia[edit]
Polygamous marriages are not recognized in Russia. The Family Code of Russia states that a marriage can only be contracted between a man and a woman, neither of whom is married to someone else.[153] Furthermore, Russia does not recognize polygamous marriages that had been contracted in other countries.[154] However, de facto polygamy or multiple cohabitation in and of itself is not a crime.[155] Due to the shortage of men in Russia's population, it is not uncommon for men to father children with multiple women, and sometimes that results in households that are openly de facto polygamous.[156][157]
See also[edit]

Bigamy
Conflict of marriage laws
Legal status of polygamy
List of polygamy court cases
More danico
Serial monogamy
Types of marriages

Notes[edit]



^ For the extent to which states can and do recognize potentially and actual polygamous forms as valid, see Marriage (conflict).



References[edit]


^ Harper, Douglas (ed.). "Polygamy". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016. 
^ πολυγαμία. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project.
^ "πολυγαμία". Dictionary of Standard Modern Greek (in Greek). Center for the Greek Language. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016. 
^ Babiniotis, Georgios (2002). "s.v. πολυγαμία". Dictionary of Modern Greek (in Greek). Lexicology Centre. 
^ Ethnographic Atlas Codebook derived from George P. Murdock's Ethnographic Atlas recording the marital composition of 1231 societies from 1960 to 1980;
^ Starkweather, Katherine E; Hames, Raymond (2012). "A Survey of Non-Classical Polyandry". Human Nature. 23 (2): 149–172. 
^ Golomski, Casey (6 January 2016). Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia of Gender and Sexuality Studies (PDF) – via ResearchGate. 
^ Low B (1088) "Measures of polygyny in humans". Curr Anthropol 29: 189–194.B.
^ Murdock GP (1981) Atlas of World Cultures. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press
^ Anderson MJ, Dixson AF (2002) "Sperm competition: motility and the midpiece in primates". Nature 416: 496
^ Dixson AL, Anderson MJ (2002) "Sexual selection, seminal coagulation and copulatory plug formation in primates". Folia Primatol (Basel) 73: 63–69.
^ Harcourt AH, Harvey PH, Larson SG, Short RV (1981) "Testis weight, body weight and breeding system in primates". Nature 293: 55–57
^ Clignet, R., Many Wives, Many Powers, Northwestern University Press, Evanston (1970), p. 17.
^ Goody, Jack (1976). Production and Reproduction: A Comparative Study of the Domestic Domain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 27–29. 
^ Goody, Jack (1976). Production and Reproduction: A Comparative Study of the Domestic Domain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 32–3. 
^ Goody, Jack. Polygyny, Economy and the Role of Women. In The Character of Kinship. London: Cambridge University Press, 1973, pp. 175–190.
^ White, Douglas and Burton, Michael. Causes of Polygyny: Ecology, Economy, Kinship, and Warfare. American Anthropologist, Volume 90, Issue 4, December 1988, p. 884.
^ White, Douglas and Burton, Michael. "Causes of Polygyny: Ecology, Economy, Kinship, and Warfare". American Anthropologist, Volume 90, Issue 4, December 1988, p. 873.
^ a b c d Zeitzen, Miriam Koktvedgaard (2008). Polygamy: A Cross-Cultural Analysis. Oxford: Berg. ISBN 978-1-84520-220-0. 
^ Lee, Gary R. (1982). "Structural Variety in Marriage". Family Structure and Interaction: A Comparative Analysis (2nd, revised ed.). University of Minnesota Press. pp. 92–93. 
^ Herlihy, David (1984). McNetting, Robert; Will, Richard; Arnould, Eric, eds. Households: Comparative and Historical Studies of the Domestic Group. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 393–95. 
^ Fox, Robin (1967). Kinship and Marriage. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books. p. 39. 
^ (Linda Stone, Kinship and Gender, 2006, Westview, 3rd ed, ch 6) The Center for Research on Tibet Papers on Tibetan Marriage and Polyandry. Retrieved 1 October 2006
^ Goldstein, Pahari and Tibetan Polyandry Revisited, Ethnology. 17(3): 325–327, 1978, from The Center for Research on Tibet. Retrieved 1 October 2007
^ Levine, Nancy (1998). The Dynamics of polyandry: kinship, domesticity, and population on the Tibetan border. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
^ Starkweather, Katherine; Hames, Raymond (2012). "A Survey of Non‑Classical Polyandry" (PDF). Human Nature. 23 (2): 150. doi:10.1007/s12110-012-9144-x. eISSN 1936-4776. ISSN 1045-6767. OCLC 879353439. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. 
^ Gough, E. Kathleen (1959). "The Nayars and the Definition of Marriage". Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. 89: 23–34. doi:10.2307/2844434. 
^ Fisher, Helen (2000). The First Sex. Ballantine Books. pp. 271–72, 276. ISBN 0-449-91260-4. 
^ Simpson, Bob (1998). Changing Families: An Ethnographic Approach to Divorce and Separation. Oxford: Berg. 
^ Constantine, Larry L. (1974). Group Marriage: A Study of Contemporary Multilateral Marriage. Collier Books. ISBN 978-0020759102. 
^ a b Vedic Index of Names and Subjects, Volume 1; Volume 5. p. 478. 
^ "The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: N–Z". p. 514. 
^ "XXIV". www.sacred-texts.com. 
^ a b Life in North-eastern India in Pre-Mauryan times. pp. 39–40. 
^ "The world wakes up to Islam!". p. 301. 
^ Antiquities of India. p. 114. 
^ Religion and Personal law in secular India: A call to judgment. p. 153. 
^ Marriages-Divorces Archived 1 September 2005 at the Wayback Machine. section at general information website on Indian laws by Sudhir Shah and Associates
^ a b "Accesstoinsight.org". Accesstoinsight.org. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ The Ethics of Buddhism, Shundō Tachibana, Routledge, 1992, ISBN 978-0-7007-0230-5
^ An introduction to Buddhist ethics: foundations, values, and issues, Brian Peter Harvey, Cambridge University Press, 2000, ISBN 978-0-521-55640-8
^ Berzin, Alexander (7 October 2010). "Buddhist Sexual Ethics: Main Issues". Study Buddhism. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. 
^ Markale, Jean (1986) [1st pub. 1972 La Femme Celte (in French)]. "The Judicial Framework". Women of the Celts. Translated by Mygind, A.; Hauch, C.; Henry, P. Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-89281-150-2. LCCN 86-20128. OCLC 14069840. OL 2726337M. 
^ Jan Fries, Couldron of the Gods, page 192.[full citation needed]
^ Seán Duffy, Medieval Ireland, An Encyclopedia, page 74.[full citation needed]
^ Paul F State, A brief history of Ireland, page 17.[full citation needed]
^ Fox, Martin and O'Ciarrai, Breandan. "Céard is Sinnsreachd Ann? (What Is Sinnsreachd?) Archived 31 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine.", Tuath na Ciarraide, 7 March 2007. Retrieved 27 July 2012.
^ Coogan, Michael (October 2010). God and Sex: What the Bible Really Says (1st ed.). New York, Boston: Twelve. Hachette Book Group. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-446-54525-9. OCLC 505927356. 
^ a b c d e f The Jerusalem Bible: The Holy Scriptures. Ed. Harold Fisch. Trans. Fisch. Jerusalem: Koren Publishers Jerusalem, 1980.
^ Deuteronomy 21:15–17 from mechon-mamre.org
^ "Devarim - Deuteronomy - Chapter 17 (Parshah Shoftim)". www.chabad.org. 
^ Women, similar to wives from vadimcherny.org
^ Freeman, Tzvi. "Chabad.org". Chabad.org. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ Gene McAfee "Sex" The Oxford Companion to the Bible. Bruce M. Metzger and Michael D. Coogan, eds. Oxford University Press 1993. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. 19 March 2010.
^ Coogan, Michael (October 2010). God and Sex: What the Bible Really Says (1st ed.). New York, Boston: Twelve. Hachette Book Group. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-446-54525-9. 
^ "The Jewish Family: Metaphor and Memory", David Charles Kraemer, p. 21, Oxford University Press, 1989, ISBN 0-19-505467-9
^ Antiquities of the Jews, xvii. 1, § 3
^ Babylonian Talmud: Kiddushin 7a. halakhah.com, n.d. 7a. Web. 25 October 2012
^ Babylonian Talmud: Yevamot 65a. halakhah.com, n.d. 5a. Web. 25 October 2012
^ Mishneh Torah: Laws of Matrimoney 14:3. chabad.org, n.d. Web. 25 October 2012. http://www.chabad.org/library/article_cdo/aid/682956/jewish/Mishneh-Torah.htm
^ "Why Does Torah Law Allow Polygamy?". www.chabad.org. Retrieved 2017-04-18. 
^ Shulkhan Aruch: Even Ha'ezer 1:9 en.wikisource.org, n.d. Web 25 October 2012. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 6 April 2013. Retrieved 2012-10-25. 
^ "Does Jewish Law Forbid Polygamy?". www.chabad.org. 
^ Judaism and Polygamy: "Originally, Gershom's ban was limited in time to the year 1260", and a man "could marry more than one wife if he obtained the special permission of 100 rabbis in 3 countries". From faqs.org
^ Penal Law Amendment (Bigamy) Law, 5719-1959.[verification needed]
^ Shifman, P. (29 December 1978). "The English Law of Bigamy in a Multi-Confessional Society: The Israel Experience". The American Journal of Comparative Law. 26 (1): 79–89. doi:10.2307/839776 – via JSTOR. 
^ "Victims of polygamy", Haaretz
^ Eglash, Ruth (30 October 2008). "Israel 2008: State of Polygamy". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ Aburabia, Sarab. "Victims of polygamy". Haaretz. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ Polygamy's Practice Stirs Debate in Israel Archived 14 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Navon, Emmanuel (16 March 2006). "Kosher Sex Without Marriage, a Jerusalem Post article that discusses Jacob Emden's and Tzvi Zohar's views". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ "Tzvi Zohar's comprehensive academic research on the subject, Akdamot Journal for Jewish Thought 17, 2003, Beit Morasha Press (in Hebrew)" (PDF). Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ Genesis 2:24, Matthew 19:3–6
^ 1 Corinthians 6:16
^ The Digital Nestle-Aland lists only one manuscript (P46) as source of the verse, while nine other manuscripts have no such verse, cf. http://nttranscripts.uni-muenster.de/AnaServer?NTtranscripts+0+start.anv
^ Letter to Philip of Hesse, 10 December 1539, De Wette-Seidemann, 6:238–244
^ Michelet, ed. (1904). "Chapter III: 1536–1545". The Life of Luther Written by Himself. Bohn’s Standard Library. Translated by Hazlitt, William. London: George Bell and Sons. p. 251. 
^ James Bowling Mozley Essays, Historical and Theological 1:403–404 Excerpts from Der Beichtrat
^ Letter to the Chancellor Gregor Brück, 13 January 1524, De Wette 2:459.
^ On Marriage and Concupiscence, I,10
^ Marcus, Joel (April 2006). "Idolatry In The New Testament". Interpretation. 60 (2): 152–164. doi:10.1177/002096430606000203. Retrieved 5 October 2012. 
^ Augustine, On the Good of Marriage, ch. 20; cf. On Marriage and Concupiscence, I,10
^ St. Augustin On the Good of Marriage, ch.17; cf. On Marriage and Concupiscence, I,9.8
^ On the Good of Marriage, ch.1
^ On the Good of Marriage, ch.3
^ On the Good of Marriage, 17
^ Augustine, On the Good of Marriage, ch. 7
^ "The Ratzinger report: an exclusive interview on the state of the Church Pope Benedict XVI, Vittorio Messori", p. 195, Ignatius Press, 1985, ISBN 0-89870-080-9
^ "Morality: The Case for Polygamy", Time Magazine, 10 May 1968, time.com and "Christianity and the African imagination: essays in honour of Adrian Hastings", edited by David Maxwell with Ingrid Lawrie, p. 345–346, Brill, 2002, ISBN 90-04-11668-0
^ Catholic Cathechism, para. 2387 April 5, 2009, Vatican website
^ "Law of the Land -- Exegesis - Biblical Polygamy . com". www.biblicalpolygamy.com. 
^ "Polygamy (Plural Marriage) | LDS Church Perspective on Polygamy". www.lds.org. Retrieved 2017-04-18. 
^ Three nights public discussion between the Revds. C. W. Cleeve, James Robertson, and Philip Cater, and Elder John Taylor, Of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, At Boulogne-Sur-Mer, France. Chairman, Rev. K. Groves, M.A., Assisted By Charles Townley, LL.D., and Mr. Luddy. pp. 8–9
^ Greiner & Sherman, Revised Laws of Illinois, 1833, pp. 198–199
^ Compton, Todd (1996). "A Trajectory of Plurality: An Overview of Joseph Smith's Thirty‑three Plural Wives". Dialogue. Salt Lake City: Dialogue Foundation. 29 (2): 1–38. ISSN 0012-2157. OCLC 929467668. 
^ Smith, George D (1994). "Nauvoo Roots of Mormon Polygamy, 1841–46: A Preliminary Demographic Report". Dialogue. 27 (1): 1–72. ISSN 0012-2157. OCLC 367616792. 
^ Times and Seasons, vol. 5, p. 423, 1 February 1844
^ Lifting the Veil of Polygamy. Main Street Church. 2007. , a video presentation concerning the history of Mormon polygamy and its modern manifestations.
^ Young, Brigham (18 June 1865). "Personality of God — His Attributes — Eternal Life, etc". Journal of Discourses. 11: 119–128. Since the founding of the Roman empire monogamy has prevailed more extensively than in times previous to that. The founders of that ancient empire were robbers and women stealers, and made laws favoring monogamy in consequence of the scarcity of women among them, and hence this monogamic system which now prevails throughout Christendom, and which had been so fruitful a source of prostitution and whoredom throughout all the Christian monogamic cities of the Old and New World, until rottenness and decay are at the root of their institutions both national and religious. 
^ GOP Convention of 1856 in Philadelphia Archived 10 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine. from the Independence Hall Association website
^ "Free Exercise Clause - First Amendment". Caselaw.lp.findlaw.com. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ "FindLaw's United States Supreme Court case and opinions". Findlaw. 
^ a b Embry, Jessie L. (1994). "Polygamy". In Powell, Allan Kent. Utah History Encyclopedia. Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press. ISBN 0874804256. OCLC 30473917. 
^ "The Primer" Archived 19 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine. - Helping Victims of Domestic Violence and Child Abuse in Polygamous Communities. A joint report from the offices of the Attorneys General of Arizona and Utah. (2006)
^ "An 1886 Revelation to John Taylor". Mormonfundamentalism.com. Archived from the original on 21 September 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ Adams, Brooke (9 August 2005). "LDS splinter groups growing". The Salt Lake Tribune. ISSN 0746-3502. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. 
^ https://www.scribd.com/doc/191409187/Utah-Polygamy-Decision[unreliable source?]
^ Schwartz, John (14 September 2013). "A Law Prohibiting Polygamy is Weakened". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 January 2014. 
^ Mears, Bill (14 December 2013). "'Sister Wives' case: Judge strikes down part of Utah polygamy law". CNN. Retrieved 13 January 2014. 
^ Stack, Peggy Fletcher (14 December 2013). "Laws on Mormon polygamists lead to win for plural marriage". The Salt Lake Tribune. ISSN 0746-3502. Retrieved 13 January 2014. 
^ Religious Sects, and Cults That Sprang from Mormonism (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers Central Company, 1942).
^ Musser, Joseph W. (September 1943). "Factions". Truth. 9 (24): 94–96. 
^ Launius, Roger D. (1987). "Methods and Motives: Joseph Smith III's Opposition to Polygamy, 1860–90". Dialogue. Salt Lake City: Dialogue Foundation. 20 (4): 112. ISSN 0012-2157. OCLC 365871238. When challenged this way he typically responded . . . ‘I am not positive nor sure that he was innocent’. [permanent dead link]
^ Promeet, Dutta; Chauhan, Yamini (6 October 2013) [1st pub. 14 June 2007]. "Community of Christ". Encyclopædia Britannica. London. Retrieved 1 February 2016. (Subscription required (help)). The Community of Christ . . . claims that polygamy was introduced by Brigham Young and his associates and that the revelation on polygamy, which was made public in 1852 by Young in Utah . . . was not in harmony with the original tenets of the church or with the teachings and practices of Smith. 
^ "Joseph Smith Fought Polygamy". www.restorationbookstore.org. 
^ [Quran 30:21]
^ Quran 4:3
^ Thomas Hughes (1855), Dictionary of Islam, p.59.
^ David Samuel Margoliouth (1905), Mohammed and the Rise of Islam, p.407, p.461.
^ Quran 4:24
^ "Prophet Muhammad and polygyny", IslamWeb.
^ Sahar El-Nadi, "Why Did the Prophet Have So Many Wives?," OnIslam.net
^ "IslamWeb". IslamWeb. 7 February 2002. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ "ahlalhdeeth". ahlalhdeeth. 12 September 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ Nurmila, Nina (10 June 2009). "Women, Islam and Everyday Life: Renegotiating Polygamy in Indonesia". Routledge – via Google Books. 
^ Maike Voorhoeve (31 January 2013). "Tunisia: Protecting Ben Ali's Feminist Legacy". Think Africa Press. Retrieved 23 January 2015. 
^ Kudat, Ay?e; Peabody, Stan; Keyder, Ça?lar (29 December 2017). "Social Assessment and Agricultural Reform in Central Asia and Turkey". World Bank Publications – via Google Books. 
^ "LES EXPERTS DU CEDAW S'INQUIÈTENT DE LA PERSISTANCE DE STÉRÉOTYPES SEXISTES ET DE LA SITUAITON DES MINORITÉS EN SERBIE". United Nations. May 16, 2007. Retrieved February 3, 2016. 
^ Modern Muslim societies. 2010. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-7614-7927-7. 
^ "Omar Hassan al-Bashir, has urged Sudanese men to take more than one wife, claiming that this would the population". BBC News. 15 August 2001. Retrieved 13 September 2011. 
^ "Equality of Rights Between Men and Women". University of Minnesota Human Rights Library. 
^ "OHCHR report" (PDF). Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 
^ "Report of the Human Rights Committee" (PDF). United Nations General Assembly. 
^ "GENERAL COMMENTS ADOPTED BY THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE UNDER ARTICLE 40, PARAGRAPH 4, OF THE INTERNATIONAL COVENANT ON CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS". United Nations Human Rights Website. Archived from the original on 30 June 2013. 
^ "United Nations Treaty Collection". 
^ reporter, Daily Express (31 July 2012). "Polygamous marriage not legal in UK". 
^ "Get a divorce - GOV.UK". www.gov.uk. 
^ James Plaskitt (20 February 2008). Parliamentary Debates (Hansard). United Kingdom: House of Commons. col. 755W. 
^ "House of Commons Library Briefing Paper Number 05051: Polygamy" (PDF). House of Commons Library. 6 January 2016. 
^ Mehta, Ankita. "Website for Muslim men to find second wife sparks outrage in UK; campaigners demand ban on the site". International Business Times, India Edition. Retrieved 2017-11-18. 
^ ACLU of Utah to Join Polygamists in Bigamy Fight, 16 July 1999 press release.
^ "Federal judge declared Utah polygamy law unconstitutional". The Salt Lake Tribune. 13 December 2013. ISSN 0746-3502. 
^ Korol, Bruce (2009). "Polygamy is a (al)right". Arts & Opinion. 8 (3).  Reprinted by Wendy McElroy at wendymcelroy.com
^ Keenan, Jillian (15 April 2013). "Legalize Polygamy! No. I am not kidding". Slate. 
^ ROWER, ALYSSA (29 December 2017). "The Legality of Polygamy: Using the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment". Family Law Quarterly. 38 (3): 711–731 – via JSTOR. 
^ Are Anti-Polygamy Laws an Unconstitutional Infringement on the Liberty Interests of Consenting Adults?, Samantha Slark, Journal of Law & Family Studies No. 6 (2004), p. 451-60.
^ Polygamy laws expose our own hypocrisy. Jonathan Turley, USA Today (10/3/2004)
^ "Polygamy vs. Democracy". The Weekly Standard. Published: 5 June 2006.
^ "Carrick v. Snyder et al". Justia Dockets & Filings. 
^ Oralandar Brand-Williams, The Detroit News (13 January 2015). "Minister sues Mich. for right to marry same-sex couples". The Detroit News. 
^ "POLYGYNY AS A VIOLATION OF INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS LAW". Department of Justice, Government of Canada. 
^ a b "Canadian polygamists found guilty". 25 July 2017 – via www.bbc.com. 
^ "Family Code of the Russian Federation, Articles 12 & 14" (in Russian). Retrieved 6 August 2012. 
^ "Family Code of the Russian Federation, Article 158" (in Russian). Retrieved 6 August 2012. 
^ Neither bigamy, nor polygamy, nor cohabitation is listed as a crime or offence in the Criminal Code of Russia or the Offences Code of Russia
^ "Russians beating demographics with polygamy". RT. 26 July 2011. Retrieved 6 August 2012. 
^ Mira Katbamna (26 October 2009). "'Half a good man is better than none at all'". The Guardian. Retrieved 6 August 2012. 


Bibliography[edit]

Boserup, Ester (1997), "The economics of polygamy", in Grinker, Roy Richard; Steiner, Christopher B., Perspectives on Africa: a reader in culture, history, and representation, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Blackwell, pp. 506–517, ISBN 9781557866868. 
Cairncross, John (1974). After Polygamy Was Made a Sin: The Social History of Christian Polygamy. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Chapman, Samuel A. (2001). Polygamy, Bigamy and Human Rights Law. Xlibris Corp. ISBN 1-4010-1244-2. [self-published source]
Hillman, Eugene (1975). Polygamy Reconsidered: African Plural Marriage and the Christian Churches. New York: Orbis Books. ISBN 0-88344-391-0. 
Korotayev, Andrey (2004). World Religions and Social Evolution of the Old World Oikumene Civilizations: A Cross-cultural Perspective (First ed.). Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen Press. ISBN 0-7734-6310-0. 
Van Wagoner, Richard S. (1992). Mormon Polygamy: A History (2nd ed.). Utah: Signature Books. ISBN 0-941214-79-6. 
Wilson, E. O. (2000). Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Harvard Univ Pr. ISBN 0-674-00235-0. 

External links[edit]

 The dictionary definition of polygamy at Wiktionary
 Quotations related to Polygamy at Wikiquote
 Works related to Portal:Polygamy at Wikisource
 Media related to Polygamy at Wikimedia Commons
History of Polygamy in Judaism
LIFE With Polygamists, 1944 - slideshow by Life magazine







v
t
e


Polygamous marriage by country



Performed
legally




Nationwide



Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cameroon
Chad
CAR
Comoros
Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Gabon
The Gambia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Kenya
Kuwait
Libya
Maldives
Mauritania
Morocco
Myanmar
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Singapore
Somalia
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
UAE
Yemen
Zambia





Statewide



Iraq1
Nigeria2
Palestine

Gaza Strip
West Bank


Syria1








Recognized if
performed
legally abroad



Australia (2008)
New Zealand (1980)
United Kingdom (2008; welfare only)





Recognized under
customary law



Botswana
Burkina Faso
Equatorial Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Hong Kong (performed until 1971)
Jordan
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Malaysia
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Swaziland
Zimbabwe





Other countries
and regions



Angola
Benin
Burundi
Canada
DR Congo
Côte d'Ivoire
Eritrea
Ethiopia
France
Ghana
Guinea
Iraqi Kurdistan
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Niue
Russia
Rwanda
Tajikistan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United States
Uzbekistan
Vietnam








Legal status
Polygamy
Polygyny
Polyandry
Non-monogamy
Polygamy by country
Marriage practice by country


1 Kurdish-controlled areas criminalize polygamy
2 Regions governed by Sharia












v
t
e


Close plural relationships



By type



Group marriage
Open marriage
Open relationship
Polyamory
Polyandry
Polyfidelity
Polygamy
Polygynandry
Polygyny
Relationship anarchy





History and Culture



Nikah Ijtimah
Polygamy in Christianity
Polygamy in North America
Polygyny in Islam





LDS/FLDS



Origin
Current state
List of practitioners
Celestial marriage
Sealing
Spiritual wifery
Placement marriage
Lost boys
Polygamy czar





Terms



Compersion
New relationship energy
Primary and secondary
Terminology within polyamory
Values within polyamory









Authority control



NDL: 00575837











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polygamy&oldid=817698147"					Categories: Mating systemsPolygamyReligion and politicsHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textCS1 Greek-language sources (el)Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing more detailed referencesAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2013All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from December 2013All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksPages containing links to subscription-only contentCS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Articles to be expanded from December 2015Use dmy dates from February 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2017All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from February 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016Accuracy disputes from December 2017