

Pope
Pius XI


Bishop of Rome



Pius XI in 1930



Papacy began
6 February 1922


Papacy ended
10 February 1939


Predecessor
Benedict XV


Successor
Pius XII


Orders


Ordination
20 December 1879
by Raffaele Monaco La Valletta


Consecration
28 October 1919
by Aleksander Kakowski


Created Cardinal
13 June 1921
by Benedict XV


Personal details


Birth name
Ambrogio Damiano Achille Ratti


Born
(1857-05-31)31 May 1857
Desio, Lombardy-Venetia, Austrian Empire


Died
10 February 1939(1939-02-10) (aged 81)
Apostolic Palace, Vatican City


Previous post



Chief of the Ambrosian Library (1907–14)
Vice-Prefect of the Vatican Library (1914–15)
Prefect of the Vatican Library (1915–19)
Titular Archbishop of Naupactus (1919–21)
Apostolic Nuncio to Poland (1919–21)
Titular Archbishop of Adana (1921)
Archbishop of Milan (1921–22)
Cardinal-Priest of Santi Silvestro e Martino ai Monti (1921–22)





Motto
Raptim Transit (It goes by swiftly Job 6:15) [1]
Pax Christi in Regno Christi (The Peace of Christ in the Realm of Christ)[2]


Signature



Coat of arms



Other popes named Pius




Ordination history of
Pope Pius XI





History



Priestly ordination



Date of ordination
20 December 1879



Episcopal consecration



Principal consecrator
Aleksander Kakowski


Co-consecrators
Józef Sebastian Pelczar
Stanisław Kazimierz Zdzitowiecki


Date of consecration
28 October 1919



Cardinalate



Elevated by
Benedict XV


Date of elevation
13 June 1921








Episcopal succession



Bishops consecrated by Pope Pius XI as principal consecrator



Oreste Giorgi
27 April 1924


Michele Lega
11 July 1926


Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster
21 July 1929





Pope Pius XI, (Italian: Pio XI) born Ambrogio Damiano Achille Ratti[a] (Italian pronunciation: [amˈbrɔ:dʒo daˈmja:no aˈkille ˈratti]; 31 May 1857 – 10 February 1939), was head of the Catholic Church from 6 February 1922 to his death in 1939. He was the first sovereign of Vatican City from its creation as an independent state on 11 February 1929. He took as his papal motto, "Pax Christi in Regno Christi," translated "The Peace of Christ in the Kingdom of Christ."
Pius XI issued numerous encyclicals, including Quadragesimo anno on the 40th anniversary of Pope Leo XIII's groundbreaking social encyclical Rerum novarum, highlighting the capitalistic greed of international finance, the dangers of socialism/communism, and social justice issues, and Quas primas, establishing the feast of Christ the King in response to anti-clericalism. The encyclical Studiorum ducem, promulgated 29 June 1923, was written on the occasion of the 6th centenary of the canonization of Thomas Aquinas, whose thought is acclaimed as central to Catholic philosophy and theology. The encyclical also singles out the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum as the preeminent institution for the teaching of Aquinas: "ante omnia Pontificium Collegium Angelicum, ubi Thomam tamquam domi suae habitare dixeris" (before all others the Pontifical Angelicum College, where Thomas can be said to dwell).[3][4]
To establish or maintain the position of the Catholic Church, he concluded a record number of concordats, including the Reichskonkordat with Germany, whose betrayals of which convention he condemned four years later in the encyclical Mit brennender Sorge ("With Burning Concern"). During his pontificate, the longstanding hostility with the Italian government over the status of the papacy and the Church in Italy was successfully resolved in the Lateran Treaty of 1929. He was unable to stop the persecution of the Church and the killing of clergy in Mexico, Spain and the Soviet Union. He canonized important saints, including Thomas More, Petrus Canisius, Konrad von Parzham, Andrew Bobola and Don Bosco. He beatified and canonized Thérèse de Lisieux, for whom he held special reverence, and gave equivalent canonization to Albertus Magnus, naming him a Doctor of the Church due to the spiritual power of his writings. He took a strong interest in fostering the participation of lay people throughout the Catholic Church, especially in the Catholic Action movement. The end of his pontificate was dominated by speaking out against Hitler and Mussolini and defending the Catholic Church from intrusions into Catholic life and education.
He died on 10 February 1939 in the Apostolic Palace and is buried in the Papal Grotto of Saint Peter's Basilica. In the course of excavating space for his tomb, two levels of burial grounds were uncovered which revealed bones now venerated as the bones of St. Peter.[5][6][7]



Contents


1 Early life and career

1.1 Nuncio to Poland and Expulsion
1.2 Elevation to the papacy


2 Public teaching: "The Peace of Christ in the Reign of Christ"

2.1 Political teachings
2.2 Social teachings

2.2.1 Private property
2.2.2 Capital and labour
2.2.3 Social order




3 Internal Church affairs and ecumenism
4 International relations

4.1 Relations with France
4.2 Relations with Italy and the Lateran Treaties
4.3 Relations with Germany and Austria

4.3.1 Mit brennender Sorge
4.3.2 Response of the press and governments
4.3.3 Kristallnacht


4.4 Relations with East Asia
4.5 Involvement with American efforts
4.6 Brazil
4.7 Persecution of Christians

4.7.1 Soviet Union
4.7.2 Mexico
4.7.3 Spain




5 Syro-Malankara Catholic Church
6 Condemnation of racism

6.1 Humani generis unitas


7 Personality
8 Death and burial
9 Legacies
10 See also
11 Citations
12 Notes
13 References

13.1 Other languages


14 External links



Early life and career[edit]




The parents of Pius XI


Achille Ratti was born in Desio, in the province of Milan, in 1857, the son of an owner of a silk factory.[8] He was ordained a priest in 1879 and embarked on an academic career within the Church. He obtained three doctorates (in philosophy, canon law and theology) at the Gregorian University in Rome, and then from 1882 to 1888 was a professor at the seminary in Padua. His scholarly specialty was as an expert paleographer, a student of ancient and medieval Church manuscripts. Eventually, he left seminary teaching to work full-time at the Ambrosian Library in Milan, from 1888 to 1911.[9]
During this time, he edited and published an edition of the Ambrosian Missal (the rite of Mass used in Milan), and researched and wrote much on the life and works of St. Charles Borromeo. He became chief of the Library in 1907 and undertook a thorough programme of restoration and re-classification of the Ambrosian's collection. He was also an avid mountaineer in his spare time, reaching the summits of Monte Rosa, the Matterhorn, Mont Blanc and Presolana. The combination of a scholar-athlete pope would not be seen again until the pontificate of John Paul II. In 1911, at Pope Pius X's (1903–1914) invitation, he moved to the Vatican to become Vice-Prefect of the Vatican Library, and in 1914 was promoted to Prefect.[10]
Nuncio to Poland and Expulsion[edit]
Main article: Pope Pius XI and Poland




Ratti (centre) circa 1900 in the Alps on a tour.






The young Ratti as a newly ordained priest


In 1918, Pope Benedict XV (1914–1922) asked him to change careers and take a diplomatic post: apostolic visitor (that is, unofficial papal representative) in Poland, a state newly restored to existence, but still under effective German and Austro-Hungarian control. In October 1918, Benedict was the first head of state to congratulate the Polish people on the occasion of the restoration of their independence.[11] In March 1919, he nominated ten new bishops and, soon after, upgraded Ratti's position in Warsaw to the official position of papal nuncio.[11] Ratti was consecrated as a titular archbishop in October 1919.
Benedict XV and Nuncio Ratti repeatedly cautioned Polish authorities against persecuting the Lithuanian and Ruthenian clergy.[12] During the Bolshevik advance against Warsaw, the Pope asked for worldwide public prayers for Poland, while Ratti was the only foreign diplomat who refused to flee Warsaw when the Red Army was approaching the city in August 1920.[13] On 11 June 1921, Benedict XV asked Ratti to deliver his message to the Polish episcopate, warning against political misuses of spiritual power, urging again peaceful coexistence with neighbouring people, stating that “love of country has its limits in justice and obligations”.[14]
Ratti intended to work for Poland by building bridges to men of goodwill in the Soviet Union, even to shedding his blood for Russia.[15] Benedict, however, needed Ratti as a diplomat, not as a martyr, and forbade his traveling into the USSR despite his being the official papal delegate for Russia.[15] The nuncio's continued contacts with Russians did not generate much sympathy for him within Poland at the time. After Pope Benedict sent Ratti to Silesia to forestall potential political agitation within the Polish Catholic clergy,[12] the nuncio was asked to leave Poland. On 20 November, when German Cardinal Adolf Bertram announced a papal ban on all political activities of clergymen, calls for Ratti's expulsion climaxed.[16] Ratti was asked to leave. “While he tried honestly to show himself as a friend of Poland, Warsaw forced his departure, after his neutrality in Silesian voting was questioned”[17] by Germans and Poles. Nationalistic Germans objected to the Polish nuncio supervising local elections, and patriotic Poles were upset because he curtailed political action among the clergy.[16]




Achille Ratti, shortly after his consecration as bishop


Elevation to the papacy[edit]
Main article: Papal conclave, 1922




Pius XI makes his first public appearance as pope in 1922. The coat of arms on the banner is that of Pope Pius IX.


In the consistory of 3 June 1921, Pope Benedict XV created three new cardinals, including Achille Ratti, who was appointed Archbishop of Milan simultaneously. The pope joked with them, saying, "Well, today I gave you the red hat, but soon it will be white for one of you."[18] After the Vatican celebration, Ratti went to the Benedictine monastery at Monte Cassino for a retreat to prepare spiritually for his new role. He accompanied Milanese pilgrims to Lourdes in August 1921.[18] Ratti received a tumultuous welcome on a visit to his home town Desio, and was enthroned in Milan on 8 September. On 22 January 1922, Pope Benedict XV died unexpectedly of pneumonia.[19]
At the conclave to choose a new pope, which proved to be the longest of the 20th century, the College of Cardinals was divided into two factions, one led by Rafael Merry del Val favoring the policies and style of Pope Pius X and the other favoring those of Pope Benedict XV led by Pietro Gasparri.[20]
Gasparri approached Ratti before voting began on the third day and told him he would urge his supporters to switch their votes to Ratti, who was shocked to hear this. When it became clear that neither Gasparri nor del Val could win, the cardinals approached Ratti, thinking him a compromise candidate not identified with either faction. Cardinal Gaetano de Lai approached Ratti and was believed to have said: "We will vote for Your Eminence if Your Eminence will promise that you will not choose Cardinal Gasparri as your secretary of state". Ratti is said to have responded: "I hope and pray that among so highly deserving cardinals the Holy Spirit selects someone else. If I am chosen, it is indeed Cardinal Gasparri whom I will take to be my secretary of state".[20]
Ratti was elected pope on the conclave's fourteenth ballot on 6 February 1922 and took the name "Pius XI", explaining that Pius IX was the pope of his youth and Pius X had appointed him head of the Vatican Library. It was rumoured that immediately after the election, he decided to appoint Pietro Gasparri as his Cardinal Secretary of State.[20]
As his first act as pope, he revived the traditional public blessing from the balcony, Urbi et Orbi ("to the city and to the world"), abandoned by his predecessors since the loss of Rome to the Italian state in 1870. This suggested his openness to a rapprochement with the government of Italy.[21] Less than a month later, considering that all four cardinals from the Western Hemisphere had been unable to participate in his election, he issued Cum proxime to allow the College of Cardinals to delay the start of a conclave for as long as eighteen days following the death of a pope.[22][23]
Public teaching: "The Peace of Christ in the Reign of Christ"[edit]




Pius XI in later life


Pius XI's first encyclical as pope was directly related to his aim of Christianising all aspects of increasingly secular societies. Ubi arcano, promulgated in December 1922, inaugurated the "Catholic Action" movement.
Similar goals were in evidence in two encyclicals of 1929 and 1930. Divini illius magistri ("That Divine Teacher") (1929) made clear the need for Christian over secular education.[24] Casti connubii ("Chaste Wedlock") (1930) praised Christian marriage and family life as the basis for any good society; it condemned artificial means of contraception, but acknowledged the unitive aspect of intercourse:

...[A]ny use whatsoever of matrimony exercised in such a way that the act is deliberately frustrated in its natural power to generate life is an offense against the law of God and of nature, and those who indulge in such are branded with the guilt of a grave sin.[25]
....Nor are those considered as acting against nature who in the married state use their right in the proper manner although on account of natural reasons either of time or of certain defects, new life cannot be brought forth. For in matrimony as well as in the use of the matrimonial rights there are also secondary ends, such as mutual aid, the cultivating of mutual love, and the quieting of concupiscence which husband and wife are not forbidden to consider so long as they are subordinated to the primary end and so long as the intrinsic nature of the act is preserved.[26]

Political teachings[edit]
In contrast to some of his predecessors in the nineteenth century who had favoured monarchy and dismissed democracy, Pius XI took a pragmatic approach toward the different forms of government. In his encyclical Dilectissima Nobis (1933), in which he addressed the situation of the Church in Republican Spain, he proclaimed,

Universally known is the fact that the Catholic Church is never bound to one form of government more than to another, provided the Divine rights of God and of Christian consciences are safe. She does not find any difficulty in adapting herself to various civil institutions, be they monarchic or republican, aristocratic or democratic.[27]

Social teachings[edit]


Part of a series on the


Catholic social teaching



Emblem of the Holy See



Overview





Social teachings of the Popes
Distributism
Solidarity
Subsidiarity
Tranquillitas ordinis







Pope Leo XIII



Rerum novarum









Pope Pius XI



Divini redemptoris
Mit brennender Sorge
Non abbiamo bisogno
Quadragesimo anno









Pope Pius XII



Social teachings









Pope John XXIII



Mater et magistra
Pacem in terris









Vatican II



Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes









Pope Paul VI



Octogesima adveniens
Populorum progressio









Pope John Paul II



Laborem exercens
Sollicitudo rei socialis
Centesimus annus
Evangelium vitae









Pope Benedict XVI



Caritas in veritate









Pope Francis



Evangelii Gaudium
Laudato si'









Other figures



Gaspard Mermillod
René de La Tour du Pin
Heinrich Pesch
Dorothy Day
Óscar Romero
Joseph Bernardin
Hilaire Belloc
G. K. Chesterton







 Catholicism portal





v
t
e





Pius XI argued for a reconstruction of economic and political life on the basis of religious values. Quadragesimo anno (1931), was written to mark 'forty years' since Pope Leo XIII's (1878–1903) encyclical Rerum novarum, and restated that encyclical's warnings against both socialism and unrestrained capitalism, as enemies to human freedom and dignity. Pius XI instead envisioned an economy based on co-operation and solidarity.
In Quadragesimo anno, he stated that social and economic issues are vital to the Church not from a technical point of view but in terms of moral and ethical issues involved. Ethical considerations include the nature of private property[28] in terms of its functions for society and the development of the individual.[29] He defined fair wages and branded the exploitation both materially and spiritually by international capitalism.
Private property[edit]
The Church has a role in discussing the issues related to the social order. Social and economic issues are vital to her not from a technical point of view but in terms of moral and ethical issues involved. Ethical considerations include the nature of private property.[28] Within the Catholic Church several conflicting views had developed. Pope Pius XI declares private property essential for the development and freedom of the individual. Those who deny private property, deny personal freedom and development. But, said Pius, private property has a social function as well. Private property loses its morality, if it is not subordinated to the common good. Therefore, governments have a right to redistribution policies. In extreme cases, the Pope grants the State a right of expropriation of private property.[29]
Capital and labour[edit]
A related issue, said Pius, is the relation between capital and labour and the determination of fair wages.[30] Pius develops the following ethical mandate: The Church considers it a perversion of industrial society to have developed sharp opposite camps based on income. He welcomes all attempts to alleviate these differences. Three elements determine a fair wage: the worker's family, the economic condition of the enterprise, and the economy as a whole. The family has an innate right to development, but this is only possible within the framework of a functioning economy and a sound enterprise. Thus, Pius concludes that cooperation and not conflict is a necessary condition, given the mutual interdependence of the parties involved.[30]
Social order[edit]
Pius XI believed that industrialization results in less freedom at the individual and communal level, because numerous free social entities get absorbed by larger ones. The society of individuals becomes the mass class-society. People are much more interdependent than in ancient times, and become egoistic or class-conscious in order to save some freedom for themselves. The pope demands more solidarity, especially between employers and employees, through new forms of cooperation and communication. Pius displays a negative view of capitalism, especially of the anonymous international finance markets.[31] He identifies certain dangers for small and medium-size enterprises, which have insufficient access to capital markets and are squeezed or destroyed by the larger ones. He warns that capitalist interests can become a danger for nations, which could be reduced to “chained slaves of individual interests”[32]
Pius XI was the first Pope to utilise the power of modern communications technology in evangelising the wider world. He established Vatican Radio in 1931, and he was the first Pope to broadcast on radio.
Internal Church affairs and ecumenism[edit]
In his management of the Church's internal affairs Pius XI mostly continued the policies of his predecessor. Like Benedict XV, he emphasised spreading Catholicism in Africa and Asia and on the training of native clergy in those mission territories. He ordered every religious order to devote some of its personnel and resources to missionary work.
Pius XI continued the approach of Benedict XV on the issue of how to deal with the threat of modernism in Catholic theology. The Pope was thoroughly orthodox theologically and had no sympathy with modernist ideas that relativised fundamental Catholic teachings. He condemned modernism in his writings and addresses. However, his opposition to modernist theology was by no means a rejection of new scholarship within the Church, as long as it was developed within the framework of orthodoxy and compatible with the Church's teachings.[citation needed] Pius XI was interested in supporting serious scientific study within the Church, establishing the Pontifical Academy of the Sciences in 1936. In 1928 he formed the Gregorian Consortium of universities in Rome administered by the Society of Jesus, fostering closer collaboration between their Gregorian University, Biblical Institute, and Oriental Institute.[33][34]




Pope Pius XI (1922–1939). Warsaw forced his departure as Nuncio. Two years later, he was pope. He signed concordats with numerous countries, including Lithuania and Poland.


Pius XI strongly encouraged devotion to the Sacred Heart in his encyclical Miserentissimus Redemptor (1928). He canonised some important saints: Bernadette Soubirous, Therese of Lisieux, John Vianney, John Fisher, Thomas More and John Bosco. He also named several new Doctors of the Church: John of the Cross, Albert the Great, Peter Canisius and Robert Bellarmine.
Pius XI was the first pope to directly address the Christian ecumenical movement. Like Benedict XV he was interested in achieving reunion with the Eastern Orthodox (failing that, he determined to give special attention to the Eastern Catholic churches).[citation needed] He also allowed the dialogue between Catholics and Anglicans which had been planned during Benedict XV's pontificate to take place at Mechelen. However, these enterprises were firmly aimed at actually reuniting with the Catholic Church other Christians who basically agreed with Catholic doctrine, bringing them back under papal authority. To the broad pan-Protestant ecumenical movement he took a more negative attitude.[citation needed]
He rejected, in his 1928 encyclical, Mortalium animos, the idea that Christian unity could be attained by establishing a broad federation of many bodies holding conflicting doctrines; rather, the Catholic Church was the true Church of Christ "the union of Christians can only be promoted by promoting the return to the one true Church of Christ of those who are separated from it, for in the past they have unhappily left it".
International relations[edit]
The pontificate of Pius XI coincided with the early aftermath of the First World War. The old European monarchies had been largely swept away and a new and precarious order formed across the continent. In the East, the Soviet Union arose. In Italy, the Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini took power, while in Germany, the fragile Weimar Republic collapsed with the Nazi seizure of power.[35] His reign was one of busy diplomatic activity for the Vatican. The Church made advances on several fronts in the 1920s, improving relations with France and, most spectacularly, settling the Roman question with Italy and gaining recognition of an independent Vatican state.
Pope Pius XI's major diplomatic approach was to make concordats. He concluded eighteen such treaties during the course of his pontificate. However, wrote Peter Hebblethwaite, these concordats did not prove "durable or creditable" and "wholly failed in their aim of safeguarding the institutional rights of the Church" for "Europe was entering a period in which such agreements were regarded as mere scraps of paper".[36]
From 1933 to 1936 Pius wrote several protests against the Nazi regime, while his attitude to Mussolini's Italy changed dramatically in 1938, after Nazi racial policies were adopted in Italy.[35] Pius XI watched the rising tide of totalitarianism with alarm and delivered three papal encyclicals challenging the new creeds: against Italian Fascism Non abbiamo bisogno (1931; 'We do not need (to acquaint you)'); against Nazism "Mit brennender Sorge" (1937; 'With deep concern') and against atheist Communist Divini redemptoris (1937; 'Divine Redeemer'). He also challenged the extremist nationalism of the Action Française movement and anti-Semitism in the United States.[35]
Relations with France[edit]
France's republican government had long been strongly anti-clerical. The Law of Separation of Church and State in 1905 had expelled many religious orders from France, declared all Church buildings to be government property, and had led to the closure of most Church schools. Since that time Pope Benedict XV had sought a rapprochement, but it was not achieved until the reign of Pope Pius XI. In Maximam gravissimamque (1924), many areas of dispute were tacitly settled and a bearable coexistence made possible.[37] In 1926 Pius XI condemned Action Française, the monarchist movement which had until this time operated with the support of a great many French Catholics. The Pope judged that it was folly for the French Church to continue to tie its fortunes to the unlikely dream of a monarchist restoration, and distrusted the movement's tendency to defend the Catholic religion in merely utilitarian and nationalistic terms. Action Française never recovered.[38][39]
Relations with Italy and the Lateran Treaties[edit]
Pius XI aimed to end the long breach between the papacy and the Italian government and to gain recognition once more of the sovereign independence of the Holy See. Most of the Papal States had been seized by the forces of King Victor Emmanuel II of Italy (1861–1878) in 1860 at the foundation of the modern unified Italian state, and the rest, including Rome, in 1870. The Papacy and the Italian Government had been at loggerheads ever since: the Popes had refused to recognise the Italian state's seizure of the Papal States, instead withdrawing to become prisoners in the Vatican, and the Italian government's policies had always been anti-clerical. Now Pius XI thought a compromise would be the best solution.
To bolster his own new regime, Benito Mussolini was also eager for an agreement. After years of negotiation, in 1929, the Pope supervised the signing of the Lateran Treaties with the Italian government. According to the terms of the treaty that was one of the agreed documents, Vatican City was given sovereignty as an independent nation in return for the Vatican relinquishing its claim to the former territories of the Papal States. Pius XI thus became a head of state (albeit the smallest state in the world), the first Pope who could be termed a head of state since the Papal States fell after the unification of Italy in the 19th century. The concordat that was another of the agreed documents of 1929 recognised Catholicism as the sole religion of the state (as it already was under Italian law, while other religions were tolerated), paid salaries to priests and bishops, gave civil recognition to church marriages (previously couples had to have a civil ceremony), and brought religious instruction into the public schools. In turn, the bishops swore allegiance to the Italian state, which had a veto power over their selection.[40] The Church was not officially obligated its support the Fascist regime; the strong differences remained, but the seething hostility ended. The Church especially endorsed foreign policies, such as support for the anti-Communist side in the Spanish Civil War, and support for the conquest of Ethiopia. Friction continued over the Catholic Action youth network, which Mussolini wanted to merge into his Fascist youth group.[41]
The third document in the agreement paid the Vatican 1750 million lira (about $100 million) for the seizures of church property since 1860. Pius XI invested the money in the stock markets and real estate. To manage these investments, the Pope appointed the lay-person Bernardino Nogara, who, through shrewd investing in stocks, gold, and futures markets, significantly increased the Catholic Church's financial holdings. The income largely paid for the upkeep of the expensive-to-maintain stock of historic buildings in the Vatican which until 1870 had been maintained through funds raised from the Papal States.




Boundary map of Vatican City, taken from the annex of the Lateran Treaty


The Vatican's relationship with Mussolini's government deteriorated drastically after 1930 as Mussolini's totalitarian ambitions began to impinge more and more on the autonomy of the Church. For example, the Fascists tried to absorb the Church's youth groups. In response, Pius issued the encyclical Non abbiamo bisogno ("We Have No Need)" in 1931. It denounced the regime's persecution of the church in Italy and condemned "pagan worship of the State."[42] It also condemned Fascism's "revolution which snatches the young from the Church and from Jesus Christ, and which inculcates in its own young people hatred, violence and irreverence".[43]
From the earliest days of the Nazi takeover in Germany, the Vatican was taking diplomatic action to attempt to defend the Jews of Germany.[citation needed] In the spring of 1933, Pope Pius XI urged Mussolini to ask Hitler to restrain the anti-Semitic actions taking place in Germany.[44] Mussolini urged Pius to excommunicate Hitler,[when?] as he thought it would render him less powerful in Catholic Austria and reduce the danger to Italy and wider Europe. The Vatican refused to comply and thereafter Mussolini began to work with Hitler, adopting his anti-Semitic and race theories.[45] In 1936, with the Church in Germany facing clear persecution, Italy and Germany agreed to the Berlin-Rome Axis.[46]
Relations with Germany and Austria[edit]
Main articles: Pope Pius XI and Germany and Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church




Signing of the Reichskonkordat on 20 July 1933. From left to right: German prelate Ludwig Kaas, German Vice-Chancellor Franz von Papen, representing Germany, Monsignor Giuseppe Pizzardo, Cardinal Pacelli, Monsignor Alfredo Ottaviani, German ambassador Rudolf Buttmann.


A threatening, though initially mainly sporadic persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany followed the 1933 Nazi takeover in Germany.[47] In the dying days of the Weimar Republic, the newly appointed Chancellor Adolf Hitler moved quickly to eliminate political Catholicism. Vice Chancellor Franz von Papen was dispatched to Rome to negotiate a Reich concordat with the Holy See.[48] Ian Kershaw wrote that the Vatican was anxious to reach agreement with the new government, despite "continuing molestation of Catholic clergy, and other outrages committed by Nazi radicals against the Church and its organisations".[49] Negotiations were conducted by Cardinal Eugenio Pacelli, who later became Pope Pius XII (1939–1958). The Reichskonkordat was signed by Pacelli and by the German government in June 1933, and included guarantees of liberty for the Church, independence for Catholic organisations and youth groups, and religious teaching in schools.[50] The treaty was an extension of existing concordats already signed with Prussia and Bavaria, but wrote Hebblethwaite, it seemed "more like a surrender than anything else: it involved the suicide of the Centre Party... ".[36]
"The agreement", wrote William Shirer, "was hardly put to paper before it was being broken by the Nazi Government". On 25 July, the Nazis promulgated their sterilization law, an offensive policy in the eyes of the Catholic Church. Five days later, moves began to dissolve the Catholic Youth League. Clergy, nuns and lay leaders began to be targeted, leading to thousands of arrests over the ensuing years, often on trumped up charges of currency smuggling or "immorality".[51]
In February 1936, Hitler sent Pius a telegram congratulating the Pope on the anniversary of his coronation, but he responded with criticisms of what was happening in Germany, so much so that Neurath, the foreign secretary, wanted to suppress it, but Pius insisted it be forwarded.[52]

Austria

The pope supported the Christian Socialists in Austria, a country with a majority Catholic population but a powerful secular element. He especially supported the regime of Engelbert Dollfuss (1932–34), who wanted to remold society based on papal encyclicals. Dollfuss suppressed the anti-clerical elements and the socialists, but was assassinated by the Austrian Nazis in 1934. His successor Kurt von Schuschnigg (1934–38) was also pro-Catholic and received Vatican support.[53] The Anschluss saw the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany in early 1938.[54] Austria was overwhelmingly Catholic.[55]
At the direction of Cardinal Innitzer, the churches of Vienna pealed their bells and flew swastikas for Hitler's arrival in the city on 14 March.[56] However, wrote Mark Mazower, such gestures of accommodation were "not enough to assuage the Austrian Nazi radicals, foremost among them the young Gauleiter Globocnik".[57] Globocnik launched a crusade against the Church, and the Nazis confiscated property, closed Catholic organisations and sent many priests to Dachau.[57] Anger at the treatment of the Church in Austria grew quickly and October 1938, wrote Mazower, saw the "very first act of overt mass resistance to the new regime", when a rally of thousands left Mass in Vienna chanting "Christ is our Fuehrer", before being dispersed by police.[58] A Nazi mob ransacked Cardinal Innitzer's residence, after he had denounced Nazi persecution of the Church.[55] The American National Catholic Welfare Conference wrote that Pope Pius, "again protested against the violence of the Nazis, in language recalling Nero and Judas the Betrayer, comparing Hitler with Julian the Apostate."[59]


Papal styles of
Pope Pius XI





Reference style
His Holiness


Spoken style
Your Holiness


Religious style
Holy Father


Posthumous style
None


Mit brennender Sorge[edit]
The Nazis claimed jurisdiction over all collective and social activity, interfered with Catholic schooling, youth groups, workers' clubs and cultural societies.[60] By early 1937, the church hierarchy in Germany, which had initially attempted to co-operate with the new government, had become highly disillusioned. In March, Pope Pius XI issued the Mit brennender Sorge encyclical - accusing the Nazi Government of violations of the 1933 Concordat, and further that it was sowing the "tares of suspicion, discord, hatred, calumny, of secret and open fundamental hostility to Christ and His Church". The Pope noted on the horizon the "threatening storm clouds" of religious wars of extermination over Germany.[51]
Copies had to be smuggled into Germany so they could be read from their pulpits[61] The encyclical, the only one ever written in German, was addressed to German bishops and was read in all parishes of Germany. The actual writing of the text is credited to Munich Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber and to the Cardinal Secretary of State, Eugenio Pacelli, who later became Pope Pius XII.[62]
There was no advance announcement of the encyclical, and its distribution was kept secret in an attempt to ensure the unhindered public reading of its contents in all the Catholic churches of Germany. This encyclical condemned particularly the paganism of Nazism, the myth of race and blood, and fallacies in the Nazi conception of God:

Whoever exalts race, or the people, or the State, or a particular form of State, or the depositories of power, or any other fundamental value of the human community – however necessary and honorable be their function in worldly things – whoever raises these notions above their standard value and divinizes them to an idolatrous level, distorts and perverts an order of the world planned and created by God; he is far from the true faith in God and from the concept of life which that faith upholds."[63]

The Nazis responded with an intensification of their campaign against the churches, beginning around April.[64] There were mass arrests of clergy and church presses were expropriated.[65]




Pope Pius XI in a portrait by Adolfo Wildt exposed in the Vatican Museums in Rome.


Response of the press and governments[edit]
While numerous German Catholics, who participated in the secret printing and distribution of the encyclical Mit brennender Sorge, went to jail and concentration camps, the Western democracies remained silent, which Pope Pius XI labeled bitterly a "conspiracy of silence".[66][67] As the extreme nature of Nazi racial anti-Semitism became obvious, and as Mussolini in the late 1930s began imitating Hitler's anti-Jewish race laws in Italy, Pius XI continued to make his position clear, both in Mit brennender Sorge and after Fascist Italy's Manifesto of Race was published, in a public address in the Vatican to Belgian pilgrims in 1938: "Mark well that in the Catholic Mass, Abraham is our Patriarch and forefather. Anti-Semitism is incompatible with the lofty thought which that fact expresses. It is a movement with which we Christians can have nothing to do. No, no, I say to you it is impossible for a Christian to take part in anti-Semitism. It is inadmissible. Through Christ and in Christ we are the spiritual progeny of Abraham. Spiritually, we [Christians] are all Semites"[68] These comments were neither reported by Osservatore Romano or Vatican Radio.[69] They were reported in Belgium in the 14 September 1938 issue of La Libre Belgique[70] and in the 17 September 1938 issue of French Catholic daily La Croix.[71] They were then published worldwide but had little resonance at the time in the secular media.[66] The "conspiracy of silence" included not only the silence of secular powers against the horrors of Nazism but also their silence on the persecution of the Church in the Mexico, the Soviet Union and Spain. Despite these public comments, Pius was reported to have suggested privately that the Church's problems in those three countries were "reinforced by the anti-Christian spirit of Judaism".[72]
Kristallnacht[edit]
When the then-newly installed Nazi government began to instigate its program of anti-Semitism in 1933, Pope Pius XI ordered the papal nuncio in Berlin, Cesare Orsenigo, to "look into whether and how it may be possible to become involved" in their aid. Orsenigo proved a poor instrument in this regard, concerned more with the anti-church policies of the Nazis and how these might affect German Catholics, than with taking action to help German Jews.[73]
On 11 November 1938, following Kristallnacht, Pope Pius XI joined Western leaders in condemning the pogrom. In response, the Nazis organised mass demonstrations against Catholics and Jews in Munich, and the Bavarian Gauleiter Adolf Wagner declared before 5,000 protesters: "Every utterance the Pope makes in Rome is an incitement of the Jews throughout the world to agitate against Germany".[74] On 21 November, in an address to the world's Catholics, the Pope rejected the Nazi claim of racial superiority, and insisted instead that there was only a single human race. Robert Ley, the Nazi Minister of Labour declared the following day in Vienna: "No compassion will be tolerated for the Jews. We deny the Pope's statement that there is but one human race. The Jews are parasites." Catholic leaders, including Cardinal Schuster of Milan, Cardinal van Roey in Belgium and Cardinal Verdier in Paris, backed the Pope's strong condemnation of Kristallnacht.[75]
Relations with East Asia[edit]
Under Pius XI, Papal relations with East Asia were marked by the rise of the Japanese Empire to prominence, as well as the unification of China under Chiang Kai-shek. In 1922 he established the position of Apostolic Delegate to China, and the first person in that capacity was Celso Benigno Luigi Costantini.[76] On 1 August 1928, the Pope addressed a message of support for the political unification of China. Following the Japanese invasion of North China in 1931 and the creation of Manchukuo, the Holy See recognized the new state. On 10 September 1938, the Pope held a reception at Castel Gandolfo for an official delegation from Manchukuo, headed by Manchukuoan Minister of Foreign Affairs Han Yun.[77]
Involvement with American efforts[edit]
Mother Katharine Drexel, who founded the American order of Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament for Indians and Colored People, corresponded with Pius XI, as she had with his papal predecessors. (In 1887, Pope Leo XIII had encouraged Katharine Drexel—then a young Philadelphia socialite— to do missionary work with America's disadvantaged people of color). In the early 1930s, Mother Drexel wrote Pius XI asking him to bless a publicity campaign to acquaint white Catholics with the needs of these disadvantaged races among them. An emissary had shown him photos of Xavier University, New Orleans, LA, which Mother Drexel had established to educate African-Americans at the highest level in the USA. Pius XI replied promptly, sending his blessing and encouragement. Upon his return, the emissary told Mother Katharine that the Pope said he had read the novel Uncle Tom's Cabin as a boy, and it had ignited his lifelong concern for the American Negro.[78]




Pope Pius XI at his workdesk


Brazil[edit]
In 1930, Pope Pius XI declared the Immaculate Conception under the title of Our Lady of Aparecida as the Queen and Patroness of Brazil.[79]
Persecution of Christians[edit]
Main articles: Persecution of Christians, Anti-Catholicism, and Anti-Christian sentiment
Pius XI was faced with unprecedented persecution of the Catholic Church in Mexico and Spain and with the persecution of all Christians especially the Eastern Catholic Churches in the Soviet Union. He called this the "terrible triangle".[80]
Soviet Union[edit]
Main article: Holy See–Soviet Union relations
Worried by the persecution of Christians in the Soviet Union, Pius XI mandated Berlin nuncio Eugenio Pacelli to work secretly on diplomatic arrangements between the Vatican and the Soviet Union. Pacelli negotiated food shipments for Russia and met with Soviet representatives, including Foreign Minister Georgi Chicherin, who rejected any kind of religious education and the ordination of priests and bishops, but offered agreements without the points vital to the Vatican.[81] Despite Vatican pessimism and a lack of visible progress, Pacelli continued the secret negotiations, until Pius XI ordered them discontinued in 1927, because they generated no results and would be dangerous to the Church, if made public.
The "harsh persecution short of total annihilation of the clergy, monks, and nuns and other people associated with the Church",[82] continued well into the 1930s. In addition to executing and exiling many clerics, monks and laymen, the confiscating of Church implements "for victims of famine" and the closing of churches were common.[83] Yet according to an official report based on the census of 1936, some 55% of Soviet citizens identified themselves openly as religious.[83]
Mexico[edit]
During the pontificate of Pius XI, the Catholic Church was subjected to extreme persecutions in Mexico, which resulted in the death of over 5,000 priests, bishops and followers.[84] In the state of Tabasco the Church was in effect outlawed altogether. In his encyclical Iniquis afflictisque[85] from 18 November 1926, Pope Pius protested against the slaughter and persecution. The United States intervened in 1929 and moderated an agreement.[84] The persecutions resumed in 1931. Pius XI condemned the Mexican government again in his 1932 encyclical Acerba animi. Problems continued with reduced hostilities until 1940, when in the new pontificate of Pope Pius XII President Manuel Ávila Camacho returned the Mexican churches to the Catholic Church.[84]
There were 4,500 Mexican priests serving the Mexican people before the rebellion, in 1934, over 90% of them suffered persecution as only 334 priests were licensed by the government to serve fifteen million people. Excluding foreign religious, over 4,100 Mexican priests were eliminated by emigration, expulsion and assassination.[86][87] By 1935, 17 Mexican states were left with no priests at all.[88]
Spain[edit]
Main article: Pope Pius XI and Spain
The Republican government which came to power in Spain in 1931 was strongly anti-clerical, secularising education, prohibiting religious education in the schools, and expelling the Jesuits from the country. On Pentecost 1932, Pope Pius XI protested against these measures and demanded restitution.
Syro-Malankara Catholic Church[edit]
Pope Pius XI accepted the Reunion Movement of Mar Ivanios along with four other members of the Malankara Orthodox Church in 1930. As a result of the Reunion Movement, the Syro-Malankara Catholic Church is in full communion with the Bishop of Rome and the Catholic Church.
Condemnation of racism[edit]
The Fascist government in Italy abstained from copying Germany's racial and anti-Semitic laws and regulations until 1938, when Italy introduced anti-Semitic legislation. The Pope publicly asked Italy to abstain from adopting a demeaning racist legislation, stating that the term “race” is divisive but may be appropriate to differentiate animals.[89] The Catholic view would refer to "the unity of human society", which includes as many differences as music includes intonations. Italy, a civilized country, should not ape the barbarian German legislation, he said.[90] In the same speech, he criticized the Italian government for attacking Catholic Action and even the papacy itself.
In April 1938, at the request of Pius XI, the Sacred Congregation of seminaries and universities developed a syllabus condemning racist theories. Its publication was postponed.[91]
In one historian's view:

By the time of his death ... Pius XI had managed to orchestrate a swelling chorus of Church protests against the racial legislation and the ties that bound Italy to Germany. He had single-mindedly continued to denounce the evils of the Nazi regime at every possible opportunity and feared above all else the re-opening of the rift between Church and State in his beloved Italy. He had, however, few tangible successes. There had been little improvement in the position of the Church in Germany and there was growing hostility to the Church in Italy on the part of the fascist regime. Almost the only positive result of the last years of his pontificate was a closer relationship with the liberal democracies and yet, even this was seen by many as representing a highly partisan stance on the part of the Pope.[92]





E. Pacelli--1922--Nuncio to Germany


Humani generis unitas[edit]
Pius XI planned an encyclical Humani generis unitas (The Unity of the Human Race) to denounce racism in the US, Europe and elsewhere, as well as antisemitism, colonialism and violent German nationalism. He died without issuing it.[93]
Pius XI's successor, Pope Pius XII, who was not aware of the text before the death of his predecessor,[94] chose not to publish it. His first encyclical Summi Pontificatus ("On the Supreme Pontificate", 12 October 1939), published after the beginning of World War II, bore the title On the Unity of Human Society and used many of the arguments of the document drafted for Pius XI, while avoiding its negative characterizations of the Jewish people.
Personality[edit]
Pius XI was seen as a blunt-spoken and no-nonsense man and those were qualities he shared with Pope Pius X. He was passionate about science and was fascinated with the power of radio, which would soon result in the founding and inauguration of Vatican Radio. He was intrigued by new forms of technology which he employed during his pontificate. He was also known for a rare smile.
Pius XI was known[95] to have a temper at times[95] and was someone who had a keen sense of knowledge and dignity of the office he held.[95] He insisted that he ate alone with no one around him[95] and would not allow his assistants or any other priests of other clergy to dine with him.[95] He would frequently meet with political figures[citation needed] but would always greet them seated.[citation needed] He insisted that when his brother and sister wanted to see him, they had to refer to him as "Your Holiness"[95] and book an appointment.[95]
Pius XI was also a very demanding individual, certainly one of the stricter pontiffs at that time. He held very high standards and did not tolerate any sort of behaviour that was not up to that standard. In regard to Angelo Roncalli, the future Pope John XXIII, a diplomatic blunder in Bulgaria, where Roncalli was stationed, led Pius XI to make Roncalli kneel for 45 minutes as a punishment.[96][95] However, it should also be indicated that when in due course Pius learnt that Roncalli had made the error in circumstances for which he could not fairly be considered culpable, he apologized to him. Aware of the implied impropriety of a Supreme Pontiff's going back on a reprimand in a matter concerning Catholic faith and morals,[clarification needed] but also deeply conscious that on a human level he had failed to keep his temper in check, he made his apology "as Achille Ratti" and in doing so stretched out his hand in friendship to Monsignor Roncalli.[97]
Death and burial[edit]




Funeral






Pius XI on his deathbed


Pope Pius XI had been ill for some time when, on 25 November 1938, he suffered two heart attacks within several hours. He had serious breathing problems and could not leave his apartment.[98] He gave his last major pontifical address to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, which he had founded, speaking without a prepared text on the relation between science and the Catholic religion.[99] Medical specialists reported that heart insufficiency combined with bronchial attacks had hopelessly complicated his already poor prospects.
Pope Pius XI died at 5:31 A.M. (Rome Time) of a third heart attack on 10 February 1939, at the age of 81. His last words to those near him at the time of his death were spoken with clarity and firmness: "My soul parts from you all in peace."[100] Some believe he was murdered, based on the fact that his primary physician was Dr. Francesco Petacci, father of Claretta Petacci, Mussolini's mistress.[101][102][103][104][105] Following a funeral he was buried in the crypt of St. Peter's Basilica on 14 February 1939, in the main chapel, close to the tomb of St. Peter. His tomb was modified in 1944 to be more ornate.[106]
Legacies[edit]




The tomb of Pope Pius XI in the Vatican grottos






Statue in Desio.


Pius XI is remembered as the pope who reigned between the two great wars of the 20th century. The onetime librarian also reorganized the Vatican archives. Nevertheless, Pius XI was hardly a withdrawn and bookish figure. He was also a well-known mountain climber with many peaks in the Alps named after him, he having been the first to scale them.[107]
A Chilean glacier bears Pius XI's name.[108] In 1940, Bishop T. B. Pearson founded the Achille Ratti Climbing Club, based in the United Kingdom and named for Pius XI.[109]
Pius XI also refounded the Pontifical Academy of Sciences in 1936, with the aim of turning it into the "scientific senate" of the Church. Hostile to any form of ethnic or religious discrimination, he appointed over eighty Academicians from a variety of countries, backgrounds and areas of research.[110] In his honour, John XXIII established the Pius XI Medal that the Council of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences awards to a young scientist under the age of 45 who has distinguished himself or herself at the international level.[111]
The Syro-Malankara Catholic Church founded a school in his name in Kattanam, Mavelikkara, Kerala, India.[citation needed]
See also[edit]

Cardinals created by Pius XI
List of encyclicals of Pope Pius XI

Citations[edit]


^ "Ratti Ambrogio Damiano Achille". Araldicavaticana.com. Retrieved 23 June 2013. 
^ Metzler, Josef (1 April 1993). "The legacy of Pius XI". International Bulletin of Missionary Research. Retrieved 9 March 2013. 
^ "Studiorum ducem". Vatican.va. Retrieved 23 June 2013. 
^ "STUDIORUM DUCEM (On St. Thomas Aquinas)[English translation]". EWTN. Retrieved December 22, 2015. 
^ Rev. William P. Saunders. "Does the church possess the actual bones of St. Peter?". Catholic Straight Answers. Retrieved December 22, 2015. 
^ "Vatican displays Saint Peter's bones for the first time". The Guardian. November 24, 2013. Retrieved December 22, 2015. 
^ Jacob Neusner (9 July 2004). Christianity, Judaism and Other Greco-Roman Cults, Part 2: Early Christianity. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 149. ISBN 978-1-59244-740-4. 
^ D'Orazi, 15–19.
^ D'Orazi, 14–24.
^ D'Orazi, 27.
^ a b Schmidlin III, 306.
^ a b Schmidlin III, 307.
^ Fontenelle, 34–44.
^ AAS 1921, 566.
^ a b Stehle, 25.
^ a b Schmidlin IV, 15.
^ Stehle, 26.
^ a b Fontenelle, 40.
^ Fontenelle, 44.
^ a b c Kertzer 2014.
^ Fontenelle, 44–56.
^ Trythall, Marisa Patrulli (2010). "Pius XI and American Pragmatism". In Gallagher, Charles R.; Kertzer, David I.; Melloni, Alberto. Pius XI and America: Proceedings of the Brown University Conference. Lit Verlag. p. 28. 
^ Pope Pius XI (1 March 1922). "Cum proxime" (in Italian). Libreria Editrice Vaticana. Retrieved 1 November 2017. 
^ Divini illius magistri
^ Casti Connubii, Section 56.
^ Casti Connubii, Section 59.
^ Pius XI (3 June 1933). "Vatican website information re pontificate and policies of Pius XI". Vatican.va. Retrieved 12 September 2010. 
^ a b Quadragesimo anno, 44–52.
^ a b Quadragesimo anno, 114–115.
^ a b Quadragesimo anno, 63–75.
^ Quadragesimo anno, 99 ff.
^ Quadragesimo anno, 109.
^ "Storia del P.I.O". Orientale (in Italian). Retrieved 2017-12-20. 
^ "Motu Proprio Quod Maxime, de Pontificiis Institutis Biblico et Orientali cum Athenaeo Gregoriano consociandi (30 Septembris 1928) | PIUS XI". w2.vatican.va. Retrieved 2017-12-20. 
^ a b c Encyclopædia Britannica Online: Pius XI; web Apr. 2013
^ a b Peter Hebblethwaite; Paul VI, the First Modern Pope; Harper Collins Religious; 1993; p.118
^ Kenneth Scott Latourette, Christianity in a Revolutionary Age: A History of Christianity in the 19th and 20th Century: Vol 4 The 20th Century In Europe (1961) pp 129-53
^ Latourette, Christianity In a Revolutionary Age pp 37-38
^ Eugen Weber (1962). Action Française: Royalism and Reaction in Twentieth-Century France. Stanford U.P. p. 249. ISBN 9780804701341. 
^ Cyprian Blamires (2006). World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 120. ISBN 9781576079409. 
^ Kenneth Scott Latourette, Christianity In a Revolutionary Age A History of Christianity in the 19th and 20th Century: Vol 4 The 20th Century In Europe (1961) pp 32-35, 153, 156, 371
^ Eamon Duffy (2002). Saints and Sinners: A History of the Popes; Second Edition. Yale University Press. p. 340. ISBN 9780300091656. 
^ Encyclopædia Britannica Online: Fascism - identification with Christianity; web Apr. 2013
^ Paul O'Shea; A Cross Too Heavy; Rosenberg Publishing; p. 230 ISBN 9781877058714
^ Frank J. Coppa, The papacy, the Jews, and the Holocaust, Catholic University of America Press, 2006, p. 166-167, ISBN 0813214491.
^ Peter Hebblethwaite; Paul VI, the First Modern Pope; Harper Collins Religious; 1993; p.129
^ Ian Kershaw; Hitler a Biography; 2008 Edn; W.W. Norton & Company; London; p.332
^ Ian Kershaw; Hitler a Biography; 2008 Edn; W.W. Norton & Company; London; p.290
^ Ian Kershaw; Hitler a Biography; 2008 Edn; WW Norton & Company; London; p.295
^ Latourette, Christianity in a Revolutionary Age: A History of Christianity in the 19th and 20th Century: Vol 4 The 20th Century in Europe (1961) pp 176-88
^ a b William L. Shirer; The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich; Secker & Warburg; London; 1960; p234-5
^ "The papacy, the Jews, and the Holocaust", Frank J. Coppa, p. 160, Catholic University Press of America, 2006, ISBN 0813214491
^ Latourette, Christianity In a Revolutionary Age A History of Christianity in the 19th and 20th Century: Vol 4 The 20th Century In Europe (1961) pp 188-91
^ William L. Shirer; The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich; Secker & Warburg; London; 1960; pp. 325–329
^ a b William L. Shirer; The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich; Secker & Warburg; London; 1960; pp. 349–350.
^ Ian Kershaw; Hitler a Biography; 2008 Edn; W.W. Norton & Co; London; p. 413
^ a b Mark Mazower; Hitler's Empire - Nazi Rule in Occupied Europe; Penguin; 2008; ISBN 978-0-713-99681-4; pp.51-52
^ Mark Mazower; Hitler's Empire - Nazi Rule in Occupied Europe; Penguin; 2008; ISBN 978-0-713-99681-4; p.52
^ The Nazi War Against the Catholic Church; National Catholic Welfare Conference; Washington D.C.; 1942; pp.29-30
^ Theodore S. Hamerow; On the Road to the Wolf's Lair - German Resistance to Hitler; Belknap Press of Harvard University Press; 1997; ISBN 0-674-63680-5; p. 136
^ Manners 2002, p. 374.
^ August Franzen, Remigius Bäumer Papstgeschichte Herder Freiburg, 1988, p. 394.
^ Mit brennender Sorge, 8.
^ Ian Kershaw; Hitler a Biography; 2008 Edn; WW Norton & Company; London; p.381-382
^ Joachim Fest; Plotting Hitler's Death: The German Resistance to Hitler 1933-1945; Weidenfield & Nicolson; London; p.374
^ a b Franzen, 395.
^ Encyclical Divini Redemptoris, § 18 (AAS 29 [1937], 74). 1937. Libreria Editrice Vaticana (English translation)
^ Marchione 1997, p. 53.
^ John Connelly, Nazi Racism & the Church: How Converts Showed the Way to Resist, Commonweal, 24 February 2012
^ Giovanni Miccoli, « Les Dilemmes et les silences de Pie XII: Vatican, Seconde Guerre mondiale et Shoah », Éditions Complexe, 2005, ISBN 9782870279373, p. 401
^ La Croix, 17 September 1938, page 1, Gallica, accessed 12 November 2012
^ Geert, Mak (2004). In Europe:Travels through the 20th century. p. 295. 
^ Paul O'Shea; A Cross Too Heavy; Rosenberg Publishing; p. 232 ISBN 9781877058714
^ Martin Gilbert; Kristallnacht - Prelude to Disaster; HarperPress; 2006; p.143
^ Martin Gilbert; Kristallnacht - Prelude to Disaster; HarperPress; 2006; p.172
^ "Celso Costantini's Contribution to the Localization and Inculturation of the Church in China". Hsstudyc.org.hk. Retrieved 23 June 2013. 
^ "Chen Fang-Chung, "Lou Tseng-Tsiang, A Lover of His Church and of His Country"". Hsstudyc.org.hk. Retrieved 23 June 2013. 
^ The Golden Door: The Life of Katharine Drexel, by Katherine Burton (P. J. Kenedy & Sons, New York, 1957, p. 261)
^ Rosales, Luis; Olivera, Daniel (2013). Francis: A Pope for our Time: The Definitive Biography. Humanix Books. p. 96. ISBN 978-1630060022. 
^ Fontenelle, 164.
^ Hansjakob Stehle, Die Ostpolitik des Vatikans, Piper, München, 1975, pp. 139–141.
^ Riasanovsky 1963, p. 617.
^ a b Riasanovsky 1963, p. 634.
^ a b c Franzen, 398.
^ Pope Pius XI (18 November 1926). "Iniquis afflictisque". Retrieved 21 October 2009. 
^ Scheina, Robert L. Latin America's Wars: The Age of the Caudillo, 1791–1899 p. 33 (2003 Brassey's) ISBN 1-57488-452-2.
^ Van Hove, Brian Blood-Drenched Altars Faith & Reason 1994.
^ Ruiz, Ramón Eduardo Triumphs and Tragedy: A History of the Mexican People p. 393 (1993 W. W. Norton & Company) ISBN 0-393-31066-3.
^ Confalioneri, 351.
^ Confalioneri, 352.
^ Hubert Wolf, Kenneth Kronenberg, Pope and Devil: The Vatican's Archives and the Third Reich (2010), p. 283
^ Peter C. Kent, "A Tale of Two Popes: Pius XI, Pius XII and the Rome-Berlin Axis," Journal of Contemporary History (1988) 23#4 pp 589-608 in JSTOR
^ The draft text was published in 1995 by Georges Passelecq and Berard Suchecky as L'Encyclique Cachée De Pie XI. La Découverte, Paris 1995.
^ Letter of Father Maher to Father La Farge, 16 March 1939.
^ a b c d e f g h "'Pope And Mussolini' Tells The 'Secret History' Of Fascism And The Church : NPR". NPR. Retrieved 4 February 2014. 
^ Yves Chiron, Pius XI, Perrin, 2004, 418 pp.
^ Elliott, L, 1974, I will be called John - A Biography of Pope John XXIII, London, Collins.
^ Confalonieri, 356.
^ Confalonieri, 358.
^ Confalonieri, 373.
^ Frank J. Coppa, Pope Pius XII: From the Diplomacy of Impartiality to the Silence of the Holocaust, Journal of Church and State, 23 December 2011.
^ Saul Friedländer, Nazi Germany and the Jews: I. The Years of Persecution, 1933–1939, New York: Harper-Collins, 1997, p. 277.
^ Harry J. Cargas, Holocaust scholars write to the Vatican, 1998, ISBN 0-313-30487-4.
^ John Cornwell, Hitler's Pope: The Secret History of Pius XII. Viking, 1999. ISBN 978-0-670-88693-7, p.204
^ Newsweek, Volume 79, 1972, p. 238.
^ "Given the high quality of the monumental reliefs that adorn the ramp of the restored entry of the Vatican Museum, executed by the Fonderia Marinelli, the Vatican also commissioned the construction of a new bronze tomb of Pope Pius XI". Retrieved 22 July 2015. 
^ The New York Times. Tuesday, 7 February 1922, Page 1 (continued on page 3), 3059 words.
^ McIlvain, Josh (2009). Fodor's Patagonia. Fodor's Travel. pp. 45–6. ISBN 978-1-4000-0684-7. 
^ "About the ARCC". Achille Ratti Climbing Club. Retrieved February 12, 2014. 
^ "Pius XI". Casinapioiv.va. Retrieved 23 June 2013. 
^ "John XXIII, Blessed". Casinapioiv.va. Retrieved 23 June 2013. 


Notes[edit]



^ English: Ambrose Damian Achilles Ratti



References[edit]

Confalonieri, Carlo (1975). 'Pius XI – A Close Up. (1975). Altadena, California: The Benzinger Sisters Press.
Eisner, Peter, (2013), The Pope's Last Crusade: How an American Jesuit Helped Pope Pius XI's Campaign to Stop Hitler, New York, New York: HarperCollins |ISBN 978-0-06-204914-8
Fattorini, Emma (2011), Hitler, Mussolini and the Vatican: Pope Pius XI and the Speech that was Never Made, Cambridge, UK; Malden, MA: Polity Press
Kertzer, David I. (2014). The Pope and Mussolini: The Secret History of Pius XI and the Rise of Fascism in Europe. Oxford University Press. 
Manners, John (2002), The Oxford History of Christianity, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-280336-0 
Marchione, Margherita (1997), Yours Is a Precious Witness: Memoirs of Jews and Catholics in Wartime Italy, Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, ISBN 0-8091-0485-7 
Morgan, Thomas B. (1937) A Reporter At The Papal Court – A Narrative of the Reign of Pope Pius XI. New York: Longmans, Green and Co.

Other languages[edit]

Ceci, Lucia (2013), L'interesse superiore. Il Vaticano e l'Italia di Mussolini, Laterza, Roma-Bari
Chiron, Yves (2004), Pie XI (1857–1939), Perrin, Paris, ISBN 2-262-01846-4.
D'Orazi, Lucio (1989), Il Coraggio Della Verita Vita do Pio XI, Edizioni logos, Roma
Ceci, Lucia (2010), Il papa non deve parlare. Chiesa, fascismo e guerra di Etiopia", Laterza, Roma-Bari
Fontenelle, Mrg R (1939), Seine Heiligkeit Pius XI. Alsactia, France
Riasanovsky, Nicholas V. (1963), A History of Russia, New York: Oxford University Press 
Schmidlin, Josef (1922–1939), Papstgeschichte, Vol I-IV, Köstel-Pusztet München
Peter Rohrbacher (2012), Völkerkunde und Afrikanistik für den Papst. Missionsexperten und der Vatikan 1922–1939 in: Römische Historische Mitteilungen 54: 583–610

External links[edit]

The Life of Pope Pius XI, also about his encyclical Quadragesimo anno




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pope Pius XI.





Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Pius XI



Vatican Website for Pope Pius XI
Pius XI Medal of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences
Pius XI biography and his addresses to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences
Catholic Forum Biography
Vatican Museum Biography
Pius XI and the mystery of the disappeared encyclical on YouTube
Pope Benedict XVI opens the Archives for the pontificate (1922–1939) of Pope Pius XI – VATICAN CITY, 2 July 2006 "...researchers will be able to consult all the documents of the period kept in the different series of archives of the Holy See, primarily in the Vatican Secret Archives and the Archive of the Second Section of the Secretariat of State...."
Achille Ratti climbing club
Pathe News archive footage of Pius XI



Catholic Church titles


Preceded by
Andrea Ferrari
Archbishop of Milan
13 June 1921 – 6 February 1922
Succeeded by
Eugenio Tosi


Preceded by
Benedict XV
Pope
6 February 1922 – 10 February 1939
Succeeded by
Pius XII


Regnal titles


New title
Sovereign of the State of Vatican City
11 February 1929 – 10 February 1939
Succeeded by
Pius XII


Awards and achievements


Preceded by
Carter Glass
Cover of Time Magazine
16 June 1924
Succeeded by
Hiram W. Evans






Links to related articles











v
t
e


List of Popes






List of popes

graphical
canonised


Tombs

extant
non-extant


Antipope
Pope emeritus

Papal resignation


Pope-elect





1st–4th centuries
During the Roman Empire (until 493)
including under Constantine (312–337)



Peter
Linus
Anacletus
Clement I
Evaristus
Alexander I
Sixtus I
Telesphorus
Hyginus
Pius I
Anicetus
Soter
Eleutherius
Victor I
Zephyrinus
Callixtus I
Urban I
Pontian
Anterus
Fabian
Cornelius
Lucius I
Stephen I
Sixtus II
Dionysius
Felix I
Eutychian
Caius
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Eusebius
Miltiades
Sylvester I
Mark
Julius I
Liberius
Damasus I
Siricius
Anastasius I








5th–8th centuries
Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537)
Byzantine Papacy (537–752)
Frankish Papacy (756–857)



Innocent I
Zosimus
Boniface I
Celestine I
Sixtus III
Leo I
Hilarius
Simplicius
Felix III
Gelasius I
Anastasius II
Symmachus
Hormisdas
John I
Felix IV
Boniface II
John II
Agapetus I
Silverius
Vigilius
Pelagius I
John III
Benedict I
Pelagius II
Gregory I
Sabinian
Boniface III
Boniface IV
Adeodatus I
Boniface V
Honorius I
Severinus
John IV
Theodore I
Martin I
Eugene I
Vitalian
Adeodatus II
Donus
Agatho
Leo II
Benedict II
John V
Conon
Sergius I
John VI
John VII
Sisinnius
Constantine
Gregory II
Gregory III
Zachary
Stephen II
Paul I
Stephen III
Adrian I
Leo III





9th–12th centuries
Papal selection before 1059
Saeculum obscurum (904–964)
Crescentii era (974–1012)
Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044/1048)
Imperial Papacy (1048–1257)



Stephen IV
Paschal I
Eugene II
Valentine
Gregory IV
Sergius II
Leo IV
Benedict III
Nicholas I
Adrian II
John VIII
Marinus I
Adrian III
Stephen V
Formosus
Boniface VI
Stephen VI
Romanus
Theodore II
John IX
Benedict IV
Leo V
Sergius III
Anastasius III
Lando
John X
Leo VI
Stephen VII
John XI
Leo VII
Stephen VIII
Marinus II
Agapetus II
John XII
Benedict V
Leo VIII
John XIII
Benedict VI
Benedict VII
John XIV
John XV
Gregory V
Sylvester II
John XVII
John XVIII
Sergius IV
Benedict VIII
John XIX
Benedict IX
Sylvester III
Benedict IX
Gregory VI
Clement II
Benedict IX
Damasus II
Leo IX
Victor II
Stephen IX
Nicholas II
Alexander II
Gregory VII
Victor III
Urban II
Paschal II
Gelasius II
Callixtus II
Honorius II
Innocent II
Celestine II
Lucius II
Eugene III
Anastasius IV
Adrian IV
Alexander III
Lucius III
Urban III
Gregory VIII
Clement III
Celestine III
Innocent III





13th–16th centuries
Viterbo (1257–1281)
Orvieto (1262–1297)
Perugia (1228–1304)
Avignon Papacy (1309–1378)
Western Schism (1378–1417)
Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534)
Reformation Papacy (1534–1585)
Baroque Papacy (1585–1689)



Honorius III
Gregory IX
Celestine IV
Innocent IV
Alexander IV
Urban IV
Clement IV
Gregory X
Innocent V
Adrian V
John XXI
Nicholas III
Martin IV
Honorius IV
Nicholas IV
Celestine V
Boniface VIII
Benedict XI
Clement V
John XXII
Benedict XII
Clement VI
Innocent VI
Urban V
Gregory XI
Urban VI
Boniface IX
Innocent VII
Gregory XII
Martin V
Eugene IV
Nicholas V
Callixtus III
Pius II
Paul II
Sixtus IV
Innocent VIII
Alexander VI
Pius III
Julius II
Leo X
Adrian VI
Clement VII
Paul III
Julius III
Marcellus II
Paul IV
Pius IV
Pius V
Gregory XIII
Sixtus V
Urban VII
Gregory XIV
Innocent IX
Clement VIII





17th–20th centuries
Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848)
Roman Question (1870–1929)
Vatican City (1929–present)
World War II (1939–1945)
Cold War (1945–1991)



Leo XI
Paul V
Gregory XV
Urban VIII
Innocent X
Alexander VII
Clement IX
Clement X
Innocent XI
Alexander VIII
Innocent XII
Clement XI
Innocent XIII
Benedict XIII
Clement XII
Benedict XIV
Clement XIII
Clement XIV
Pius VI
Pius VII
Leo XII
Pius VIII
Gregory XVI
Pius IX
Leo XIII
Pius X
Benedict XV
Pius XI
Pius XII
John XXIII
Paul VI
John Paul I
John Paul II





21st century



Benedict XVI
Francis





History of the papacy




Antiquity and Early
Middle Ages



During the Roman Empire (until 493)

Under Constantine (312–337)


Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537)
Byzantine Papacy (537–752)
Frankish Papacy (756–857)
Saeculum obscurum (904–964)
Crescentii era (974–1012)





High and Late
Middle Ages



Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044 / 1048)
Imperial Papacy (1048–1257)
Wandering Papacy

Viterbo, 1257–1281
Orvieto, 1262–1297
Perugia, 1228–1304


Avignon Papacy (1309–1378)
Western Schism (1378–1417)





Early Modern and
Modern Era



Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534)
Reformation Papacy (1534–1585)
Baroque Papacy (1585–1689)
Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848)
Roman Question (1870–1929)
Vatican City (1929–present)

WWII (1939–1945)













 Book
 Category
 Pope portal
 Catholicism portal












v
t
e


Catholic Church






Index
Outline





History
(Timeline)



Jesus
Holy Family

Mary
Joseph


Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Council of Trent
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index






Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Ecumenism
Dei verbum
Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum concilium











Hierarchy
(Precedence)




Pope (List)



Pope Francis (2013–)

conclave
inauguration
theology
canonizations
visits


Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI (2005–2013)







Roman Curia
College of Cardinals

Cardinal


Patriarchate
Episcopal conference
Patriarch
Major archbishop
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop
Titular bishop
Bishop emeritus
Abbot
Abbess
Superior general
Provincial superior
Grand Master
Prior (-ess)
Priest
Brother

Friar


Sister
Monk
Nun
Hermit
Master of novices
Novice
Oblate
Postulant
Laity





Theology



Body and soul
Bible
Catechism
Divine grace
Dogma
Ecclesiology

Four Marks of the Church


Original sin

List


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship




Mariology



Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration








Philosophy



Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers





Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy orders
Matrimony





Saints



Mary
Apostles
Archangels
Confessors
Disciples
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Church Fathers
Martyrs
Patriarchs
Prophets
Virgins





Doctors
of the
Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Institutes,
orders,
and societies



Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines





Associations
of the faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Apostolic Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Community of Sant'Egidio





Charities



Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas Internationalis
Catholic Home Missions
Catholic Relief Services
CIDSE





Particular
churches
(By country)



Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches: Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian




Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Latin

Anglican Use
Ambrosian
Mozarabic
Roman


West Syrian











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal


 Book
Name
 Media

 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject














v
t
e


History of the Catholic Church



General



History of the Catholic Church

By country or region


History of the Papacy
Timeline of the Catholic Church
Catholic Ecumenical Councils
History of the Roman Curia
Catholic Church art
Religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Papal States
Role of Christianity in civilization








Church beginnings,
Great Church



Jesus
John the Baptist
Apostles

Peter
John
Paul


Saint Stephen
Great Commission
Council of Jerusalem
Apostolic Age
Apostolic Fathers
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus
Pope Victor I
Tertullian






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Constantine the Great and Christianity
Arianism
Archbasilica of St. John Lateran
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Benedict of Nursia
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant





Early Middle Ages



Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East–West Schism





High Middle Ages



Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Thomas Aquinas





Late Middle Ages



Pope Boniface VIII
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI






Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the Monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine






Baroque Period to the
French Revolution




Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution





19th century



Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum





20th century



Pope Pius X
Our Lady of Fátima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI
Pope John Paul I
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day

1995
2000







21st century



Catholic Church sexual abuse cases
Pope Benedict XVI
World Youth Day

2002
2005
2008
2011
2013
2016


Pope Francis








 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal
 Catholicism portal












v
t
e


History of Catholic theology



General history



History of the Catholic Church
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical Councils
Timeline of the Catholic Church
History of Christianity
History of Christian theology








Church beginnings



Paul
Clement of Rome
First Epistle of Clement
Didache
Ignatius of Antioch
Polycarp
Epistle of Barnabas
The Shepherd of Hermas
Aristides of Athens
Justin Martyr
Epistle to Diognetus
Irenaeus
Montanism
Tertullian
Origen
Antipope Novatian
Cyprian






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Eusebius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Arianism
Pelagianism
Nestorianism
Monophysitism
Ephrem the Syrian
Hilary of Poitiers
Cyril of Jerusalem
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Ambrose
John Chrysostom
Jerome
Augustine of Hippo
John Cassian
Orosius
Cyril of Alexandria
Peter Chrysologus
Pope Leo I
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Pope Gregory I





Early Middle Ages



Isidore of Seville
John Climacus
Maximus the Confessor
Monothelitism
Ecthesis
Bede
John of Damascus
Iconoclasm
Transubstantiation dispute
Predestination disputes
Paulinus II of Aquileia
Alcuin
Benedict of Aniane
Rabanus Maurus
Paschasius Radbertus
John Scotus Eriugena





High Middle Ages



Roscellinus
Gregory of Narek
Berengar of Tours
Peter Damian
Anselm of Canterbury
Joachim of Fiore
Peter Abelard
Decretum Gratiani
Bernard of Clairvaux
Peter Lombard
Anselm of Laon
Hildegard of Bingen
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominic de Guzmán
Robert Grosseteste
Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Beatrice of Nazareth
Bonaventure
Albertus Magnus
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Thomas Aquinas
Siger of Brabant
Thomism
Roger Bacon





Mysticism and reforms



Ramon Llull
Duns Scotus
Dante Alighieri
William of Ockham
Richard Rolle
John of Ruusbroec
Catherine of Siena
Brigit of Sweden
Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Walter Hilton
The Cloud of Unknowing
Heinrich Seuse
Geert Groote
Devotio Moderna
Julian of Norwich
Thomas à Kempis
Nicholas of Cusa
Marsilio Ficino
Girolamo Savonarola
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola






Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Erasmus
Thomas Cajetan
Thomas More
John Fisher
Johann Eck
Francisco de Vitoria
Thomas of Villanova
Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Ávila
Francis Xavier
Teresa of Ávila
Luis de León
John of the Cross
Peter Canisius
Luis de Molina (Molinism)
Robert Bellarmine
Francisco Suárez
Lawrence of Brindisi
Francis de Sales






Baroque period to
French Revolution




Tommaso Campanella
Pierre de Bérulle
Pierre Gassendi
René Descartes
Mary of Jesus of Ágreda
António Vieira
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis Thomassin
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet
François Fénelon
Cornelius Jansen (Jansenism)
Blaise Pascal
Nicolas Malebranche
Giambattista Vico
Alphonsus Liguori
Louis de Montfort
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Alfonso Muzzarelli
Johann Michael Sailer
Clement Mary Hofbauer
Bruno Lanteri





19th century



Joseph Görres
Felicité de Lamennais
Luigi Taparelli
Antonio Rosmini
Ignaz von Döllinger
John Henry Newman
Henri Lacordaire
Jaime Balmes
Gaetano Sanseverino
Giovanni Maria Cornoldi
Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler
Giuseppe Pecci
Joseph Hergenröther
Tommaso Maria Zigliara
Matthias Joseph Scheeben´
Émile Boutroux
Modernism
Léon Bloy
Désiré-Joseph Mercier
Friedrich von Hügel
Vladimir Solovyov
Marie-Joseph Lagrange
George Tyrrell
Maurice Blondel
Thérèse of Lisieux





20th century



G. K. Chesterton
Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange
Joseph Maréchal
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Jacques Maritain
Étienne Gilson
Ronald Knox
Dietrich von Hildebrand
Gabriel Marcel
Marie-Dominique Chenu
Romano Guardini
Edith Stein
Fulton Sheen
Henri de Lubac
Jean Guitton
Josemaría Escrivá
Adrienne von Speyr
Karl Rahner
Yves Congar
Bernard Lonergan
Emmanuel Mounier
Jean Daniélou
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alfred Delp
Edward Schillebeeckx
Thomas Merton
G. E. M. Anscombe
René Girard
Johann Baptist Metz
Jean Vanier
Henri Nouwen





21st century



Pope Benedict XVI
Walter Kasper
Raniero Cantalamessa
Michał Heller
Jean-Luc Marion
Tomáš Halík
Scott Hahn
Robert Barron








 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal












v
t
e


Bishops and Archbishops of Milan



Ancient Age



St Apostle Barnabas (1st-century, his coming to Milan is probably legendary)
St Anathalon
St Caius
St Castricianus
St Calimerus (about 270 – 280)
St Monas (283–313?)
St Mirocles (313–316?)
St Maternus (316–328?)
St Protasius (328–343?)
St Eustorgius I (343–349?)
St Dionysius (349–355)
Auxentius (355–374, considered an intruder by the Catholic Church)
St Ambrose (374–397)
St Simplician (397–400)
St Venerius (400–408)
St Marolus (408–423)
St Martinianus (423–435)
St Glycerius (436–438)
St Lazarus (438–449)
St Eusebius (449–462)
St Gerontius (462–465)
St Benignus (465–472)
St Senator (472–475)
St Theodorus I (475–490)
St Lawrence I (490–512)
St Eustorgius II (512–518)
St Magnus (518–530?)
St Dacius (530–552)
Vitale (552–556)
St Ausanus (556–559?)





Genoa Period



St Honoratus (560–571?)
Frontone (571–573?)
Lawrence II (573–592)
Constantius (593–600)
Deodatus (601–628)
Asterius (629–639)
Forte (639–641)





Middle Age



St John the Good (641–669)
St Antonino (669–671)
St Maurilio (671)
St Ampelius (671–676)
St Mansuetus (676–685)
St Benedict (685–732)
Theodorus II (732–746)
St Natalis (746–747)
Arifred (747–748)
Stabile (748–750)
Leto (751–755)
Thomas (755–783)
Peter (784–803)
Odelpert (803–813)
St Anselm I (813–818)
St Buono (818–822)
Angilbert I (822–823)
Angilbert II Pusterla (824–859)
Tadone (860–868)
Anspert (868–881)
Anselmo II Capra (882–896)
Landulf I (896–899)
Andrea of Canciano (899–906)
Aicone (906–918)
Gariberto of Besana (918–921)
Lambert (921–931)
Elduin (931–936)
Arderico (936–948)
Adelman (948–953)
Walpert (953–970)
Arnulf I (970–974)
Gotofredo I (974–979)
Landulf II of Carcano (980–998)
Arnolfo II da Arsago (998–1018)
Ariberto da Intimiano (1018–1045)
St Guido da Velate (1045–1069)
Attone (1070–1075)
Gotofredo II da Castiglione (1070–1075, antibishop)
Tebald da Castiglione (1075–1080)
Anselmo III da Rho (1086–1093)
Arnolfo III (1093–1097)
Anselmo IV da Bovisio (1097–1101)
Grossolano (1102–1112)
Giordano da Clivio (1112–1120)
Ulrich da Corte (1120–1126)
Anselmo V della Pusterla (1126–1135)
Robaldo (1135–1145)
Umberto I da Pirovano (1146–1166)
St Galdino della Sala (1166–1176)
Algisio da Pirovano (1176–1185)
Umberto II Crivelli (1185–1187, elected Pope Urban III)
Milone da Cardano (1187–1195)
Umberto III da Terzago (1195–1196)
Filippo I da Lampugnano (1196–1206)
Umberto IV da Pirovano (1206–1211)
Gerardo da Sessa (1211–1212)
Enrico I da Settala (1213–1230)
Guglielmo I da Rizolio (1230–1241)
Leon da Perego (1241–1257)
Ottone Visconti (1262–1295)
Ruffino da Frisseto (1295–1296)
Francesco I da Parma (1296–1308)
Cassone della Torre (1308–1317)
Aicardo da Intimiano (1317–1339)
Giovanni II Visconti (1342–1354)
Roberto Visconti (1354–1361)
Guglielmo II della Pusterla (1361–1370)
Simon da Borsano (1370–1380)
Antonio de' Saluzzi (1380–1401)
Pietro II di Candia (1402–1410)
Francesco II Crippa (1409–1414)
Bartolommeo Capra (1414–1433)
Francesco III Piccolpasso (1433–1443)
Enrico II Rampini (1443–1450)
Giovanni III Visconti (1450–1453)
Nicolò Amidano (1453–1454)
Timoteo Maffei (1454)
Gabriele Sforza (1454–1457)
Carlo I da Forlì (1457–1461)
Stefano Nardini (1461–1484)
Giovan IV Arcimboldi (1484–1488)
Guido Antonio Arcimboldi (1488–1497)
Ottaviano Arcimboldi (1497)
Ippolito I d'Este (1497–1520)
Ippolito II d'Este (1520–1550)
Giovan Angelo Arcimboldi (1550–1555)
Filippo II Archinto (1556–1558)
vacant





Modern Age



St. Carlo Borromeo (1564–1584)
Gaspare Visconti (1584–1595)
Federico I Borromeo (1595–1631)
Cesare Monti (1632–1650)
Alfonso Litta (1652–1679)
Federico II Visconti (1681–1693)
Federico III Caccia (1693–1699)
Giuseppe Archinto (1699–1712)
Benedetto II Erba Odescalchi (1712–1737)
Carlo Gaetano Stampa (1737–1742)
Giuseppe II Pozzobonelli (1743–1783)
Filippo Maria Visconti (1784–1801)
Giovanni Battista Caprara (1802–1810)
vacant
Carlo Gaetano Gaisruck (1818–1846)
Bartolomeo Carlo Romilli (1847–1859)
Paolo Angelo Ballerini (1859–1867)
Luigi Nazari di Calabiana (1867–1893)
Bl. Andrea Ferrari (1894–1921)
Ambrogio Damiano Achille Ratti (1921–1922, elected Pope Pius XI)
Eugenio Tosi (1922–1929)
Bl. Ildefonso Schuster (1929–1954)
Giovanni Battista Montini (1954–1963, elected Pope Paul VI)
Giovanni Colombo (1963–1979)
Carlo Maria Martini, SJ (1979–2002)
Dionigi Tettamanzi (2002–2011)
Angelo Scola (2011–2017)
Mario Delpini (2017-present)








 Catholicism portal














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 88598915
LCCN: n50044410
ISNI: 0000 0001 2102 9249
GND: 118594745
SELIBR: 275435
SUDOC: 027075532
BNF: cb11919956b (data)
ULAN: 500356467
NLA: 35740671
NKC: jn19981001987
ICCU: IT\ICCU\RAVV\063544
BNE: XX1090632
IATH: w6z45mbq






[Category:Diplomats of the Holy See]]





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pope_Pius_XI&oldid=816921036"					Categories: Pope Pius XI1857 births1939 deaths20th-century Roman Catholic archbishopsApostolic Nuncios to PolandArchbishops of MilanBurials at St. Peter's BasilicaItalian librariansItalian mountain climbersItalian popesNazi persecution of the Catholic ChurchPeople from the Province of Monza e BrianzaPopesHidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it)Use dmy dates from February 2014Pages using infobox Christian leader with unknown parametersArticles containing Italian-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2007Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from November 2013Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2017Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014Pages using S-rel template with ca parameterWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers