

Pope Blessed
Paul VI


Bishop of Rome



Paul VI in 1963



Papacy began
21 June 1963


Papacy ended
6 August 1978


Predecessor
John XXIII


Successor
John Paul I


Orders


Ordination
29 May 1920
by Giacinto Gaggia


Consecration
12 December 1954
by Eugène Tisserant


Created Cardinal
15 December 1958
by John XXIII


Personal details


Birth name
Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria Montini


Born
(1897-09-26)26 September 1897
Concesio, Brescia, Kingdom of Italy


Died
6 August 1978(1978-08-06) (aged 80)
Castel Gandolfo, Italy


Previous post



Referendary Prelate of the Apostolic Signatura (1926–38)
Substitute for General Affairs (1937–53)
Pro-Secretary for Ordinary Affairs of Secretariat of State (1953–54)
Archbishop of Milan (1954–63)
Cardinal-Priest of Ss. Silvestro e Martino ai Monti (1958–63)





Motto
Cum Ipso in monte (With Him on the mount)
In nomine Domini (In the name of the Lord)


Signature



Coat of arms



Sainthood


Feast day



26 September
30 May (Ambrosian Rite)[1]





Venerated in
Catholic Church


Beatified
19 October 2014
Saint Peter's Square, Vatican City
by Pope Francis


Attributes



Papal vestments
Papal tiara





Patronage



Archdiocese of Milan[2]
Paul VI Pontifical Institute[3]
Second Vatican Council[4]
Diocese of Brescia[5]
Concesio
Magenta
Paderno Dugnano





Other popes named Paul




Ordination history of
Pope Paul VI





History



Diaconal ordination



Date of ordination
28 February 1920


Place of ordination
Concesio, Brescia



Priestly ordination



Ordained by
Giacinto Gaggia (Brescia)


Date of ordination
29 May 1920


Place of ordination
Concesio, Brescia



Episcopal consecration



Principal consecrator
Eugène Card. Tisserant (Dec. Sac. Coll.)


Co-consecrators
Giacinto Tredici (Brescia)
Domenico Bernareggi (Milan aux.)


Date of consecration
12 December 1954


Place of consecration
Saint Peter's Basilica, Vatican City



Cardinalate



Elevated by
Pope John XXIII


Date of elevation
15 December 1958








Episcopal succession



Bishops consecrated by Pope Paul VI as principal consecrator



Giuseppe Schiavini
22 May 1955


Cesário Alexandre Minali
5 June 1955


Ubaldo Teofano Stella
3 October 1955


Domenico Enrici
1 November 1955


Aristide Pirovano
13 November 1955


Adolfo Luís Bossi
14 September 1958


Antonio Fustella
25 June 1960


Giovanni Umberto Colombo
7 December 1960


Luigi Oldani
7 December 1961


Francesco Rossi
26 May 1963


Igino Eugenio Cardinale
20 October 1963


Albert Reuben Edward Thomas
20 October 1963


Giovanni Fallani
28 June 1964


Johannes Gerardus Maria Willebrands
28 June 1964


Leobard D'Souza
3 December 1964


Ferdinando Giuseppe Antonelli
19 March 1966


Giacomo Violardo
19 March 1966


Loris Francesco Capovilla[6]
16 July 1967


Agostino Casaroli
16 July 1967


Ernesto Civardi
16 July 1967


Paul Casimir Marcinkus
6 January 1969


Louis Vangeke
3 December 1970


Annibale Bugnini
13 February 1972


Giuseppe Casoria
13 February 1972


Enrico Bartolucci Panaroni
29 June 1973


Jean Jerome Hamer
29 June 1973


Andrzej Maria Deskur
30 June 1974


Nicola Rotunno
30 June 1974





Pope Paul VI (Latin: Paulus VI; Italian: Paolo VI), born Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria Montini[a] (Italian pronunciation: [dʒioˈvanːi baˈtːista enˈriko anˈtonjo marˈija monˈtini]; 26 September 1897 – 6 August 1978), reigned from 21 June 1963 to his death in 1978. Succeeding John XXIII, he continued the Second Vatican Council which he closed in 1965, implementing its numerous reforms, and fostered improved ecumenical relations with Eastern Orthodox and Protestants, which resulted in many historic meetings and agreements.[7] Montini served in the Holy See's Secretariat of State from 1922 to 1954. While in the Secretariat of State, Montini and Domenico Tardini were considered as the closest and most influential advisors of Pope Pius XII, who in 1954 named him Archbishop of Milan, the largest Italian diocese. Montini later became the Secretary of the Italian Bishops' Conference. John XXIII elevated him to the College of Cardinals in 1958, and after the death of John XXIII, Montini was considered one of his most likely successors.[8]
Upon his election to the papacy, Montini took the name Paul VI. He re-convened the Second Vatican Council, which had automatically closed with the death of John XXIII. After the Council had concluded its work, Paul VI took charge of the interpretation and implementation of its mandates, often walking a thin line between the conflicting expectations of various groups within Catholicism. The magnitude and depth of the reforms affecting all fields of Church life during his pontificate exceeded similar reform programmes of his predecessors and successors. Paul VI spoke repeatedly to Marian conventions and mariological meetings, visited Marian shrines and issued three Marian encyclicals. Following his famous predecessor Saint Ambrose of Milan, he named Mary as the Mother of the Church during the Second Vatican Council.[9] Paul VI described himself as a humble servant for a suffering humanity and demanded significant changes from the rich in North America and Europe in favour of the poor in the Third World.[10] His positions on birth control, promulgated famously in the 1968 encyclical Humanae vitae were often contested, especially in Western Europe and North America. The same opposition emerged in reaction to the political aspects of some of his teaching.
Following the standard procedures that lead to sainthood, Pope Benedict XVI declared that the late pontiff had lived a life of heroic virtue and conferred the title of Venerable upon him on 20 December 2012. Pope Francis beatified him on 19 October 2014 after the recognition of a miracle attributed to his intercession. His liturgical feast is celebrated on the date of his birth on 26 September.
Popes John Paul I, John Paul II, and Benedict XVI were made cardinals during his papacy.



Contents


1 Early life
2 Vatican career

2.1 Diplomatic service
2.2 Roman Curia


3 Archbishop of Milan

3.1 Montini's philosophy
3.2 Pastoral progressivism
3.3 Cardinal


4 Papacy

4.1 Papal conclave
4.2 Reforms of papal ceremonial
4.3 Completion of the Vatican Council

4.3.1 Ecumenical orientation
4.3.2 Dialogue with the world
4.3.3 The Council priorities of Paul VI
4.3.4 Third and fourth sessions
4.3.5 Universal call to holiness


4.4 Church reforms

4.4.1 Synod of Bishops
4.4.2 Curia reform
4.4.3 Age limits and restrictions
4.4.4 Mass of Paul VI


4.5 Relations and dialogues

4.5.1 Dialogues


4.6 Refutation of homosexual activity

4.6.1 Foreign travels


4.7 Attempted assassination of Paul VI

4.7.1 New diplomacy


4.8 Theology

4.8.1 Mariology
4.8.2 Encyclicals


4.9 Ecumenism and ecumenical relations

4.9.1 Orthodox
4.9.2 Anglicans
4.9.3 Protestants


4.10 Beatifications and canonizations
4.11 Consistories


5 Final months and death

5.1 Final days
5.2 Death


6 Beatification
7 Legacy and controversies
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References

10.1 Citations
10.2 Sources


11 External links



Early life[edit]




His father, Giorgio Montini


Giovanni Battista Montini was born in the village of Concesio, in the province of Brescia, Lombardy, Italy, in 1897. His father Giorgio Montini was a lawyer, journalist, director of the Catholic Action and member of the Italian Parliament. His mother was Giudetta Alghisi, from a family of rural nobility. He had two brothers, Francesco Montini, who became a physician, and Lodovico Montini, who became a lawyer and politician.[11] On 30 September 1897, he was baptized with the name Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria Montini.[12] He attended the Cesare Arici school run, by the Jesuits, and in 1916 received a diploma from the Arnaldo da Brescia public school in Brescia. His education was often interrupted by bouts of illness.
In 1916, he entered the seminary to become a Catholic priest. He was ordained priest on 29 May 1920 in Brescia and celebrated his first Holy Mass in Brescia in the Basilica of Santa Maria delle Grazie.[13] Montini concluded his studies in Milan with a doctorate in Canon Law in the same year.[14] Afterwards he studied at the Gregorian University, the University of Rome La Sapienza and, at the request of Giuseppe Pizzardo at the Accademia dei Nobili Ecclesiastici. In 1922, at the age of twenty-five, again at the request of Giuseppe Pizzardo, Montini entered the Secretariat of State, where he worked under Pizzardo together with Francesco Borgongini-Duca, Alfredo Ottaviani, Carlo Grano, Domenico Tardini and Francis Spellman.[15] Consequently, he never had an appointment as a parish priest. In 1925 he helped found the publishing house Morcelliana in Brescia, focused on promoting a 'Christian-inspired culture'.[16]
Vatican career[edit]
Diplomatic service[edit]
Montini had just one foreign posting in the diplomatic service of the Holy See as Secretary in office of the papal nuncio to Poland in 1923. Of the nationalism he experienced there he wrote: "This form of nationalism treats foreigners as enemies, especially foreigners with whom one has common frontiers. Then one seeks the expansion of one's own country at the expense of the immediate neighbours. People grow up with a feeling of being hemmed in. Peace becomes a transient compromise between wars."[17] He described his experience in Warsaw as "useful, though not always joyful".[18] When he became pope, the Communist government of Poland refused him permission to visit Poland on a Marian pilgrimage.
Roman Curia[edit]




Montini on the day of his ordination in 1920


His organisational skills led him to a career in the Roman Curia, the papal civil service. In 1931, Pacelli appointed him to teach history at the Pontifical Academy for Diplomats[14] In 1937, after his mentor Giuseppe Pizzardo was named a cardinal and was succeeded by Domenico Tardini, Montini was named Substitute for Ordinary Affairs under Cardinal Pacelli, the Secretary of State. His immediate supervisor was Domenico Tardini, with whom he got along well. Pacelli became Pope Pius XII in 1939 and confirmed Montini's appointement as Substitute under the new Cardinal Secretary of State Luigi Maglione. In that role, roughly that of a chief of staff, he met the pope every morning until 1954 and developed a rather close relationship with him. Of his service to two popes he wrote:

It is true, my service to the pope was not limited to the political or extraordinary affairs according to Vatican language. The goodness of Pope Pius XII opened to me the opportunity to look into the thoughts, even into the soul of this great pontiff. I could quote many details how Pius XII, always using measured and moderate speech, was hiding, nay revealing a noble position of great strength and fearless courage.[19]

When war broke out, Maglione, Tardini and Montini were the principal figures in the Secretariat of State of the Holy See.[20][page needed] Montini was in charge of taking care of the "ordinary affairs" of the Secretariat of State, which took much of the mornings of every working day. In the afternoon he moved to the third floor into the Office of the Private Secretary of the Pontiff. Pius XII did not have a personal secretary. As did several popes before him, he delegated the secretarial functions he needed to the Secretariat of State.[21] During the war years, thousands of letters from all parts of the world arrived at the desk of the pope, most of them asking for understanding, prayer and help. Montini's task was to formulate the replies in the name of Pius XII, expressing his empathy, and understanding and providing help, where possible.[21]
At the request of the pope, Montini created an information office regarding prisoners of war and refugees, which from 1939 until 1947 received almost ten million requests for information about missing persons and produced over eleven million replies.[22] Montini was several times attacked by Benito Mussolini's government for meddling in politics, but the Holy See consistently defended him.[23] When Maglione died in 1944, Pius XII appointed Tardini and Montini together as joint heads of Secretariat of State, each with the title of Pro-Secretary of State. Montini's admiration was almost filial, when he described Pope Pius XII:

His richly cultivated mind, his unusual capacity for thought and study led him to avoid all distractions and every unnecessary relaxation. He wished to enter fully into the history of his own afflicted time: with a deep understanding, that he was himself a part of that history. He wished to participate fully in it, to share his sufferings in his own heart and soul.[24]

As Pro-Secretary of State, Montini coordinated the activities of assistance to the persecuted hidden in convents, parishes, seminaries, and in Catholic schools.[25] At the request of the pope, Montini established together with Ferdinando Baldelli and Otto Faller the Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza (Pontifical Commission for Assistence), which aided large number of Romans and refugees from everywhere with shelter, food and other material assistance. In Rome alone this organization distributed almost two million portions of free food in the year 1944.[26] The Papal Residence of Castel Gandolfo was opened to refugees, as was Vatican City in so far as space allowed. Some 15,000 persons lived in Castel Gandolfo alone, supported by the Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza.[26] At the request of Pius XII, Montini was also involved in the re-establishment of Church Asylum, providing protection to hundreds of Allied soldiers, who had escaped from Axis prison camps, Jews, anti-Fascists, Socialists, Communists, and after the liberation of Rome, German soldiers, partisans, displaced persons and others.[27] As pope in 1971, Montini turned the Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza into Caritas Italiana.[28]
Archbishop of Milan[edit]




Montini at the opening of the new building of the RAS, Milan, 1962. Photo by Paolo Monti.


After the death of the Benedictine Cardinal Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster, in 1954, Montini was appointed to succeed him as Archbishop of Milan, which made him the Secretary of the Italian Bishops Conference.[29] Pope Pius XII presented the new Archbishop Giovanni Battista Montini "as his personal gift to Milan". He was consecrated bishop in Saint Peter's Basilica by Cardinal Eugène Tisserant, the Dean of the College of Cardinals, since Pius XII was forced to stay in bed due to his severe illness.
Pius XII delivered an address about Montini's appointment from his sick-bed over radio to those assembled in St. Peter's Basilica on 12 December 1954.[30] Both Montini and the pope had tears in their eyes when Montini parted for his diocese, with its 1,000 churches, 2,500 priests and 3,500,000 souls.[31] On 5 January 1955, Montini formally took possession of his Cathedral of Milan. After a period of settling in, Montini liked his new tasks as archbishop, connecting to all groups of faithful in Milan. He enjoyed meetings with intellectuals, artists and writers.[32]
Montini's philosophy[edit]




Cardinal Giovanni Battista Montini walking in Saint Peter's Square in 1962


In his first months Montini showed his interest in working conditions and labour issues by personally contacting unions, associations and giving related speeches. Believing that churches are the only non-utilitarian buildings in modern society and a most necessary place of spiritual rest, he initiated the building of over 100 new churches for service and contemplation.[33]
His public speeches were noticed not only in Milan but also in Rome and elsewhere. Some considered him a liberal, when he asked lay people to love not only Catholics but also schismatics, Protestants, Anglicans, the indifferent, Muslims, pagans, atheists.[34] He gave a friendly welcome to a group of Anglican clergy visiting Milan in 1957 and a subsequently exchanged letters with the Archbishop of Canterbury, Geoffrey Fisher.[35]
Pope Pius XII revealed at the 1952 secret consistory that both Montini and Tardini had declined appointments to the cardinalate[36][37] and in fact Montini was never to be made a cardinal by Pius XII, who held no consistory and created no cardinals from the time he appointed Montini to Milan and his own death four years later. After Angelo Roncalli became Pope John XXIII, he made Montini a cardinal in December 1958.
Montini and Angelo Roncalli were considered to be friends, but when Roncalli, as Pope John XXIII announced a new Ecumenical Council, Cardinal Montini reacted with disbelief and said to Giulio Bevilacqua: "This old boy does not know what a hornets nest he is stirring up."[38] He was appointed to the Central Preparatory Commission in 1961. During the Council, Pope John XXIII asked him to live in the Vatican. He was a member of the Commission for Extraordinary Affairs but did not engage himself much in the floor debates on various issues. His main advisor was Monsignore Giovanni Colombo, whom he later appointed to be his successor in Milan[39] The Commission was greatly overshadowed by the insistence of John XXIII that the Council complete all its work in one single session before Christmas 1962, to coincide with the 400th anniversary of the Council of Trent, an insistence which may have also been influenced by the Pope's having recently been told that he had cancer.[40]
Pastoral progressivism[edit]
During his period in Milan, Montini was widely seen as a progressive member of the Catholic hierarchy. He reformed pastoral care, adopting new approaches. He used his authority to ensure that the liturgical reforms of Pius XII were carried out at the local level and employed innovative methods to reach the people of Milan. For example, huge posters announced throughout the city that 1,000 voices would speak to them from 10 to 24 November 1957. More than 500 priests and many bishops, cardinals and lay people delivered 7,000 sermons in the period not only in churches but in factories, meeting halls, houses, courtyards, schools, offices, military barracks, hospitals, hotels and other places, wherever people congregated.[41] His goal was the re-introduction of faith to a city without much religion. "If only we can say Our Father and know what this means, then we would understand the Christian faith."[42]
Pius XII asked Archbishop Montini to Rome October 1957, where he gave the main presentation to the Second World Congress of Lay Apostolate. Previously as Pro-Secretary of State, he had worked hard to form a unified worldwide organization of lay people of 58 nations, representing 42 national organizations. He presented them to Pius XII in Rome in 1951. The second meeting in 1957 gave Montini an opportunity to express the lay apostolate in modern terms: "Apostolate means love. We will love all, but especially those, who need help... We will love our time, our technology, our art, our sports, our world."[43]
Cardinal[edit]




Montini as the Archbishop of Milan circa 1956


Although some cardinals seem to have viewed him as papabile, a likely candidate to become pope, and although he may consequently have received some votes in the 1958 conclave,[44] Montini was not yet a cardinal, which made him an unlikely choice.[b] Angelo Roncalli was elected pope on 28 October 1958 and took the name John XXIII. On 17 November 1958, L'Osservatore Romano announced a consistory for the creation of new cardinals. Montini's name led the list.[45] When the pope raised Montini to the cardinalate on 15 December 1958, he became Cardinal-Priest of Ss. Silvestro e Martino ai Monti. He appointed him simultaneously to several Vatican congregations which resulted in many visits by Montini to Rome in the coming years.[46]
As a Cardinal, Montini journeyed to Africa (1962), where he visited Ghana, Sudan, Kenya, Congo, Rhodesia, South Africa, and Nigeria. After this journey, John XXIII gave called Montini to a private audience for a debriefing on his trip which lasted for several hours. In fifteen other trips he visited Brazil (1960) and the USA (1960), including New York City, Washington DC, Chicago, the University of Notre Dame in Indiana, Boston, Philadelphia, and Baltimore. While a cardinal, he usually vacationed in Engelberg Abbey, a secluded Benedictine monastery in Switzerland.[47]
Papacy[edit]


Papal styles of
Pope Paul VI





Reference style
His Holiness


Spoken style
Your Holiness


Religious style
Holy Father


Posthumous style
Blessed


Papal conclave[edit]
Main article: Papal conclave, 1963
Montini was generally seen as the most likely successor to Pope John XXIII because of his closeness to both Popes Pius XII and John XXIII, his pastoral and administrative background, and his insight and determination.[48] John XXIII was not exactly a newcomer to the Vatican, since he had been an official of the Holy See in Rome and until his appointment to Venice was a papal diplomat, but returning to Rome at the age of 76 he may have felt outflanked by the professional Roman Curia at times; Montini knew its most inner workings well due to the fact that he had worked there for a generation.[48]
Unlike the papabile cardinals Giacomo Lercaro of Bologna and Giuseppe Siri of Genoa, Montini was not identified with either the left or right, nor was he seen as a radical reformer. He was viewed as most likely to continue the Second Vatican Council,[48] which already, without any tangible results, had lasted longer than John XXIII anticipated. John had a vision but "did not have a clear agenda. His rhetoric seems to have had a note of over-optimism, a confidence in progress, which was characteristic of the 1960s."[49] When John XXIII died of stomach cancer on 3 June 1963, this triggered a conclave to elect a new pope.
Montini was elected pope on the sixth ballot of the papal conclave on 21 June and he took the name of "Paul VI". When the Dean of the College of Cardinals Eugene Tisserant asked if he accepted the election, Montini said "Accepto, in nomine Domini" ("I accept, in the name of the Lord"). At one point during the conclave, it was said, Cardinal Gustavo Testa lost his temper and demanded that opponents of Montini halt their efforts to thwart his election.[50] Montini took the name "Paul" in honor of Saint Paul.[51]
The white smoke first rose from the chimney of the Sistine Chapel at 11:22 am, Cardinal Alfredo Ottaviani in his role as Protodeacon, announced to the public the successful election of Montini. When the new pope appeared on the central loggia, he gave the shorter episcopal blessing as his first Apostolic Blessing rather than the longer, traditional Urbi et Orbi.
Of the papacy, Paul VI wrote in his journal: "The position is unique. It brings great solitude. 'I was solitary before, but now my solitude becomes complete and awesome.'"[52]
Reforms of papal ceremonial[edit]
Paul VI did away with much of the regal splendor of the papacy. He was the last pope to date to be crowned; his successor Pope John Paul I replaced the Papal Coronation (which Paul had already substantially modified, but which he left mandatory in his 1975 apostolic constitution Romano Pontifici Eligendo) with a Papal Inauguration. Paul VI donated his own Papal Tiara, a gift from his former Archdiocese of Milan, to the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, DC (where it is on permanent display in the Crypt) as a gift to American Catholics.
In 1968, with the motu proprio Pontificalis Domus, he discontinued most of the ceremonial functions of the old Roman nobility at the papal court, save for the Prince Assistants to the Papal Throne. He also abolished the Palatine Guard and the Noble Guard, leaving the Swiss Guard as the sole military order of the Vatican.
Completion of the Vatican Council[edit]
Main article: Second Vatican Council




Pope Paul VI fully supported Cardinal Augustin Bea, credited with ecumenical breakthroughs during the Second Vatican Council.


Paul VI decided to continue Vatican II (canon law dictates that a council is suspended at the death of a pope), and brought it to completion in 1965. Faced with conflicting interpretations and controversies, he directed the implementation of its reform goals.
Ecumenical orientation[edit]
Main article: Pope Paul VI and Ecumenism
During Vatican II, the Council Fathers avoided statements which might anger Christians of other faiths.[53][page needed] Cardinal Augustin Bea, the President of the Christian Unity Secretariat, always had the full support of Paul VI in his attempts to ensure that the Council language was friendly and open to the sensitivities of Protestant and Orthodox Churches, whom he had invited to all sessions at the request of Pope John XXIII. Bea also was strongly involved in the passage of Nostra aetate, which regulates the Church's relations with the Jewish faith and members of other religions.[c]
Dialogue with the world[edit]
After his election as Bishop of Rome, Paul VI first met with the priests in his new diocese. He told them that in Milan he started a dialogue with the modern world and asked them to seek contact with all people from all walks of life. Six days after his election he announced that he would continue Vatican II and convened the opening to take place on 29 September 1963.[29] In a radio address to the world, Paul VI recalled the uniqueness of his predecessors, the strength of Pius XI, the wisdom and intelligence of Pius XII and the love of John XXIII. As "his pontifical goals" he mentioned the continuation and completion of Vatican II, the reform of the Canon Law and improved social peace and justice in the world. The Unity of Christianity would be central to his activities.[29]
The Council priorities of Paul VI[edit]
The pope re-opened the Ecumenical Council on 29 September 1963 giving it four key priorities:

A better understanding of the Catholic Church
Church reforms
Advancing the unity of Christianity
Dialogue with the world[29]





Pope Paul VI after his election with the first and only Catholic U.S. president with whom he visited as pope, John F. Kennedy, 2 July 1963


He reminded the council fathers that only a few years earlier Pope Pius XII had issued the encyclical Mystici corporis about the mystical body of Christ. He asked them not to repeat or create new dogmatic definitions but to explain in simple words how the Church sees itself. He thanked the representatives of other Christian communities for their attendance and asked for their forgiveness if the Catholic Church is guilty for the separation. He also reminded the Council Fathers that many bishops from the east could not attend because the governments in the East did not permit their journeys.[54]




The opening of the second session of Vatican II


Third and fourth sessions[edit]
Paul VI opened the third period on 14 September 1964, telling the Council Fathers that he viewed the text about the Church as the most important document to come out from the Council. As the Council discussed the role of bishops in the papacy, Paul VI issued an explanatory note confirming the primacy of the papacy, a step which was viewed by some as meddling in the affairs of the Council[55] American bishops pushed for a speedy resolution on religious freedom, but Paul VI insisted this to be approved together with related texts such as ecumenism.[56] The Pope concluded the session on 21 November 1964, with the formal pronouncement of Mary as Mother of the Church.[57]
Between the third and fourth sessions the pope announced reforms in the areas of Roman Curia, revision of Canon Law, regulations for mixed marriages involving several faiths, and birth control issues. He opened the final session of the council, concelebrating with bishops from countries where the Church was persecuted. Several texts proposed for his approval had to be changed. But all texts were finally agreed upon. The Council was concluded on 8 December 1965, the Feast of the Immaculate Conception.[56]
In the final session of the Council, Paul VI announced that he would open the canonization processes of his immediate predecessors: Pope Pius XII and Pope John XXIII.
Universal call to holiness[edit]
According to Pope Paul VI, "the most characteristic and ultimate purpose of the teachings of the Council" is the universal call to holiness:[58] "all the faithful of Christ of whatever rank or status, are called to the fullness of the Christian life and to the perfection of charity; by this holiness as such a more human manner of living is promoted in this earthly society." This teaching is found in Lumen Gentium, the Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, promulgated by Paul VI on 21 November 1964.
Church reforms[edit]




Following his predecessor Ambrose of Milan, Pope Paul VI named Mary the "Mother of the Church" during Vatican II.


Synod of Bishops[edit]
On 14 September 1965, he established the Synod of Bishops as a permanent institution of the Church and an advisory body to the papacy. Several meetings were held on specific issues during his pontificate, such as the Synod of Bishops on evangelization in the modern world, which started 9 September 1974.[59]
Curia reform[edit]
Main article: Pope Paul VI's reform of the Roman Curia
Pope Paul VI knew the Roman Curia well, having worked there for a generation from 1922 to 1954. He implemented his reforms in stages. On 1 March 1968, he issued a regulation, a process that had been initiated by Pius XII and continued by John XXIII. On 28 March, with Pontificalis Domus, and in several additional Apostolic Constitutions in the following years, he revamped the entire Curia, which included reduction of bureaucracy, streamlining of existing congregations and a broader representation of non-Italians in the curial positions.[60]
Age limits and restrictions[edit]
On 6 August 1966, Paul VI asked all bishops to submit their resignations to the pontiff by their 75th birthday. They were not required to do so but "earnestly requested of their own free will to tender their resignation from office".[61] He extended this requirement to all cardinals in Ingravescentem aetatem on 21 November 1970, with the further provision that cardinals would relinquish their offices in the Roman Curia upon reaching their 80th birthday.[62] These retirement rules enabled the Pope to fill several positions with younger prelates and reduce the Italian domination of the Roman Curia.[63] His 1970 measures also revolutionized papal elections by restricting the right to vote in papal conclaves to cardinals who had not yet reached their 80th birthday, a class known since then as "cardinal electors". This reduced the power of the Italians and the Curia in the next conclave. Some senior cardinals objected to losing their voting privilege, without effect.[64][65] Paul VI's measures also limited the number of cardinal-electors to a maximum of 120,[66] a rule sometimes circumvented by Pope John Paul II[67] but respected by Pope Francis.[68]
Some prelates questioned whether he should not apply these retirement rules to himself.[69] When Pope Paul was asked towards the end of his papacy whether he would retire at age 80, he replied "Kings can abdicate, Popes cannot."[citation needed]
Mass of Paul VI[edit]
Main article: Mass of Paul VI
Reform of the liturgy had been a part of the liturgical movements in the 20th century mainly in France, and Germany which were officially recognized by Pius XII in his encyclical Mediator Dei. During the pontificate of Pius XII, the Vatican eased regulations on the use of Latin in Catholic liturgies, permitting some use of vernacular languages during baptisms, funerals and other events. In 1951 and 1955, the Easter liturgies underwent revision, most notably including the reintroduction of the Easter Triduum.[70] The Second Vatican Council made no changes to the Roman Missal, but in the document Sacrosanctum Concilium mandated that a general revision of it take place. After the Vatican Council, in April 1969, Paul VI approved the "new Order of Mass" promulgated in 1970, as stated in the Acta Apostolica Sedis to "end experimentation" with the Mass and which included the introduction of three new Eucharistic Prayers to what was up to then a single Roman Canon.
The Mass of Paul VI was also in Latin but approval was given for the use of vernacular languages. There had been other instructions issued by the Pope in 1964, 1967, 1968, 1969 and 1970 which centered on the reform of all liturgies of the Roman Church.[71] These major reforms were not welcomed by all and in all countries. The sudden apparent "outlawing" of the 400-year-old Mass, the last typical edition of which being promulgated only a few years earlier in 1962 by Paul's predecessor, Pope John XXIII, was not always explained well. Further experimentation with the new Mass by liturgists, such as the usage of pop/folk music (as opposed to the Gregorian Chant advocated by Pope Pius X), along with concurrent changes in the order of sanctuaries, was viewed by some as vandalism.[48] In 2007, Pope Benedict XVI clarified that the 1962 Mass of John XXIII and the 1970 Mass of Paul VI are two forms of the same Roman Rite, the first, which had never been "juridically abrogated", now being an "extraordinary form of the Roman Rite", while the other "obviously is and continues to be the normal Form – the Forma ordinaria – of the Eucharistic Liturgy".[72]
Relations and dialogues[edit]




Pope Paul VI during an October 1973 audience


To Paul VI, a dialogue with all of humanity was essential not as an aim but as a means to find the truth. Dialogue according to Paul, is based on full equality of all participants. This equality is rooted in the common search for the truth[73] He said: "Those who have the truth, are in a position as not having it, because they are forced to search for it every day in a deeper and more perfect way. Those who do not have it, but search for it with their whole heart, have already found it."[73]
Dialogues[edit]




Pope Paul VI meets Jafar Shahidi, an Iranian Shia cleric.


In 1964, Paul VI created a Secretariat for non-Christians, later renamed the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue and a year later a new Secretariat (later Pontifical Council) for Dialogue with Non-Believers. This latter was in 1993 incorporated by Pope John Paul II in the Pontifical Council for Culture, which he had established in 1982. In 1971, Paul VI created a papal office for economic development and catastrophic assistance. To foster common bonds with all persons of good will, he decreed an annual peace day to be celebrated on January first of every year. Trying to improve the condition of Christians behind the Iron Curtain, Paul VI engaged in dialogue with Communist authorities at several levels, receiving Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet Nikolai Podgorny in 1966 and 1967 in the Vatican. The situation of the Church in Hungary, Poland and Romania, improved during his pontificate.[74]
Refutation of homosexual activity[edit]
In 1976 Montini became the first pontiff in the modern era to deny the accusation of homosexuality. On December 29, 1975, the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued a document entitled Persona Humana: Declaration on Certain Questions concerning Sexual Ethics, that reaffirmed Church teaching that pre or extra-marital sex, homosexual activity, and masturbation are sinful acts.[75][76] In response, Roger Peyrefitte, who had already written in two of his books that Montini had a longtime homosexual relationship, repeated his charges in a magazine interview with a French gay magazine that, when reprinted in Italian, brought the rumors to a wider public and caused an uproar. He said that Montini was a hypocrite who had a longtime sexual relationship with a movie actor.[77][78][79] Widespread rumors identified the actor as Paolo Carlini,[80] who had a small part in the Audrey Hepburn film Roman Holiday (1953). In a brief address to a crowd of approximately 20,000 in St. Peters Square on 18 April, Montini called the charges "horrible and slanderous insinuations" and appealed for prayers on his behalf. Special prayers for Montini were said in all Italian Catholic churches in "a day of consolation".[78][80][d] The charges have resurfaced periodically. In 1994, Franco Bellegrandi, a former Vatican honour chamberlain and correspondent for the Vatican newspaper L'Osservatore Romano, alleged that Montini had been blackmailed and had promoted fellow homosexuals to positions of power within the Vatican.[82] In 2006, the newspaper L'Espresso confirmed the blackmail story based on the private papers of police commander General Giorgio Manes. It reported that Italian Prime Minister Aldo Moro had been asked to help.[80][83]
Foreign travels[edit]




The countries visited by Pope Paul VI






Relief commemorating Pope Paul VI's visit to Nazareth, 5 January 1964






Pope Paul VI's Diamond Ring and Cross donated to the United Nations


Main article: List of pastoral visits of Pope Paul VI outside Italy
Pope Paul VI became the first pope to visit six continents. He traveled more widely than any of his predecessors, earning the nickname "the Pilgrim Pope". He visited the Holy Land in 1964 and participated in Eucharistic Congresses in Bombay, India and Bogotá, Colombia. In 1966, he was twice denied permission to visit Poland for the 1,000th anniversary of the introduction of Christianity in Poland. In 1967, he visited the shrine of Our Lady of Fátima in Portugal on the fiftieth anniversary of the apparitions there. He undertook a pastoral visit to Uganda in 1969,[84] the first by a reigning pope to Africa.[85] On 27 November 1970 he was the target of an assassination attempt at Manila International Airport in the Philippines. He was only lightly stabbed by Benjamín Mendoza y Amor Flores,[86][87] who was subdued by the pope's personal bodyguard and travel organizer, Monsignor Paul Marcinkus.[88] Pope Paul VI became the first reigning pontiff to visit the Western hemisphere when he addressed the United Nations in New York City in October 1965.[e] As the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War was escalating, Paul VI pleaded for peace before the UN:

Our very brief visit has given us a great honour; that of proclaiming to the whole world, from the Headquarters of the United Nations, Peace! We shall never forget this extraordinary hour. Nor can We bring it to a more fitting conclusion than by expressing the wish that this central seat of human relationships for the civil peace of the world may ever be conscious and worthy of this high privilege.[92]


No more war, never again war. Peace, it is peace that must guide the destinies of people and of all mankind."[93]

Attempted assassination of Paul VI[edit]
Shortly after arriving at the airport in Manila, Philippines on 27 November 1970, the Pope, closely followed by President Ferdinand Marcos and personal aide Msgr. Pasquale Macci, who was private secretary to Pope Paul VI, were encountered suddenly by a crew-cut, cassock-clad man who tried to attack the Pope with a knife. Macci pushed the man away; police identified the would-be assassin as Benjamin Mendoza y Amor, 35, of La Paz, Bolivia. Mendoza was an artist living the Philippines. The Pontiff continued with his trip and thanked Marcos and Macci, who both had moved to protect him during the attack.[94]
New diplomacy[edit]
Like his predecessor Pius XII, Paul VI put much emphasis on the dialogue with all nations of the world through establishing diplomatic relations. The number of foreign embassies accredited to the Vatican doubled during his pontificate.[95] This was a reflection of a new understanding between Church and State, which had been formulated first by Pius XI and Pius XII but decreed by Vatican II. The pastoral constitution Gaudium et spes stated that the Catholic Church is not bound to any form of government and willing to cooperate with all forms. The Church maintained its right to select bishops on its own without any interference by the State.[96]
Pope Paul VI sent one of 73 Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages to NASA for the historic first lunar landing. The message still rests on the lunar surface today. It has the Psalm 8 and the pope wrote, "To the Glory of the name of God who gives such power to men, we ardently pray for this wonderful beginning."[97]
Theology[edit]
Mariology[edit]
Main article: Mariology of Pope Paul VI




Paul VI with Albino Luciani (later John Paul I) in Venice


Pope Paul VI made extensive contributions to Mariology (theological teaching and devotions) during his pontificate. He attempted to present the Marian teachings of the Church in view of her new ecumenical orientation. In his inaugural encyclical Ecclesiam suam (section below), the pope called Mary the ideal of Christian perfection. He regards "devotion to the Mother of God as of paramount importance in living the life of the Gospel."[98]
Encyclicals[edit]
Main article: List of Encyclicals of Pope Paul VI

Mense maio

Main article: Mense maio
The encyclical Mense maio (from 29 April 1965) focused on the Virgin Mary, to whom traditionally the month of May is dedicated as the Mother of God. Paul VI writes that Mary is rightly to be regarded as the way by which people are led to Christ. Therefore, the person who encounters Mary cannot help but encounter Christ.[99]

Ecclesiam suam

Main article: Ecclesiam suam
Ecclesiam suam was given at St. Peter's, Rome, on the Feast of the Transfiguration, 6 August 1964, the second year of his Pontificate. It is considered an important document, identifying the Catholic Church with the Body of Christ. A later Council document Lumen Gentium stated that the Church subsists in the Body of Christ, raising questions as to the difference between "is" and "subsists in". Paul VI appealed to "all people of good will" and discussed necessary dialogues within the Church and between the Churches and with atheism.[59]

Mysterium fidei

Main article: Mysterium fidei (encyclical)
On 3 September 1965, Paul VI issued Mysterium fidei, on the mystery of the faith. He opposed relativistic notions which would have given the Eucharist a symbolic character only. The Church, according to Paul VI, has no reason to give up the deposit of faith in such a vital matter.[59]

Sacerdotalis caelibatus

Main article: Sacerdotalis caelibatus
Sacerdotalis caelibatus (Latin for "Of the celibate priesthood"), promulgated on 24 June 1967, defends the Catholic Church's tradition of priestly celibacy in the West. This encyclical was written in the wake of Vatican II, when the Catholic Church was questioning and revising many long-held practices. Priestly celibacy is considered a discipline rather than dogma, and some had expected that it might be relaxed. In response to these questions, the Pope reaffirms the discipline as a long-held practice with special importance in the Catholic Church. The encyclical Sacerdotalis caelibatus from 24 June 1967, confirms the traditional Church teaching, that celibacy is an ideal state and continues to be mandatory for Catholic priests. Celibacy symbolizes the reality of the kingdom of God amid modern society. The priestly celibacy is closely linked to the sacramental priesthood.[59] However, during his pontificate Paul VI was considered generous in permitting bishops to grant laicization of priests who wanted to leave the sacerdotal state, a position which was drastically reversed by John Paul II in 1980 and cemented in the 1983 Canon Law that only the pope can in exceptional circumstances grant laicization.

Populorum progressio

Main article: Populorum progressio




Paul VI at an audience in October 1977


Populorum progressio, released on 26 March 1967, dealt with the topic of "the development of peoples" and that the economy of the world should serve mankind and not just the few. It touches on a variety of traditional principles of Catholic social teaching: the right to a just wage; the right to security of employment; the right to fair and reasonable working conditions; the right to join a union and strike as a last resort; and the universal destination of resources and goods.
In addition, Populorum progressio opines that real peace in the world is conditional on justice. He repeats his demands expressed in Bombay in 1964 for a large-scale World Development Organization, as a matter of international justice and peace. He rejected notions to instigate revolution and force in changing economic conditions.[100]

Humanae vitae

Main article: Humanae vitae
Of his eight encyclicals, Pope Paul VI is best known for his encyclical Humanae vitae (Of Human Life, subtitled On the Regulation of Birth), published on 25 July 1968. In this encyclical he reaffirmed the Catholic Church's traditional view of marriage and marital relations and a continued condemnation of artificial birth control.[101] There were two Papal committees and numerous independent experts looking into the latest advancement of science and medicine on the question of artificial birth control.[102] which were noted by the Pope in his encyclical[103] The expressed views of Paul VI reflected the teachings of his predecessors, especially Pius XI,[104] Pius XII[105] and John XXIII[106] and never changed, as he repeatedly stated them in the first few years of his Pontificate[107]
To the pope as to all his predecessors, marital relations are much more than a union of two people. They constitute a union of the loving couple with a loving God, in which the two persons create a new person materially, while God completes the creation by adding the soul. For this reason, Paul VI teaches in the first sentence of Humanae vitae that the transmission of human life is a most serious role in which married people collaborate freely and responsibly with God the Creator.[108] This divine partnership, according to Paul VI, does not allow for arbitrary human decisions, which may limit divine providence. The Pope does not paint an overly romantic picture of marriage: marital relations are a source of great joy, but also of difficulties and hardships.[108] The question of human procreation exceeds in the view of Paul VI specific disciplines such as biology, psychology, demography or sociology.[109] The reason for this, according to Paul VI, is that married love takes its origin from God, who "is love". From this basic dignity, he defines his position:

Love is total—that very special form of personal friendship in which husband and wife generously share everything, allowing no unreasonable exceptions and not thinking solely of their own convenience. Whoever really loves his partner loves not only for what he receives, but loves that partner for the partner's own sake, content to be able to enrich the other with the gift of himself.[110]

The reaction to the encyclical's continued prohibitions of artificial birth control was very mixed. In Italy, Spain, Portugal and Poland, the encyclical was welcomed.[111] In Latin America, much support developed for the Pope and his encyclical. As World Bank President Robert McNamara declared at the 1968 Annual Meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group that countries permitting birth control practices would get preferential access to resources, doctors in La Paz, Bolivia called it insulting that money should be exchanged for the conscience of a Catholic nation. In Colombia, Cardinal archbishop Aníbal Muñoz Duque declared, if American conditionality undermines Papal teachings, we prefer not to receive one cent.[112] The Senate of Bolivia passed a resolution stating that Humanae vitae could be discussed in its implications for individual consciences, but was of greatest significance because the papal document defended the rights of developing nations to determine their own population policies.[112] The Jesuit Journal Sic dedicated one edition to the encyclical with supportive contributions.[113]
Paul VI was concerned but not surprised by the negative reaction in Western Europe and the United States. He fully anticipated this reaction to be a temporary one: "Don't be afraid", he reportedly told Edouard Gagnon on the eve of the encyclical, "in twenty years time they'll call me a prophet."[114] His biography on the Vatican's website notes of his reaffirmations of priestly celibacy and the traditional teaching on contraception that "[t]he controversies over these two pronouncements tended to overshadow the last years of his pontificate".[115] Pope John Paul II later reaffirmed and expanded upon Humanae vitae with the encyclical Evangelium vitae.
Ecumenism and ecumenical relations[edit]
After the Council, Paul VI contributed in two ways to the continued growth of ecumenical dialogue. The separated brothers and sisters, as he called them, were not able to contribute to the Council as invited observers. After the Council, many of them took initiative to seek out their Catholic counterparts and the Pope in Rome, who welcomed such visits. But the Catholic Church itself recognized from the many previous ecumenical encounters, that much needed to be done within, to be an open partner for ecumenism.[116] To those who are entrusted the highest and deepest truth and therefore, so Paul VI, believed that he had the most difficult part to communicate. Ecumenical dialogue, in the view of Paul VI, requires from a Catholic the whole person: one's entire reason, will, and heart.[117] Paul VI, like Pius XII before him, was reluctant to give in on a lowest possible point. And yet, Paul felt compelled to admit his ardent Gospel-based desire to be everything to everybody and to help all people[118] Being the successor of Peter, he felt the words of Christ, "Do you love me more" like a sharp knife penetrating to the marrow of his soul. These words meant to Paul VI love without limits,[119] and they underscore the Church's fundamental approach to ecumenism.
Orthodox[edit]
Paul VI visited the Orthodox Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Constantinople in 1964 and 1967. He was the first pope since the ninth century to visit the East, labeling the Eastern Churches as sister Churches.[120] He was also the first pope in centuries to meet the heads of various Eastern Orthodox faiths. Notably, his meeting with Ecumenical Patriarch Athenagoras I in 1964 in Jerusalem led to rescinding the excommunications of the Great Schism, which took place in 1054.[citation needed]
This was a significant step towards restoring communion between Rome and Constantinople. It produced the Catholic-Orthodox Joint declaration of 1965, which was read out on 7 December 1965, simultaneously at a public meeting of the Second Vatican Council in Rome and at a special ceremony in Istanbul. The declaration did not end the schism, but showed a desire for greater reconciliation between the two churches.[120] In May 1973, the Coptic Patriarch Shenouda III of Alexandria visited the Vatican, where he met three times with Pope Paul VI. A common declaration and a joint Creed issued after the visit proclaimed unity in a number of theological issues,[95] though also that other theological differences "since the year 451" "cannot be ignored" while both traditions work to a greater unity.[121]
Anglicans[edit]
Paul VI was the first pope to receive an Anglican Archbishop of Canterbury, Michael Ramsey in official audience as Head of Church, after the private audience visit of Archbishop Geoffrey Fisher to Pope John XXIII on 2 December 1960.[122] Ramsey met Paul three times during his visit and opened the Anglican Centre in Rome to increase their mutual knowledge.[123] He praised Paul VI[f] and his contributions in the service of unity.[123] Paul replied that "by entering into our house, you are entering your own house, we are happy to open our door and heart to you."[123] The two Church leaders signed a common declaration, which put an end to the disputes of the past and outlined a common agenda for the future.
Cardinal Augustin Bea, the head of the Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity, added at the end of the visit, "Let us move forward in Christ. God wants it. Humanity is waiting for it."[124] Unmoved by a harsh condemnation by the Congregation of Faith on mixed marriages precisely at this time of the visit, Paul VI and Ramsey appointed a preparatory commission which was to put the common agenda into practice on such issues as mixed marriages. This resulted in a joint Malta declaration, the first joint agreement on the Creed since the Reformation.[125] Paul VI was a good friend of the Anglican Church, which he described as "our beloved sister Church". This description was unique to Paul and not used by later popes.
Protestants[edit]
In 1965, Paul VI decided on the creation of a joint working group with the World Council of Churches to map all possible avenues of dialogue and cooperation. In the following three years, eight sessions were held which resulted in many joint proposals.[126] It was proposed to work closely together in areas of social justice and development and Third World Issues such as hunger and poverty. On the religious side, it was agreed to share together in the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, to be held every year. The joint working group was to prepare texts which were to be used by all Christians.[127] On 19 July 1968, the meeting of the World Council of Churches took place in Uppsala, Sweden, which Pope Paul called a sign of the times. He sent his blessing in an ecumenical manner: "May the Lord bless everything you do for the case of Christian Unity."[128] The World Council of Churches decided on including Catholic theologians in its committees, provided they have the backing of the Vatican.
The Lutherans were the first Protestant Church offering a dialogue to the Catholic Church in September 1964 in Reykjavík, Iceland.[129] It resulted in joint study groups of several issues. The dialogue with the Methodist Church began October 1965, after its representatives officially applauded remarkable changes, friendship and cooperation of the past five years. The Reformed Churches entered four years later into a dialogue with the Catholic Church.[130] The President of the Lutheran World Federation and member of the central committee of the World Council of Churches Fredrik A. Schiotz stated during the 450th anniversary of the Reformation, that earlier commemorations were viewed almost as a triumph. Reformation should be celebrated as a thanksgiving to God, his truth and his renewed life. He welcomed the announcement of Pope Paul VI to celebrate the 1900th anniversary of the death of the Apostle Peter and Apostle Paul, and promised the participation and cooperation in the festivities.[131]
Paul VI supported the new-found harmony and cooperation with Protestants on so many levels. When Cardinal Augustin Bea went to see him for permission for a joint Catholic-Protestant translation of the Bible with Protestant Bible societies, the pope walked towards him and exclaimed, "as far as the cooperation with Bible societies is concerned, I am totally in favour."[132] He issued a formal approval on Pentecost 1967, the feast on which the Holy Spirit descended on the Christians, overcoming all linguistic difficulties, according to Christian tradition.[133]
Beatifications and canonizations[edit]
Main articles: List of people declared venerable by Pope Paul VI, List of people beatified by Pope Paul VI, and List of saints canonized by Pope Paul VI
Paul VI beatified a total of 38 individuals in his pontificate and he canonized 84 saints in 21 causes. Among the beatifications included Maximilian Kolbe (1971) and the Korean Martyrs (1968). He canonized saints such as Nikola Tavelić (1970) and the Ugandan Martyrs (1964).
Consistories[edit]




Paul VI makes Joseph Ratzinger (future Pope Benedict XVI) a cardinal in 1977.


Main article: Cardinals created by Paul VI
Pope Paul VI held six consistories between 1965 and 1977 that raised 143 men to the cardinalate in his fifteen years as pope. They were held on 22 February 1965, 27 cardinals, 26 June 1967, 27 cardinals, 28 April 1969, 34 cardinals, 5 March 1973, 30 cardinals, 24 May 1976, 20 cardinals, and, 27 June 1977, 4 cardinals.
The next three popes were created cardinals by him. His immediate successor, Albino Luciani, who took the name John Paul I, was created a cardinal in the consistory of 5 March 1973. Karol Wojtyła (John Paul II) was created a cardinal in the consistory of 26 June 1967. Joseph Ratzinger (Benedict XVI) was created a cardinal in the small four-appointment consistory of 27 June 1977.[134]
With the six consistories, Paul VI continued the internationalization policies started by Pius XII in 1946 and continued by John XXIII. In his 1976 consistory, five of twenty cardinals originated from Africa, one of them a son of a tribal chief with fifty wives.[134] Several prominent Latin Americans like Eduardo Francisco Pironio of Argentina; Luis Aponte Martinez of Puerto Rico, Eugênio de Araújo Sales and Aloisio Lorscheider from Brazil were also elevated by him. There were voices within the Church at the time saying that the European period of the Church was coming to a close, a view shared by Britain's Cardinal Basil Hume.[134] At the same time, the members of the College of Cardinals lost some of their previous influences, after Paul VI decreed, that membership by bishops in committees and other bodies of the Roman Curia would not be limited to cardinals. The age limit of eighty years imposed by the Pope, a numerical increase of Cardinals by almost 100%, and a reform of the formal dress of the "Princes of the Church" further contributed to a service-oriented perception of Cardinals under his pontificate. The increased number of Cardinals from the Third World and the papal emphasis on related issues was nevertheless welcomed by many in Western Europe.[134]
Final months and death[edit]




Aldo Moro, photographed during his kidnapping by the Red Brigades in 1978






Paul VI's body in the Vatican, after his death


On 16 March 1978, his friend from FUCI student days Aldo Moro, a Christian Democratic politician, was kidnapped by the Red Brigades, which kept the world and the pope in suspense for 55 days.[135] On 20 April, Moro directly appealed to the pope to intervene as Pope Pius XII had intervened in the case of Professor Giuliano Vassalli in the same situation.[136] The eighty-year-old Paul VI wrote a letter to the Red Brigades:

I have no mandate to speak to you, and I am not bound by any private interests in his regard. But I love him as a member of the great human family as a friend of student days and by a very special title as a brother in faith and as a son of the Church of Christ. I make an appeal that you will certainly not ignore. On my knees I beg you, free Aldo Moro, simply without conditions, not so much because of my humble and well-meaning intercession, but because he shares with you the common dignity of a brother in humanity. Men of the Red Brigades, leave me, the interpreter of the voices of so many of our fellow citizens, the hope that in your heart feelings of humanity will triumph. In prayer and always loving you I await proof of that."[136]

Some in the Italian government accused the pope of treating the Red Brigades too kindly. However, he continued looking for ways to pay ransom for Moro – but to no avail. On 9 May, the bullet-riddled body of Aldo Moro was found in a car in Rome.[137] Pope Paul VI later celebrated his State Funeral Mass.
Final days[edit]




The Papal Tiara of Paul VI, now in the Crypt of the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception


Pope Paul VI left the Vatican to go to the papal summer residence, Castel Gandolfo, on 14 July 1978, visiting on the way the tomb of Cardinal Giuseppe Pizzardo,[138] who had introduced him to the Vatican half a century earlier. Although he was sick, he agreed to see the new Italian President Sandro Pertini for over two hours. In the evening he watched a Western on TV, happy only when he saw "horses, the most beautiful animals that God had created."[138] He had breathing problems and needed oxygen. On Sunday, at the Feast of the Transfiguration, he was tired, but wanted to say the Angelus. He was neither able nor permitted to do so and instead stayed in bed, his temperature rising.




Tomb of Paul VI


Death[edit]
From his bed he participated in Sunday Mass at 18:00. After communion, the pope suffered a massive heart attack, after which he continued to live for three hours. On 6 August 1978 at 21:41 Paul VI died in Castel Gandolfo.[138] According to the terms of his will, he was buried in the "true earth" and therefore, he does not have an ornate sarcophagus but in practice beneath the floor of Saint Peter's Basilica, though in an area of the baslica's crypt near the tombs of other popes.[139]
According to some sources, as Paul VI became increasingly ill, he spoke of possibly abdicating the papal throne and going into retirement in the event that he was no longer able to fulfill the duties of the papacy to the full[according to whom?]. His position mirrors the statements attributed to Pius XI "a Pope may suffer but he must be able to function" and by Pius XII.[140] Pope Paul, reflecting on Hamlet, wrote the following in a private note in 1978:

What is my state of mind? Am I Hamlet? Or Don Quixote? On the left? On the right? I do not think I have been properly understood. I am filled with 'great joy (Superabundo gaudio)' With all our affliction, I am overjoyed (2 Cor 2:4).[141]

His confessor, the Jesuit Paolo Dezza, said that "this pope is a man of great joy" [52] and

If Paul VI was not a saint, when he was elected Pope, he became one during his pontificate. I was able to witness not only with what energy and dedication he toiled for Christ and the Church but also and above all, how much he suffered for Christ and the Church. I always admired not only his deep inner resignation but also his constant abandonment to divine providence."[142]

Beatification[edit]




Tapestry of Paul VI on the occasion of his beatification on 19 October 2014


Main article: Beatification of Pope Paul VI
The diocesan process for beatification for Paul VI - titled then as a Servant of God - opened in Rome on 11 May 1993 under Pope John Paul II after the "nihil obstat" ("nothing against") was declared the previous 18 March. Cardinal Camillo Ruini opened the diocesan process in Rome. The title of Servant of God is the first of four steps toward possible canonization. The diocesan process concluded its business on 18 March 1998.[143]
On 20 December 2012, Pope Benedict XVI, in an audience with the Cardinal Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints Angelo Amato, declared that the late pontiff had lived a life of heroic virtue, which means that he could be called "Venerable".[144] A miracle attributed to the intercession of Paul VI was approved on 9 May 2014 by Pope Francis. The beatification ceremony for Paul VI was held on 19 October 2014, which means that he can now be called "Blessed".[145] His liturgical feast day is celebrated on the date of his birth, 26 September, rather than the day of his death as is usual since the latter falls on a major Church feast.[146]
On 12 December 2013, Vatican officials comprising a medical panel approved a supposed miracle that was attributed to the intercession of the late pontiff, which was the curing of an unborn child in California, U.S.A in the 1990s. This miracle was investigated in California from 7 July 2003 until 12 July 2004. It was expected that Pope Francis would approve the miracle in the near future, thus, warranting the beatification of the late pontiff.[147] In February 2014, it was reported that the consulting Vatican theologians to the Congregation for the Causes of Saints recognized the miracle attributed to the late pontiff on 18 February.[148]
On 24 April 2014, it was reported in the Italian magazine Credere that the late pope could possibly be beatified on 19 October 2014. This report from the magazine further stated that several cardinals and bishops would meet on 5 May to confirm the miracle that had previously been approved, and then present it to Pope Francis who may sign the decree for beatification shortly after that.[149] The Congregation for the Causes of Saints' cardinal and bishop members held that meeting and positively concluded that the healing was indeed a miracle that could be attributed to the late pope. The matter would then be presented by the Cardinal Prefect to the pope for approval.[150]
The miracle was formally approved on 9 May 2014 by Pope Francis in an audience with Cardinal Angelo Amato, Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints. The beatification ceremony for Paul VI was held on 19 October 2014 in Saint Peter's Square, which meant that he was titled as "Blessed".[151]
The second miracle required for his canonization was reported to have occurred in 2014 not long after his beatification occured. The vice-postulator Antonio Lanzoni suggested that the canonization could have been approved in the near future which would allow for the canonization sometime in spring 2016; this did not materialize because the investigations were still ongoing at that stage.[152][153][154] It was further reported in January 2017 that Pope Francis was considering canonizing Paul VI either in that year, or in 2018 (marking 40 years since the late pope's death), without the second miracle required for sainthood.[155] This too was proven false since the miracle from 2014 was being presented to the competent Vatican officials for assessment.
The final miracle needed for the late pope's canonization was investigated in Verona and was closed on 11 March 2017. The miracle in question involves the healing of an unborn girl, Amanda Maria Paola (born 25 December 2014), after her parents (Vanna and Alberto) went to the Santuario delle Grazie in Brescia to pray for the late pope's intercession the previous 29 October, just ten days after Paul VI was beatified.[156] The miracle regarding Amanda was the fact that she had survived for months despite the fact that the placenta was broken. On 23 September, a month before the beatification, Amanda's mother Vanna Pironato (aged 35) was hospitalized due to the premature rupture of the placenta, with doctors declaring her pregnancy to be at great risk.[156] The documents regarding the alleged miracle are now in Rome awaiting approval; he shall be canonized should this healing be approved.[157] Theologians advising the Congregation for the Causes of Saints voiced their approval to this miracle on 13 December 2017 and have this direction on to the cardinal and bishop members of the C.C.S. who must vote on the cause also before taking it to Pope Francis for his approval. Brescian media reports the canonization could take place in October 2018 to coincide with the synod on the youth.[158][156]
Legacy and controversies[edit]


Part of a series on the


Catholic social teaching



Emblem of the Holy See



Overview





Social teachings of the Popes
Distributism
Solidarity
Subsidiarity
Tranquillitas ordinis







Pope Leo XIII



Rerum novarum









Pope Pius XI



Divini redemptoris
Mit brennender Sorge
Non abbiamo bisogno
Quadragesimo anno









Pope Pius XII



Social teachings









Pope John XXIII



Mater et magistra
Pacem in terris









Vatican II



Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes









Pope Paul VI



Octogesima adveniens
Populorum progressio









Pope John Paul II



Laborem exercens
Sollicitudo rei socialis
Centesimus annus
Evangelium vitae









Pope Benedict XVI



Caritas in veritate









Pope Francis



Evangelii Gaudium
Laudato si'









Other figures



Gaspard Mermillod
René de La Tour du Pin
Heinrich Pesch
Dorothy Day
Óscar Romero
Joseph Bernardin
Hilaire Belloc
G. K. Chesterton







 Catholicism portal





v
t
e





The pontificate of Paul VI continued the opening and internationalization of the Church started under Pius XII. He implemented the reforms of John XXIII and Vatican II. Yet, unlike these popes, Paul VI faced criticism throughout his papacy from both traditionalists and liberals for steering a middle course during Vatican II and during the implementation of its reforms thereafter.[159] He expressed a desire for peace during the Vietnam War.[160]
On basic Church teachings, the pope was unwavering. On the tenth anniversary of Humanae vitae, he reconfirmed this teaching.[161] In his style and methodology, he was a disciple of Pius XII, whom he deeply revered.[161] He suffered for the attacks on Pius XII for his alleged silences during the Holocaust.[161] Pope Paul VI was said to have been less intellectually gifted than his predecessors: he was not credited with an encyclopedic memory, nor a gift for languages, nor the brilliant writing style of Pius XII,[162] nor did he have the charisma and outpouring love, sense of humor and human warmth of John XXIII. He took on himself the unfinished reform work of these two popes, bringing them diligently with great humility and common sense and without much fanfare to conclusion.[163] In doing so, Paul VI saw himself following in the footsteps of the Apostle Paul, torn to several directions as Saint Paul, who said, "I am attracted to two sides at once, because the Cross always divides."[164]




A statue of Paul VI in Milan, Italy






Paul VI received the Grand Cross First Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany.


Unlike his predecessors and successors, Paul VI refused to excommunicate the opponents. He admonished but did not punish those with other views. The new theological freedoms which he fostered resulted in a pluralism of opinions and uncertainties among the faithful.[165] New demands were voiced, which were taboo at the Council, the reintegration of divorced Catholics, the sacramental character of the confession, and the role of women in the Church and its ministries. Conservatives complained, that "women wanted to be priests, priests wanted to get married, bishops became regional popes and theologians claimed absolute teaching authority. Protestants claimed equality, homosexuals and divorced called for full acceptance."[166] Changes such as the reorientation of the liturgy, alterations to the ordinary of the Mass, alterations to the liturgical calendar in the motu proprio Mysterii Paschalis, and the relocation of the tabernacle were controversial among some Catholics.
Paul VI did renounce many traditional symbols of the papacy and the Catholic Church; some of his changes to the papal dress were reversed by Pope Benedict XVI in the early 21st century. Refusing a Vatican army of colourful military uniforms from centuries, he got rid of them. He became the first pope to visit five continents.[167] Paul VI systematically continued and completed the efforts of his predecessors, to turn the Euro-centric Church into a Church of the world, by integrating the bishops from all continents in its government and in the Synods which he convened. His 6 August 1967 motu proprio Pro Comperto Sane opened the Roman Curia to the bishops of the world. Until then, only Cardinals could be leading members of the Curia.[167]
Some critiqued Paul VI's decision; the newly created Synod of Bishops had an advisory role only and could not make decisions on their own, although the Council decided exactly that. During the pontificate of Paul VI, five such synods took place, and he is on record of implementing all their decisions.[168] Related questions were raised about the new National Bishop Conferences, which became mandatory after Vatican II. Others questioned his Ostpolitik and contacts with Communism and the deals he engaged in for the faithful.[169]
The pope clearly suffered from the responses within the Church to Humanae vitae. While most regions and bishops supported the pontiff, a small but important part of them especially in the Netherlands, Canada, and Germany openly disagreed with the pope, which deeply wounded him for the rest of his life.[170] When Patrick O'Boyle, the Cardinal Archbishop of Washington, DC, disciplined several priests for publicly dissenting from this teaching, the pope encouraged him.
See also[edit]
Directly related:

Paul VI Audience Hall
Paul VI: The Pope in the Tempest

Associated topics:

Credo of the People of God
Liberation theology
List of meetings between the Pope and the President of the United States
List of popes

Notes[edit]



^ English: John Baptist Henry Anthony Mary Montini
^ In theory any male Catholic is eligible for election to the papacy. In fact, his photograph was published in Life magazine with the other potential candidates for the papacy in 1958. However, the cardinals in modern times almost always elect a fellow cardinal to the office.
^ 28 October 1965.
^ In 1984, Paul Hofmann, a former correspondent for the New York Times, repeated the allegations.[81]
^ As a gesture of goodwill, the pope gave to the UN two pieces of papal jewelry, a diamond cross[89] and ring,[90][91] with the hopes that the proceeds from their sale at auction would contribute to the UN's efforts to end human suffering.
^ And John XXIII.



References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ "Memory of Blessd Paul VI". Archdiocese of Milan. 15 May 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2015. 
^ "In the Diocese of Milan. A pastoral community dedicated to Paul VI (in Italian)". 1 October 2014. Retrieved 21 November 2014. 
^ "About Paul VI, Patron of the Institute". Archdiocese of St. Louis. Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ "Paul VI Blessed! (in Italian)". Diocese of Brescia. 2014. Retrieved 28 March 2015. 
^ "Letter to the diocese for calling a "Montinian Year" (in Italian)" (PDF). Diocese of Brescia. 2014. Retrieved 28 March 2015. 
^ "CAPOVILLA, Loris Francesco (1915-)". Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church. Retrieved 22 February 2014. 
^ Catholic Church and ecumenism#Since the Second Vatican Council
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, pp. 322–23.
^ Sharkey, Michael; Weinandy, Thomas, eds. (21 August 2009). International Theological Commission, Vol II: 1986-2007. p. 208. ISBN 1586172263. 
^ 'It's not Easy Being a Christian', says Pope, Rome, IT: Vatican Radio, 11 August 2009, retrieved 19 May 2014 
^ Lazzarini 1964, pp. 20–21.
^ Lazzarini 1964, p. 19.
^ Lazzarini 1964, p. 26.
^ a b Franzen 1988, p. 419.
^ Lazzarini 1964, p. 31.
^ Our History, IT: Morcelliana, archived from the original on 3 April 2015 
^ Fappani, Molinari & Montini 1979, p. 404.
^ Fappani, Molinari & Montini 1979, p. 265.
^ Lazzarini 1964, p. 58.
^ Actes et Documents [Acts & documents] (in French). I–XI. 
^ a b Lazzarini 1964, p. 57.
^ Pallenberg 1960, p. 71.
^ [[#CITEREFHebblethwaite1993|Hebblethwaite 1993]], p. 155.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 195.
^ Tagliaferri, Lionello. The Pope wants ..., Piacenza, Berti, 2011
^ a b Pallenberg 1960, p. 72.
^ Pallenberg 1960, pp. 72–73.
^ "Who We Are". Caritas Italiana. Retrieved 8 February 2017. 
^ a b c d Franzen 1988, p. 420.
^ Lazzarini 1964, p. 169.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, pp. 260–62.
^ Franzen 1988, p. 420.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 266.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 273.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, pp. 714–15.
^ Pacelli, Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni (1953), "La Allocuzione nel consistorio Segreto del 12 Gennaio 1953", Discorsi e Radiomessagi di Sua Santita [Speeches and radio messages from his Holiness] (in Italian), Vatican City, p. 455 
^ "Biography". Pope Paul VI: 1963–1978. Rome, IT: Vatican. Retrieved 2 March 2006. 
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 284.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 296.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 301.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 275.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 276.
^ Lazzarini 1964, p. 63.
^ Zizola, Giancalro (1977). Borla. Rome. p. 157. 
^ L'Osservatore Romano. 17 November 1958. p. 1. 
^ Lazzarini 1964, p. 92.
^ Lazzarini 1964, pp. 90–92.
^ a b c d Duffy 1997, p. 275.
^ Duffy 1997, p. 272.
^ Weigel, George (21 April 2005). "Conclaves: Surprises abound in the Sistine Chapel". Madison Catholic Herald. Retrieved 13 February 2014. 
^ Bunson, Matthew (8 October 2014). "POPE AND PROPHET: The beatification of Paul VI Ceremony brings new appreciation of a pontiff who was much maligned after Vatican II, Humanae Vitae". Our Sunday Visitor. Retrieved 26 December 2016. 
^ a b Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 339.
^ Hebblethwaite 1993.
^ Franzen 1988, pp. 421–22.
^ Franzen 1988, p. 423.
^ a b
^ Franzen 1988, p. 424.
^ Motu Proprio Sanctitas Clarior Archived 2 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c d Franzen 1988, p. 425
^ "Note Storiche". Annuario Pontificio [Pontifical annuary] (in Italian). 2005. pp. 1820 ff. 
^ Montini, Giovanni Battista (15 June 1966). "Apostolic Letter: Ecclesiae Sanctae". Holy See. Retrieved 9 January 2017. 
^ Montini, Giovanni Battista (21 November 1970). "Apostolic Letter: Ingravescentem aetatem" (in Italian). Holy See. Retrieved 9 January 2017. 
^ Franzen 1988, p. 425.
^ Friendly Jr., Alfred (27 November 1970). "Ottaviani Deplores Papal Action Barring Vote of Aged Cardinals". New York Times. Retrieved 9 January 2017. 
^ "Crítica de dos Cardenales contra el Papa Paulo VI" (in Spanish). UP. 26 November 1970. Retrieved 9 January 2017. 
^ Hofmann, Paul (24 November 1970). "Voting for Popes Is Barred to Cardinals Over 80". New York Times. Retrieved 10 January 2017. 
^ Pham, John-Peter (2004). Heirs of the Fisherman: Behind the Scenes of Papal Death and Succession. Oxford University Press. p. 66. 
^ Gagliarducci, Andrea (13 October 2016). "What's the thought behind Pope Francis' choices for cardinals?". Catholic News Agency. Retrieved 9 January 2017. 
^ Miller, Lisa (28 March 2000). "John Paul's Frailty Sparks Debate on Papal Retirement". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 10 January 2017. 
^ Adam 1985, pp. 47–48.
^ Adam 1985, p. 49.
^ Joseph Ratzinger (7 July 2007). "To the Bishops on the occasion of the publication of the motu proprio 'Summorum Pontificum'" (letter). Rome, IT: Vatican. Archived from the original on 29 September 2010. Retrieved 12 September 2010. 
^ a b Guitton 1967, p. 172.
^ Franzen 1988, p. 427.
^ http://www.vatican.va/roman_curia/congregations/cfaith/documents/rc_con_cfaith_doc_19751229_persona-humana_en.html
^ Hitchens, Christopher (28 February 2013). "Christopher Hitchens on the death of Pope Paul VI". New Statesman. 
^ Peyrefitte, Roger Mea culpa? Ma fatemi il santo piacere, Tempo, 4 April 1976.
^ a b Torress, Jose (5 April 1976). "Paul VI Denies He Is Homosexual". Observer Reporter. Associated Press. p. 27. 
^ Bellegrandi, Franco Nichitaroncalli: Controvita Di Un Papa, Edizioni Internazionale Di Letterature E Scienze (EILES), Rome 2009. English edition: Nikitaroncalli: Counterlife of a Pope
^ a b c Posner, Gerald (2015). God's Bankers: A History of Money and Power at the Vatican. Simon and Schuster. p. 174. 
^ Hoffman, Paul (1984). Oh Vatican! A Slightly Wicked View Of The Holy See. New York: Congdon & Weed. p. 151. 
^ Bellegrandi, Franco (1994). Nichita Roncalli - Controvita di un Papa. Rome: Editizioni Internazionale di Letterature e Scienze. pp. 85–86, 91–92. 
^ Dino, Martirano (27 January 2006). "Dossier su un tentato ricatto a Paolo VI". Corriere Della Sera (in Italian). 
^ "Pope Paul VI's Apostolic Pilgrimage to Uganda, 31st July - 2nd August 1969". Retrieved 29 October 2016. 
^ "Uganda 1969: Paul VI the first Pope to visit Africa". Retrieved 29 October 2016. 
^ "On this day: November 27". KCCI-TV News. 27 November 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2014. 
^ "Pope Paul VI Beatified as 'Great Helmsman' of Vatican II". Catholic New York. 20 October 2014. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 3 November 2014. 
^ "Apostle Endangered". Time, 7 December 1970. Retrieved 13 April 2007.
^ "Pope Paul VI's Diamond Cross". Rau Antiques. Retrieved 2015-10-05. 
^ "Pope Paul VI's Diamond Ring". Rau Antiques. Retrieved 2015-10-05. 
^ "Diamond Jewelry Owned By Pope Paul VI On Sale For $1.9 Million". Forbes. Retrieved 2015-11-23. 
^ Montini, Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria. "Speeches". The Vatican: The Holy See. Retrieved 23 June 2013. 
^ "The conflict in Vietnam widens". UPI. 1965. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013. 
^ http://www.upi.com/News_Photos/view/upi/c3c63bdf79379c9f4ea490fd44bef1a5/Msgr-Pasquale-Macci-foils-assassination-attempt-on-Pope-Paul-VI-in-Manila/
^ a b Franzen 1988, p. 430
^ Franzen 1991, p. 391.
^ Colgrove, Rosemary (2010). Eye on the Sparrow: The Remarkable Journey of Father Joseph Nisari, Pakistani Priest. Hillcrest Publishing Group. pp. 112–113. ISBN 9781936400874. 
^ Ecclesiam suam, 58
^ Mense maio, 1
^ Franzen 426
^ "1968 Year in Review". United Press International. Retrieved 12 September 2010. 
^ Germain Grisez on "Humanae Vitae," Then and Now Archived 11 November 2004 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved 2 March 2006.
^ Humanae vitae, 2–8
^ Pius XI, encyc.letter Divini illius Magistri: AAS 22 (1930), 58–61; encyc. letter Casti connubii: AAS 22 (1930), 545–546
^ Discorsi e radiomessaggi di Pio XII, VI, 191–192; to Italian Association of Catholic Midwives: AAS 43 (1951), 835–854
^ John XXIII, encyc. letter Mater et magistra: AAS 53 (1961), 457.
^ Herder Korrespondenz, Orbis Catholicus Freiburg, Herder Verlag, 1964–1968
^ a b Humanae vitae, 1 
^ Humanae vitae, 7 
^ Humanae vitae, 8–9 .
^ Herder Korrespondenz Orbis Catholicus, 1968 .
^ a b Herder Korrespondenz, Freiburg: Orbis Catholicus, 1968, HK 1968 549 
^ Sic, 31 (308), October 1968, pp. 359–79 
^ National Catholic Reporter, 26 August 1988, p. 10 
^ "Biography", Pope Paul VI: 1963–1978, Rome, IT: Vatican, retrieved 2 March 2006 
^ Schmidt, pp. 811–12.
^ Guitton 1967, p. 177.
^ Guitton 1967, p. 181.
^ Guitton 1967, p. 185.
^ a b Franzen 1988, p. 429
^ Paul VI; Shenouda III (10 May 1973). "Common Declaration of Pope Paul VI and of the Pope of Alexandria Shenouda III". Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 18 April 2005. Retrieved 19 September 2016. 
^ Guitton 1967, p. 198.
^ a b c Schmidt 813
^ Schmidt 814
^ Schmidt 815
^ Schmidt 822–824
^ Schmidt 826
^ Schmidt 827.
^ Schmidt 830,
^ Schmidt 831
^ Schmidt 833
^ Schmidt 835
^ Schmidt 837
^ a b c d Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 669.
^ Hebblethwaite 699
^ a b Hebblethwaite 700–701
^ Hebblethwaite 706
^ a b c Hebblethwaite 707
^ Kenneth A. Briggs (7 August 1978). "Pope Paul VI Is Dead of a Heart Attack at 80; Guided the Church Through Era of Change". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 July 2007. 
^ Leiber, Robert (December 1958). "Pius XII". Stimmen der Zeit. 
^ Daly, Cathal B (1998), Steps on my Pilgrim Journey, Veritas 
^ Hebblethwaite 1993, p. 600.
^ "Catholic Press" (translator). Microsoft. Retrieved 23 June 2013. 
^ "translator". Microsoft. Retrieved 23 June 2013. 
^ "Pope Paul VI to be beatified October 19, 2014". Vatican Radio. 10 May 2014. Retrieved 10 May 2014. 
^ "Booklet of the Beatification of Paul VI" (PDF). Holy See. 18 October 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 October 2014. Retrieved 18 October 2014. 
^ "Alleged miracle puts Pope Paul VI one step closer to sainthood". US Catholic. Retrieved 5 January 2014. 
^ "Pope Benedict Forgoes Waiting Period, begins John Paul II Beatification Process" Catholic News Agency 13 May 2005 Retrieved 1 May 2011
^ "Pope Paul VI 'to be beatified this year'". 24 April 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2014. 
^ "Paul VI set for beatification". ANSA. 6 May 2014. Retrieved 6 May 2014. 
^ "Pope Paul VI to be beatified October 19, 2014". Vatican Radio. 10 May 2014. Retrieved 10 May 2014. 
^ "Paul VI made a miracle". Italia Oggi. 14 January 2015. Retrieved 17 August 2015. 
^ "Saint Paul VI soon". RMF Online. 16 January 2015. Retrieved 17 August 2015. 
^ "Violist healed by Paul VI? The Church is listening and evaluating". Brescia Oggi. 13 August 2015. Retrieved 17 August 2015. 
^ "Pablo VI en los altares de Bergoglio". Vida Nueva. 13 January 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2017. 
^ a b c "Paolo VI Santo: una bella notizia". La Voce del Popolo. 22 December 2017. Retrieved 27 December 2017. 
^ "Alcuni incontri del Vescovo". Diocesi di Verona. March 2017. Retrieved 19 July 2017. 
^ Iacopo Scaramuzzi (21 December 2017). "Primi ok al miracolo, passo Avanti per Paolo VI santo". La Stampa. Retrieved 22 December 2017. 
^ Graham 1983, p. 75.
^ "Pope Paul VI, Address to the United Nations General Assembly". Handbook of Catholic Social Teaching: War and Peace. SHC. 1965. Archived from the original on 13 July 2013. Retrieved 13 July 2013. No more war, war never again! Peace, it is peace which must guide the destinies of people and of all mankind. 
^ a b c
^ Pallenberg 1960, p. 107.
^ Graham 1983, p. 76.
^ Guitton 1967, p. 159.
^ Franzen 1991, p. 389.
^ Martin 1981, p. 277.
^ a b Josef Schmitz van Vorst, 68
^ Simmel, 80
^ Simmel, 82
^ Simmel, 81


Sources[edit]

Adam, A (1985), Liturgie, Freiburg: Herder .
Alnor, William M. Soothsayers of the Second Advent. 
Duffy, Eamon (1997). Saints and Sinners, A History of the Popes. Yale University Press. .
Fappani, Antonio; Molinari, Franco; Montini, Giovanni Battista (1979), Giovane, documenti inediti e testimonianze [Youth, unedited documents and testimonies], Turino: Maretti .
Franzen, August (1988), Papstgeschichte (in German), Freiburg: Herder , quoted as Franzen.
——— (1991), Kleine Kichengeschichte (in German), Herder: Freiburg , quoted as Franzen, Kirchengeschichte
Gonzalez, JL; Perez, T (1964), Paul VI, Paulist Press 
Graham (7 November 1983), Paul VI, A Great Pontificate, Brescia .
Guitton, Jean (1967). Dialog mit Paul VI [Dialogues with Paul VI] (in German). Wien: Molden. .
Hebblethwaite, Peter (1993). Paul VI: The First Modern Pope. Paulist Press. ISBN 0-8091-0461-X. .
Lazzarini, Andrea (1964). Paolo VI, Profilo di Montini [Paul IV: profile of Montini] (in Italian). Roma, IT: Casa Editrice Herder.  quoted from Papst Paul VI (in German), Freiburg: Herder, 1964 .
Malachi Martin (1972). Three Popes and the Cardinal. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. ISBN 0-374-27675-7. .
——— (1981), The Decline and Fall of the Roman Church, New York: Putnam .
Pallenberg, Corrado (1960), "Inside the Vatican", Michigan University, Hawthorn Books, p. 273 .
Rahman, Tahir (2007). We Came in Peace for all Mankind – the Untold Story of the Apollo 11 Silicon Disc. Leathers. ISBN 978-1-58597-441-2. 

External links[edit]



Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Paul VI





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paulus VI.



Montini, Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria, Apostolic Constitutions, Encyclicals and documents issued, as well as his Last Will and Testament (list), Catholic pages .
———, The writings, Saint Mike .
———, "Quotes", Brainy Quote .
Montini, Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria, Opera Omnia [Complete works] (in Latin), EU: Documenta catholica omnia .
Janet E. Smith, Pro-Humanæ Vitæ analysis, Good morals , former Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Dallas.
Wojtyla, Cardinal Karol, The truth of the encyclical "Humanæ vitæ", EWTN .
American attitudes towards Humanæ Vitæ, PBS .
"Tomb of Paul VI", Vatican Grottoes, St. Peter's Basilica .
Impostor, TLDM , comparing pictures of Pope Paul VI to 'prove' he had been replaced by an actor while the real Pope Paul was 'kept drugged' in the Vatican.
Pope Paul VI, IntraText : text, concordances and frequency list
"Pope Paul VI". Pathé News (video archive). .


Documentaries with English subtitles


"Paulus VI, a forgotten pope", YouTube (video) (in Italian), Google .
"The assassination attempt of Paulus VI", YouTube (video) (in Italian), Google .
"The last years of Paulus VI (G.B. Montini 1974–78)", YouTube (video) (in Italian), Google .



Catholic Church titles


Preceded by
Federico Tedeschini
Substitute for General Affairs
13 December 1937 – 17 February 1953
Succeeded by
Angelo Dell'Acqua


Preceded by
Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster
Archbishop of Milan
1 November 1954 – 21 June 1963
Succeeded by
Giovanni Colombo


Preceded by
Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster
Cardinal-Priest of Santi Silvestro e Martino ai Monti
18 December 1958 – 21 June 1963
Succeeded by
Giovanni Colombo


Preceded by
John XXIII
Pope
21 June 1963 – 6 August 1978
Succeeded by
John Paul I








v
t
e


List of Popes






List of popes

graphical
canonised


Tombs

extant
non-extant


Antipope
Pope emeritus

Papal resignation


Pope-elect





1st–4th centuries
During the Roman Empire (until 493)
including under Constantine (312–337)



Peter
Linus
Anacletus
Clement I
Evaristus
Alexander I
Sixtus I
Telesphorus
Hyginus
Pius I
Anicetus
Soter
Eleutherius
Victor I
Zephyrinus
Callixtus I
Urban I
Pontian
Anterus
Fabian
Cornelius
Lucius I
Stephen I
Sixtus II
Dionysius
Felix I
Eutychian
Caius
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Eusebius
Miltiades
Sylvester I
Mark
Julius I
Liberius
Damasus I
Siricius
Anastasius I








5th–8th centuries
Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537)
Byzantine Papacy (537–752)
Frankish Papacy (756–857)



Innocent I
Zosimus
Boniface I
Celestine I
Sixtus III
Leo I
Hilarius
Simplicius
Felix III
Gelasius I
Anastasius II
Symmachus
Hormisdas
John I
Felix IV
Boniface II
John II
Agapetus I
Silverius
Vigilius
Pelagius I
John III
Benedict I
Pelagius II
Gregory I
Sabinian
Boniface III
Boniface IV
Adeodatus I
Boniface V
Honorius I
Severinus
John IV
Theodore I
Martin I
Eugene I
Vitalian
Adeodatus II
Donus
Agatho
Leo II
Benedict II
John V
Conon
Sergius I
John VI
John VII
Sisinnius
Constantine
Gregory II
Gregory III
Zachary
Stephen II
Paul I
Stephen III
Adrian I
Leo III





9th–12th centuries
Papal selection before 1059
Saeculum obscurum (904–964)
Crescentii era (974–1012)
Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044/1048)
Imperial Papacy (1048–1257)



Stephen IV
Paschal I
Eugene II
Valentine
Gregory IV
Sergius II
Leo IV
Benedict III
Nicholas I
Adrian II
John VIII
Marinus I
Adrian III
Stephen V
Formosus
Boniface VI
Stephen VI
Romanus
Theodore II
John IX
Benedict IV
Leo V
Sergius III
Anastasius III
Lando
John X
Leo VI
Stephen VII
John XI
Leo VII
Stephen VIII
Marinus II
Agapetus II
John XII
Benedict V
Leo VIII
John XIII
Benedict VI
Benedict VII
John XIV
John XV
Gregory V
Sylvester II
John XVII
John XVIII
Sergius IV
Benedict VIII
John XIX
Benedict IX
Sylvester III
Benedict IX
Gregory VI
Clement II
Benedict IX
Damasus II
Leo IX
Victor II
Stephen IX
Nicholas II
Alexander II
Gregory VII
Victor III
Urban II
Paschal II
Gelasius II
Callixtus II
Honorius II
Innocent II
Celestine II
Lucius II
Eugene III
Anastasius IV
Adrian IV
Alexander III
Lucius III
Urban III
Gregory VIII
Clement III
Celestine III
Innocent III





13th–16th centuries
Viterbo (1257–1281)
Orvieto (1262–1297)
Perugia (1228–1304)
Avignon Papacy (1309–1378)
Western Schism (1378–1417)
Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534)
Reformation Papacy (1534–1585)
Baroque Papacy (1585–1689)



Honorius III
Gregory IX
Celestine IV
Innocent IV
Alexander IV
Urban IV
Clement IV
Gregory X
Innocent V
Adrian V
John XXI
Nicholas III
Martin IV
Honorius IV
Nicholas IV
Celestine V
Boniface VIII
Benedict XI
Clement V
John XXII
Benedict XII
Clement VI
Innocent VI
Urban V
Gregory XI
Urban VI
Boniface IX
Innocent VII
Gregory XII
Martin V
Eugene IV
Nicholas V
Callixtus III
Pius II
Paul II
Sixtus IV
Innocent VIII
Alexander VI
Pius III
Julius II
Leo X
Adrian VI
Clement VII
Paul III
Julius III
Marcellus II
Paul IV
Pius IV
Pius V
Gregory XIII
Sixtus V
Urban VII
Gregory XIV
Innocent IX
Clement VIII





17th–20th centuries
Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848)
Roman Question (1870–1929)
Vatican City (1929–present)
World War II (1939–1945)
Cold War (1945–1991)



Leo XI
Paul V
Gregory XV
Urban VIII
Innocent X
Alexander VII
Clement IX
Clement X
Innocent XI
Alexander VIII
Innocent XII
Clement XI
Innocent XIII
Benedict XIII
Clement XII
Benedict XIV
Clement XIII
Clement XIV
Pius VI
Pius VII
Leo XII
Pius VIII
Gregory XVI
Pius IX
Leo XIII
Pius X
Benedict XV
Pius XI
Pius XII
John XXIII
Paul VI
John Paul I
John Paul II





21st century



Benedict XVI
Francis





History of the papacy




Antiquity and Early
Middle Ages



During the Roman Empire (until 493)

Under Constantine (312–337)


Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537)
Byzantine Papacy (537–752)
Frankish Papacy (756–857)
Saeculum obscurum (904–964)
Crescentii era (974–1012)





High and Late
Middle Ages



Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044 / 1048)
Imperial Papacy (1048–1257)
Wandering Papacy

Viterbo, 1257–1281
Orvieto, 1262–1297
Perugia, 1228–1304


Avignon Papacy (1309–1378)
Western Schism (1378–1417)





Early Modern and
Modern Era



Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534)
Reformation Papacy (1534–1585)
Baroque Papacy (1585–1689)
Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848)
Roman Question (1870–1929)
Vatican City (1929–present)

WWII (1939–1945)













 Book
 Category
 Pope portal
 Catholicism portal












v
t
e


Catholic Church






Index
Outline





History
(Timeline)



Jesus
Holy Family

Mary
Joseph


Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Council of Trent
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index






Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Ecumenism
Dei verbum
Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum concilium











Hierarchy
(Precedence)




Pope (List)



Pope Francis (2013–)

conclave
inauguration
theology
canonizations
visits


Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI (2005–2013)







Roman Curia
College of Cardinals

Cardinal


Patriarchate
Episcopal conference
Patriarch
Major archbishop
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop
Titular bishop
Bishop emeritus
Abbot
Abbess
Superior general
Provincial superior
Grand Master
Prior (-ess)
Priest
Brother

Friar


Sister
Monk
Nun
Hermit
Master of novices
Novice
Oblate
Postulant
Laity





Theology



Body and soul
Bible
Catechism
Divine grace
Dogma
Ecclesiology

Four Marks of the Church


Original sin

List


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship




Mariology



Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration








Philosophy



Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers





Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy orders
Matrimony





Saints



Mary
Apostles
Archangels
Confessors
Disciples
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Church Fathers
Martyrs
Patriarchs
Prophets
Virgins





Doctors
of the
Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Institutes,
orders,
and societies



Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines





Associations
of the faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Apostolic Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Community of Sant'Egidio





Charities



Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas Internationalis
Catholic Home Missions
Catholic Relief Services
CIDSE





Particular
churches
(By country)



Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches: Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian




Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Latin

Anglican Use
Ambrosian
Mozarabic
Roman


West Syrian











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal


 Book
Name
 Media

 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject














v
t
e


History of the Catholic Church



General



History of the Catholic Church

By country or region


History of the Papacy
Timeline of the Catholic Church
Catholic Ecumenical Councils
History of the Roman Curia
Catholic Church art
Religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Papal States
Role of Christianity in civilization








Church beginnings,
Great Church



Jesus
John the Baptist
Apostles

Peter
John
Paul


Saint Stephen
Great Commission
Council of Jerusalem
Apostolic Age
Apostolic Fathers
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus
Pope Victor I
Tertullian






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Constantine the Great and Christianity
Arianism
Archbasilica of St. John Lateran
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Benedict of Nursia
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant





Early Middle Ages



Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East–West Schism





High Middle Ages



Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Thomas Aquinas





Late Middle Ages



Pope Boniface VIII
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI






Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the Monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine






Baroque Period to the
French Revolution




Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution





19th century



Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum





20th century



Pope Pius X
Our Lady of Fátima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI
Pope John Paul I
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day

1995
2000







21st century



Catholic Church sexual abuse cases
Pope Benedict XVI
World Youth Day

2002
2005
2008
2011
2013
2016


Pope Francis








 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal
 Catholicism portal












v
t
e


Bishops and Archbishops of Milan



Ancient Age



St Apostle Barnabas (1st-century, his coming to Milan is probably legendary)
St Anathalon
St Caius
St Castricianus
St Calimerus (about 270 – 280)
St Monas (283–313?)
St Mirocles (313–316?)
St Maternus (316–328?)
St Protasius (328–343?)
St Eustorgius I (343–349?)
St Dionysius (349–355)
Auxentius (355–374, considered an intruder by the Catholic Church)
St Ambrose (374–397)
St Simplician (397–400)
St Venerius (400–408)
St Marolus (408–423)
St Martinianus (423–435)
St Glycerius (436–438)
St Lazarus (438–449)
St Eusebius (449–462)
St Gerontius (462–465)
St Benignus (465–472)
St Senator (472–475)
St Theodorus I (475–490)
St Lawrence I (490–512)
St Eustorgius II (512–518)
St Magnus (518–530?)
St Dacius (530–552)
Vitale (552–556)
St Ausanus (556–559?)





Genoa Period



St Honoratus (560–571?)
Frontone (571–573?)
Lawrence II (573–592)
Constantius (593–600)
Deodatus (601–628)
Asterius (629–639)
Forte (639–641)





Middle Age



St John the Good (641–669)
St Antonino (669–671)
St Maurilio (671)
St Ampelius (671–676)
St Mansuetus (676–685)
St Benedict (685–732)
Theodorus II (732–746)
St Natalis (746–747)
Arifred (747–748)
Stabile (748–750)
Leto (751–755)
Thomas (755–783)
Peter (784–803)
Odelpert (803–813)
St Anselm I (813–818)
St Buono (818–822)
Angilbert I (822–823)
Angilbert II Pusterla (824–859)
Tadone (860–868)
Anspert (868–881)
Anselmo II Capra (882–896)
Landulf I (896–899)
Andrea of Canciano (899–906)
Aicone (906–918)
Gariberto of Besana (918–921)
Lambert (921–931)
Elduin (931–936)
Arderico (936–948)
Adelman (948–953)
Walpert (953–970)
Arnulf I (970–974)
Gotofredo I (974–979)
Landulf II of Carcano (980–998)
Arnolfo II da Arsago (998–1018)
Ariberto da Intimiano (1018–1045)
St Guido da Velate (1045–1069)
Attone (1070–1075)
Gotofredo II da Castiglione (1070–1075, antibishop)
Tebald da Castiglione (1075–1080)
Anselmo III da Rho (1086–1093)
Arnolfo III (1093–1097)
Anselmo IV da Bovisio (1097–1101)
Grossolano (1102–1112)
Giordano da Clivio (1112–1120)
Ulrich da Corte (1120–1126)
Anselmo V della Pusterla (1126–1135)
Robaldo (1135–1145)
Umberto I da Pirovano (1146–1166)
St Galdino della Sala (1166–1176)
Algisio da Pirovano (1176–1185)
Umberto II Crivelli (1185–1187, elected Pope Urban III)
Milone da Cardano (1187–1195)
Umberto III da Terzago (1195–1196)
Filippo I da Lampugnano (1196–1206)
Umberto IV da Pirovano (1206–1211)
Gerardo da Sessa (1211–1212)
Enrico I da Settala (1213–1230)
Guglielmo I da Rizolio (1230–1241)
Leon da Perego (1241–1257)
Ottone Visconti (1262–1295)
Ruffino da Frisseto (1295–1296)
Francesco I da Parma (1296–1308)
Cassone della Torre (1308–1317)
Aicardo da Intimiano (1317–1339)
Giovanni II Visconti (1342–1354)
Roberto Visconti (1354–1361)
Guglielmo II della Pusterla (1361–1370)
Simon da Borsano (1370–1380)
Antonio de' Saluzzi (1380–1401)
Pietro II di Candia (1402–1410)
Francesco II Crippa (1409–1414)
Bartolommeo Capra (1414–1433)
Francesco III Piccolpasso (1433–1443)
Enrico II Rampini (1443–1450)
Giovanni III Visconti (1450–1453)
Nicolò Amidano (1453–1454)
Timoteo Maffei (1454)
Gabriele Sforza (1454–1457)
Carlo I da Forlì (1457–1461)
Stefano Nardini (1461–1484)
Giovan IV Arcimboldi (1484–1488)
Guido Antonio Arcimboldi (1488–1497)
Ottaviano Arcimboldi (1497)
Ippolito I d'Este (1497–1520)
Ippolito II d'Este (1520–1550)
Giovan Angelo Arcimboldi (1550–1555)
Filippo II Archinto (1556–1558)
vacant





Modern Age



St. Carlo Borromeo (1564–1584)
Gaspare Visconti (1584–1595)
Federico I Borromeo (1595–1631)
Cesare Monti (1632–1650)
Alfonso Litta (1652–1679)
Federico II Visconti (1681–1693)
Federico III Caccia (1693–1699)
Giuseppe Archinto (1699–1712)
Benedetto II Erba Odescalchi (1712–1737)
Carlo Gaetano Stampa (1737–1742)
Giuseppe II Pozzobonelli (1743–1783)
Filippo Maria Visconti (1784–1801)
Giovanni Battista Caprara (1802–1810)
vacant
Carlo Gaetano Gaisruck (1818–1846)
Bartolomeo Carlo Romilli (1847–1859)
Paolo Angelo Ballerini (1859–1867)
Luigi Nazari di Calabiana (1867–1893)
Bl. Andrea Ferrari (1894–1921)
Ambrogio Damiano Achille Ratti (1921–1922, elected Pope Pius XI)
Eugenio Tosi (1922–1929)
Bl. Ildefonso Schuster (1929–1954)
Giovanni Battista Montini (1954–1963, elected Pope Paul VI)
Giovanni Colombo (1963–1979)
Carlo Maria Martini, SJ (1979–2002)
Dionigi Tettamanzi (2002–2011)
Angelo Scola (2011–2017)
Mario Delpini (2017-present)








 Catholicism portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 61533321
LCCN: n79054084
ISNI: 0000 0001 2135 5247
GND: 118592076
SELIBR: 82865
SUDOC: 027060969
BNF: cb11918828k (data)
BIBSYS: 90717845
ULAN: 500323773
NLA: 36176057
NDL: 00452317
NKC: jn20000701384
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\003027
BNE: XX1645263
IATH: w6tt5f35











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pope_Paul_VI&oldid=817268387"					Categories: 1897 births1978 deathsPeople from the Province of BresciaPope Paul VIPopes20th-century popesArchbishops of MilanParticipants in the Second Vatican CouncilItalian popesItalian beatified peopleBeatified popesPontifical Gregorian University alumniDiplomats of the Holy See20th-century venerated ChristiansPontifical Ecclesiastical Academy alumni20th-century Roman Catholic archbishopsGrand Crosses 1st class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of GermanyBurials at St. Peter's BasilicaCardinals created by Pope John XXIIIBeatifications by Pope FrancisVenerated Catholics by Pope Benedict XVIRecipients of the Silver World AwardHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 Italian-language sources (it)Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Use dmy dates from March 2013Articles containing Latin-language textArticles containing Italian-language textWikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2014All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2016CS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 Latin-language sources (la)Pages using S-rel template with ca parameterAC with 15 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers