







This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in French.  (May 2012) Click [show] for important translation instructions. 


View a machine-translated version of the French article.
Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.
Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.
You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary (using German): Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Exact name of German article]]; see its history for attribution.
You should also add the template {{Translated|fr|Chiffres de population de la France}} to the talk page.
For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation.







Population without double counting is an English translation of the French phrase Population sans doubles comptes.
In France, for the purposes of the census, the INSEE has defined several population indicators that allow people who live in more than one place to be counted in each place, to study and keep count of population movement. So each commune in France does not have only one figure for the population, but several; for example students may be counted both where they study and where they live when not studying. A parallel may be drawn to English laws that allow students to register and vote in local elections in more than one place.



Contents


1 Statistical view
2 Legal aspects
3 Notes and references
4 External links



Statistical view[edit]
The figures given by INSEE for a particular commune are :

Population municipale 
a count of the people who live in a house, flat etc. in the commune
Population comptée à part 
those living in a collective or temporary manner (e.g. prisoners, soldiers, hospital patients, nuns, monks)
Population totale 
the sum of population municipale and population comptée à part
Doubles comptes 
a sub-division of population comptée à part, comprising those who have a second residence in another commune and are already counted in that commune's population municipale
Population sans doubles comptes 
the population totale minus the doubles comptes[1]

The population sans doubles comptes is therefore always no smaller than the population municipale and no larger than the population totale.
To evaluate the population properly, one should use the population sans doubles comptes.
Since 1999, places with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants have had a census every five years, with one-fifth of the places each year being subject to census.
Since 2004, places with 10,000 inhabitants or more have an annual census of a sample 8% of the population. This is carried out in January and February. A census collector leaves a questionnaire and collects it at a later date.[citation needed] Since this time, population municipale and population sans doubles comptes have had the same meaning.
Legal aspects[edit]
Census results are official by law.
The population totale is used when applying rules and regulations to budget and finance, in particular in section R2151-2 of the Code of Territorial Collectives.[1] But the population municipale determines the size of a council and the scrutiny of municipal elections, R2151-3.[1]
Notes and references[edit]



^ a b c "Population de la Commune", Code géneral des collectives territoriales (in French), retrieved 2009-04-14 



External links[edit]

Les définitions officielles sur le site de l'INSEE (in French)  The official definitions on the INSEE site
Pour comprendre le recensement de la population (in French), Insee Méthodes., May 2005  Understanding the census.
l'histoire du recensement (PDF) (in French)  The history of the census
Glossaire (PDF) (in French)  Glossary.
Les données du dernier recensement (in French)  The results of the last (1999) census.
Population en chiffres (in French)  Population, a page per view.
Population des communes de France de plus de 2000 habitants (in French)  Population of French communes of more than 2000 inhabitants.






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Population_without_double_counting&oldid=781388077"					Categories: Demographics of FranceHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles to be expanded from May 2012All articles to be expandedArticles needing translation from French WikipediaAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2009