For other uses, see Population (disambiguation).




The distribution of human world population in 1994






Key


In biology, a population is all the organisms of the same group or species, which live in a particular geographical area, and have the capability of interbreeding.[1][2] The area that is used to define a sexual population is defined as the area where inter-breeding is potentially possible between any pair within the area, and where the probability of interbreeding is greater than the probability of cross-breeding with individuals from other areas.[3]
In sociology, population refers to a collection of humans. Demography is a social science which entails the statistical study of human populations.
This article refers mainly to human population.



Contents


1 Population genetics (ecology)
2 World human population

2.1 Predicted growth and decline
2.2 Control


3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Population genetics (ecology)[edit]
In population genetics a sexual population is a set of organisms in which any pair of members can breed together. This means that they can regularly exchange gametes to produce normally-fertile offspring, and such a breeding group is also known therefore as a Gamo deme. This also implies that all members belong to the same species.[4] If the Gamo deme is very large (theoretically, approaching infinity), and all gene alleles are uniformly distributed by the gametes within it, the Gamo deme is said to be panmictic. Under this state, allele (gamete) frequencies can be converted to genotype (zygote) frequencies by expanding an appropriate quadratic equation, as shown by Sir Ronald Fisher in his establishment of quantitative genetics.[5]
This seldom occurs in nature: localization of gamete exchange – through dispersal limitations, preferential mating, cataclysm, or other cause – may lead to small actual Gamo demes which exchange gametes reasonably uniformly within themselves but are virtually separated from their neighboring Gamo demes. However, there may be low frequencies of exchange with these neighbors. This may be viewed as the breaking up of a large sexual population (panmictic) into smaller overlapping sexual populations. This failure of panmixia leads to two important changes in overall population structure: (1) the component Gamo demos vary (through gamete sampling) in their allele frequencies when compared with each other and with the theoretical panmictic original (this is known as dispersion, and its details can be estimated using expansion of an appropriate binomial equation); and (2) the level of homozygosity rises in the entire collection of Gamo demes. The overall rise in homozygosity is quantified by the inbreeding coefficient (f or φ). Note that all homozygotes are increased in frequency – both the deleterious and the desirable. The mean phenotype of the Gamo demes collection is lower than that of the panmictic original – which is known as inbreeding depression. It is most important to note, however, that some dispersion lines will be superior to the panmictic original, while some will be about the same, and some will be inferior. The probabilities of each can be estimated from those binomial equations. In plant and animal breeding, procedures have been developed which deliberately utilize the effects of dispersion (such as line breeding, pure-line breeding, backcrossing). It can be shown that dispersion-assisted selection leads to the greatest genetic advance (ΔG=change in the phenotypic mean), and is much more powerful than selection acting without attendant dispersion. This is so for both allogamous (random fertilization)[6] and autogamous (self-fertilization) Gamo demes.[7]
In ecology, the population of a certain species in a certain area can be estimated using the Lincoln Index.
World human population[edit]
Main article: World population
As of today's date, the world's population is estimated by the United States Census Bureau to be 7.592 billion.[8] The US Census Bureau estimates the 7 billion number was surpassed on 12 March 2012. According to a separate estimate by the United Nations, Earth’s population exceeded seven billion in October 2011, a milestone that offers unprecedented challenges and opportunities to all of humanity, according to UNFPA, the United Nations Population Fund.[9]
According to papers published by the United States Census Bureau, the world population hit 6.5 billion on 24 February 2006. The United Nations Population Fund designated 12 October 1999 as the approximate day on which world population reached 6 billion. This was about 12 years after world population reached 5 billion in 1987, and 6 years after world population reached 5.5 billion in 1993. The population of countries such as Nigeria, is not even known to the nearest million,[10] so there is a considerable margin of error in such estimates.[11]
Researcher Carl Haub calculated that a total of over 100 billion people have probably been born in the last 2000 years.[12]
Predicted growth and decline[edit]




The years taken for every billion people to be added to the world's population, and the years that population was reached (with future estimates).


Main article: Population growth
Population growth increased significantly as the Industrial Revolution gathered pace from 1700 onwards.[13] The last 50 years have seen a yet more rapid increase in the rate of population growth[13] due to medical advances and substantial increases in agricultural productivity, particularly beginning in the 1960s,[14] made by the Green Revolution.[15] In 2007 the United Nations Population Division projected that the world's population will likely surpass 10 billion in 2055.[16]




PRB 2017 Data Sheet Largest Populations


In the future, the world's population is expected to peak,[17] after which it will decline due to economic reasons, health concerns, land exhaustion and environmental hazards. According to one report, it is very likely that the world's population will stop growing before the end of the 21st century. Further, there is some likelihood that population will actually decline before 2100.[18][19] Population has already declined in the last decade or two in Eastern Europe, the Baltics and in the Commonwealth of Independent States.[20]
The population pattern of less-developed regions of the world in recent years has been marked by gradually declining birth rates. These followed an earlier sharp reduction in death rates.[21] This transition from high birth and death rates to low birth and death rates is often referred to as the demographic transition.[21]
Control[edit]
Main article: Human population control
Human population control is the practice of altering the rate of growth of a human population. Historically, human population control has been implemented with the goal of increasing the rate of population growth. In the period from the 1950s to the 1980s, concerns about global population growth and its effects on poverty, environmental degradation, and political stability led to efforts to reduce population growth rates. While population control can involve measures that improve people's lives by giving them greater control of their reproduction, a few programs, most notably the Chinese government's one-child per family policy, have resorted to coercive measures.
In the 1970s, tension grew between population control advocates and women's health activists who advanced women's reproductive rights as part of a human rights-based approach.[22] Growing opposition to the narrow population control focus led to a significant change in population control policies in the early 1980s.[23]
See also[edit]

Community (ecology)
List of countries by population
Lists of organisms by population

References[edit]


^ "Population". Biology Online. Retrieved 5 December 2012. 
^ "Definition of population (biology)". Oxford Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 5 December 2012. a community of animals, plants, or humans among whose members interbreeding occurs 
^ Hartl, Daniel (2007). Principles of Population Genetics. Sinauer Associates. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-87893-308-2. 
^ Hartl, Daniel (2007). Principles of Population Genetics. Sinauer Associates. p. 95. ISBN 978-0-87893-308-2. 
^ Fisher, R. A. (1999). The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-850440-3. 
^ Gordon, Ian L. (2000). "Quantitative genetics of allogamous F2 : an origin of randomly fertilized populations". Heredity. 85: 43–52. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2540.2000.00716.x. PMID 10971690. 
^ Gordon, Ian L. (2001). "Quantitative genetics of autogamous F2". Hereditas. 134 (3): 255–262. doi:10.1111/j.1601-5223.2001.00255.x. PMID 11833289. 
^ U.S. Census Bureau – World Pop Clock Projection
^ to a World of Seven Billion People UNFPA 12 September 2011
^ "Cities in Nigeria: 2005 Population Estimates – MongaBay.com". Retrieved 1 July 2008. 
^ "Country Profile: Nigeria". BBC News. 24 December 2009. Retrieved 1 July 2008. 
^ Haub, C. 1995/2004. "How Many People Have Ever Lived On Earth?" Population Today, http://www.prb.org/Articles/2002/HowManyPeopleHaveEverLivedonEarth.aspx
^ a b As graphically illustrated by population since 10,000BC and population since 1000AD
^ "The end of India's green revolution?". BBC News. 29 May 2006. Retrieved 29 November 2009. 
^ Food First/Institute for Food and Development Policy Archived 14 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "World population will increase by 2.5 billion by 2050; people over 60 to increase by more than 1 billion" (Press release). United Nations Population Division. 13 March 2007. Retrieved 14 March 2007. The world population continues its path towards population ageing and is on track to surpass 9 billion persons by 2050. 
^ World Population Development Statistics: Forecast, United Nations, 2011.
^ "The End of World Population Growth". Nature. 412: 543–545. doi:10.1038/35087589. Retrieved 4 November 2008. 
^ Ojovan, M.I.; Loshchinin, M.B. (2015). "Heuristic Paradoxes of S.P. Kapitza Theoretical Demography" (PDF). European Researcher. 92 (3): 237–248. doi:10.13187/er.2015.92.237. 
^ Shackman, Gene, Xun Wang and Ya-Lin Liu. 2011. Brief review of world population trends. Available at http://gsociology.icaap.org/report/demsum.html
^ a b http://users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/P/Populations.html
^ Knudsen, Lara (2006). Reproductive Rights in a Global Context. Vanderbilt University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-8265-1528-5. 
^ Knudsen, Lara (2006). Reproductive Rights in a Global Context. Vanderbilt University Press. pp. 4–5. ISBN 978-0-8265-1528-5. 


External links[edit]

UNFPA, The United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Population Division
CICRED homepage a platform for interaction between research centres and international organizations, such as the United Nations Population Division, UNFPA, WHO and FAO.
Current World Population
NECSP HomePage
Overpopulation
Population Matters
Population Reference Bureau (2005). Retrieved 13 February 2005.
Population World: Population of World. Retrieved 13 February 2004.
SIEDS, Italian Society of Economics Demography and Statistics
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe – Official Web Site
World Population Counter, and separate regions.
WorldPopClock.com. (French)
Populations du monde. (French)
OECD population data
Understanding the World Today Reports about world and regional population trends
Lee, Ronald Demos (2008). "Population". In David R. Henderson (ed.). Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Library of Economics and Liberty. ISBN 978-0-86597-665-8. OCLC 237794267. CS1 maint: Extra text: editors list (link)







v
t
e


Global human population



Major topics



Biocapacity
Optimum population
Overpopulation

Malthusian catastrophe


Population
Population ethics
Population momentum
Sustainable development
Women's reproductive rights
Zero population growth





Biological and
related topics



Family planning

Pledge two or fewer


Human population planning

One-child policy
Two-child policy


Population biology
Population decline
Population density

Physiological density


Population dynamics
Population growth
Population model
Population pyramid
Projections of population growth





Human impact on
the environment



Deforestation
Desalination
Desertification
Environmental impact

of agriculture
of aviation
of biodiesel
of concrete
of electricity generation
of the energy industry
of fishing
of irrigation
of mining
of off-roading
of oil shale industry
of palm oil
of paper
of the petroleum industry
of reservoirs
of shipping
of war


Industrialisation
Land degradation
Land reclamation
Overconsumption
Pollution
Quarrying
Urbanization

Loss of green belts
Urban sprawl


Waste
Water scarcity

Overdrafting








Population
ecology




Carrying capacity
Deep ecology
Earth's energy budget
Food security
Habitat destruction
I = P × A  × T
Malthusian growth model
Overshoot (population)
World energy consumption
World energy resources
World3 model





Literature



A Modest Proposal
Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.
An Essay on the Principle of Population
"How Much Land Does a Man Need?"
Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth
Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits
The Limits to Growth
The Population Bomb
The Skeptical Environmentalist
The Ultimate Resource





Publications



Population and Environment
Population and Development Review





Lists



Population and housing censuses by country
Metropolitan areas by population
Population milestone babies






Events and
organizations




7 Billion Actions
International Conference on Population and Development
Population Action International
Population Connection
Population Matters
Population Research Institute
United Nations Population Fund
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
World Population Day
World Population Foundation





Related topics



Classic Maya collapse
Fertility and intelligence
Green Revolution
Holocene extinction
Migration








 Commons
 Human overpopulation
Human activities with impact on the environment
Human migration












v
t
e


Lists of countries by population statistics



World population



Current population
Current population (United Nations)





Continental



Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe
Oceania





Regional



Arab world
Caribbean
Commonwealth of Nations
Eurasia
European Union
Islands
Latin America
North America
Middle East
South America





Cities



National capitals
Cities proper
Metropolitan areas
Urban areas
Megacities
Megalopolises





Past and future
population



Past population (United Nations)
Past and future population
1
1000
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
1907
1939
1989
2000
2005
2010
Future population





Population density



Current density
Current real density based on food growing capacity





Growth indicators



Population growth rate
Natural increase
Birth rate
Mortality rate
Fertility rate





Other
demographics



Age at first marriage
Divorce rate
Domestic citizens
Ethnic and cultural diversity level
Foreign-born population
Immigrant population
Linguistic diversity
Median age
Net migration rate
Number of households
Sex ratio
Urban population
Urbanization





Health



Antiviral medications for pandemic influenza
HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate
Infant mortality rate
Life expectancy
Percentage suffering from undernourishment
Health expenditure covered by government
Suicide rate
Total health expenditure (PPP) per capita
Body Mass Index (BMI)





Education
and innovation



Bloomberg Innovation Index
Education Index
International Innovation Index
Innovation Union Scoreboard
Literacy rate
Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies
Progress in International Reading Literacy Study
Student skills
Tertiary education attainment
Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
Women's average years in school
World Intellectual Property Indicators





Economic



Development aid given

Official Development Assistance received


Employment rate
Irrigated land area
Human Development Index

by country
inequality-adjusted


Human Poverty Index
Imports
Income equality
Job security
Labour force
Number of millionaires (US dollars)
Number of billionaires (US dollars)
Percentage living in poverty
Public sector
Sen social welfare function
Unemployment rate









List of international rankings
List of top international rankings by country
Lists by country













v
t
e


Hierarchy of life






Biosphere > Ecosystem > Biocoenosis > Population > Organism > Organ system > Organ > Tissue > Cell > Organelle > Biomolecular complex > Macromolecule > Biomolecule












v
t
e


Ethnicity



Related
concepts



Clan
Ethnic group

Ethnolinguistic group
Ethnoreligious group


Indigenous peoples
Ingroups and outgroups
Meta-ethnicity
Metroethnicity
Minority group
Monoethnicity
Nation
Nationality
Panethnicity
Polyethnicity
Population
Race
Symbolic ethnicity
Tribe





Ethnology



Anthropology
Ethnic studies
Ethnoarchaeology
Ethnobiology

Ethnobotany
Ethnozoology
Ethnoecology


Ethnocinema
Ethnogeology
Ethnography

Autoethnography
Clinical
Critical
Cyber-
Netnography
Online
Person-centered
Salvage
Transidioethnography
Video


Ethnohistory
Ethnolinguistics
Ethnology
Ethnomathematics
Ethnomethodology
Ethnomuseology
Ethnomusicology
Ethnophilosophy
Ethnopoetics
Ethnoscience
Ethnosemiotics
Ethnotaxonomy





Groups
by region



Africa

Arab League


Americas

Indigenous
Canada
Mexico
United States
Central America
South America


Asia

Central Asia
East Asia
Northern Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
West Asia


Australia

Indigenous


Europe
Oceania

Indigenous
European








Identity and
ethnogenesis




Cross-race effect
Cultural assimilation
Cultural identity
Demonym
Development
Endonym
Ethnic flag
Ethnic option
Ethnic origin
Ethnic religion
Ethnicity in census
Ethnofiction
Ethnonym
Folk religion
Historical
Imagined community
Kinship
Legendary progenitor
Lineage-bonded society
Mores
Nation-building
Nation state
National language
National myth
Origin myth
Pantribal sodality
Tribal name
Tribalism
Urheimat





Multiethnic
society



Consociationalism
Diaspora politics
Dominant minority
Ethnic democracy
Ethnic enclave
Ethnic interest group
Ethnic majority
Ethnic media
Ethnic pornography
Ethnic theme park
Ethnoburb
Ethnocracy
Indigenous rights
Middleman minority
Minority rights
Model minority
Multinational state






Ideology and
ethnic conflict




Ethnic bioweapon
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnic nationalism
Ethnic nepotism
Ethnic penalty
Ethnic slur
Ethnic stereotype
Ethnic violence
Ethnocentrism
Ethnocide
Ethnosymbolism
Indigenism
Separatist movements
Xenophobia









Authority control



LCCN: sh85104910
GND: 4006287-9
NDL: 00574780











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Population&oldid=816553744"					Categories: PopulationPopulation ecologyLists by populationPopulation modelsDemographyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesCS1 maint: Extra text: editors listUse dmy dates from August 2010Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers