This article is about the facility for ships. For other uses, see Port (disambiguation).




The Port of New York and New Jersey grew from the original harbor at the convergence of the Hudson River and the East River at the Upper New York Bay.






Seaport, a 17th-century depiction by Claude Lorrain, 1638






Shanghai Port is the world's busiest container port






Port of Hamburg






The port of Piraeus






Port of Klaipėda






Port of Seattle






Port of Haifa, Israel






Port of Barcelona, one of Spain's largest ports






Port of Busan, Korea. Two Maersk vessels can be seen in the background.






Port of Montreal, Quebec.






The Port of Duluth-Superior, the largest freshwater port in the world






Port of Karachi, Pakistan's largest port






Cargo port in Hilo, Hawaii


A port is a location on a coast or shore containing one or more harbors where ships can dock and transfer people or cargo to or from land. Port locations are selected to optimize access to land and navigable water, for commercial demand, and for shelter from wind and waves. Ports with deeper water are rarer, but can handle larger ships. Since ports throughout history handled every kind of traffic, support and storage facilities vary widely, may extend for miles, and dominate the local economy. Some ports have an important military role.



Contents


1 Historical

1.1 Ancient China
1.2 Ancient Egypt
1.3 Ancient Greece
1.4 Ancient India
1.5 Ancient Rome
1.6 Japan


2 Distribution
3 Types

3.1 Inland port
3.2 Fishing port
3.3 Dry port
3.4 Warm-water port
3.5 Seaport

3.5.1 Cruise home port
3.5.2 Port of call
3.5.3 Cargo port




4 Access
5 Environmental impact
6 World's major ports

6.1 Africa
6.2 Asia
6.3 Europe
6.4 North America
6.5 Oceania
6.6 South America


7 See also

7.1 Water port topics
7.2 Other types of ports
7.3 Lists


8 References
9 External links



Historical[edit]
One of the world's oldest known artificial harbors is at Wadi al-Jarf on the Red Sea. Along with the finding of harbor structures, ancient anchors have also been found.
Ancient China[edit]
Guangzhou was an important port during the ancient times as far back as the Qin Dynasty.
Ancient Egypt[edit]
Canopus was the principal port in Egypt for Greek trade before the foundation of Alexandria.
Ancient Greece[edit]
Athens' port of Piraeus was the base for the Athenian fleet and this played a crucial role in the Battle of Salamis against the Persians in 480 BC.
Ancient India[edit]
Lothal is one of the most prominent cities of the ancient Indus valley civilisation, located in the Bhāl region of the modern state of Gujarāt and dating from 3700 BCE.
Ancient Rome[edit]
Ostia Antica was the port of ancient Rome with Portus established by Claudius and enlarged by Trajan to supplement the nearby port of Ostia.
Japan[edit]
During the Edo period, the island of Dejima was the only port open for trade with Europe and only received one Dutch ship per year, whereas Osaka was the largest domestic port and the main trade hub for rice.
Distribution[edit]
Ports often have cargo-handling equipment, such as cranes (operated by longshoremen) and forklifts for use in loading ships, which may be provided by private interests or public bodies. Often, canneries or other processing facilities will be located nearby. Some ports feature canals, which allow ships further movement inland. Access to intermodal transportation, such as railroads and highways, is critical to a port, so that passengers and cargo can also move further inland beyond the port area. Ports with international traffic have customs facilities. Harbor pilots and tugboats may maneuver large ships in tight quarters when near docks.
Types[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The terms "port" and "seaport" are used for different types of port facilities that handle ocean-going vessels, and river port is used for river traffic, such as barges and other shallow-draft vessels.
Inland port[edit]
Main article: Inland port
An inland port is a port on a navigable lake, river (fluvial port), or canal with access to a sea or ocean, which therefore allows a ship to sail from the ocean inland to the port to load or unload its cargo. An example of this is the St. Lawrence Seaway which allows ships to travel from the Atlantic Ocean several thousand kilometers inland to Great Lakes ports like Toronto, Duluth-Superior, and Chicago.[1]
Fishing port[edit]
A fishing port is a port or harbor for landing and distributing fish. It may be a recreational facility, but it is usually commercial. A fishing port is the only port that depends on an ocean product, and depletion of fish may cause a fishing port to be uneconomical.
Dry port[edit]
Main article: Dry port
A dry port is an inland intermodal terminal directly connected by road or rail to a seaport and operating as a centre for the transshipment of sea cargo to inland destinations.[2]
Warm-water port[edit]
A warm-water port is one where the water does not freeze in wintertime. Because they are available year-round, warm-water ports can be of great geopolitical or economic interest. Such settlements as Dalian in China, Vostochny Port,[3] Murmansk and Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky in Russia, Odessa in Ukraine, Kushiro in Japan and Valdez at the terminus of the Alaska Pipeline owe their very existence to being ice-free ports. The Baltic Sea and similar areas have ports available year-round beginning in the 20th century thanks to icebreakers, but earlier access problems prompted Russia to expand its territory to the Black Sea.
Seaport[edit]
A seaport is further categorized as a "cruise port" or a "cargo port". Additionally, "cruise ports" are also known as a "home port" or a "port of call". The "cargo port" is also further categorized into a "bulk" or "break bulk port" or as a "container port".
Cruise home port[edit]
A cruise home port is the port where cruise ship passengers board (or embark) to start their cruise and disembark the cruise ship at the end of their cruise. It is also where the cruise ship's supplies are loaded for the cruise, which includes everything from fresh water and fuel to fruits, vegetables, champagne, and any other supplies needed for the cruise. "Cruise home ports" are very busy places during the day the cruise ship is in port, because off-going passengers debark their baggage and on-coming passengers board the ship in addition to all the supplies being loaded. Currently, the Cruise Capital of the World is the Port of Miami, Florida, closely followed behind by Port Everglades, Florida and the Port of San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Port of call[edit]
A port of call is an intermediate stop for a ship on its sailing itinerary. At these ports, cargo ships may take on supplies or fuel, as well as unloading and loading cargo while cruise liners have passengers get on or off ship.
Cargo port[edit]
Cargo ports, on the other hand, are quite different from cruise ports, because each handles very different cargo, which has to be loaded and unloaded by very different mechanical means. The port may handle one particular type of cargo or it may handle numerous cargoes, such as grains, liquid fuels, liquid chemicals, wood, automobiles, etc. Such ports are known as the "bulk" or "break bulk ports". Those ports that handle containerized cargo are known as container ports. Most cargo ports handle all sorts of cargo, but some ports are very specific as to what cargo they handle. Additionally, the individual cargo ports are divided into different operating terminals which handle the different cargoes, and are operated by different companies, also known as terminal operators or stevedores.
Access[edit]
Ports sometimes fall out of use. Rye, East Sussex, was an important English port in the Middle Ages, but the coastline changed and it is now 2 miles (3.2 km) from the sea, while the ports of Ravenspurn and Dunwich have been lost to coastal erosion. Also in the United Kingdom, London, on the River Thames, was once an important international port, but changes in shipping methods, such as the use of containers and larger ships, put it at a disadvantage.
Environmental impact[edit]
There are several initiatives to decrease negative environmental impacts of ports. These include SIMPYC, the World Ports Climate Initiative, the African Green Port Initiative and EcoPorts.[4]
World's major ports[edit]
Main article: List of seaports
Africa[edit]
See also: Ports and harbours in South Africa
The busiest port in Africa is Port Said in Egypt.
Asia[edit]
See also: List of East Asian ports and List of ports and harbours of the Indian Ocean




Visakhapatnam sea port


The port of Shanghai is the largest port in the world in both cargo tonnage and activity. It regained its position as the world's busiest port by cargo tonnage and the world's busiest container port in 2009 and 2010, respectively. It is followed by the ports of Singapore and Hong Kong, both of which are in Asia.
Europe[edit]
See also: List of busiest ports in Europe
Europe's busiest container port and biggest port by cargo tonnage by far is the Port of Rotterdam, in the Netherlands. It is followed by the Belgian Port of Antwerp or the German Port of Hamburg, depending on which metric is used.[5] In turn, Valencia (Spain) is the busiest port in the Mediterranean basin.
North America[edit]
See also: List of North American ports and Ports of the United States
The largest ports include the ports of Los Angeles and South Louisiana in the U.S., Manzanillo in Mexico and Vancouver in Canada. Panama also has the Panama Canal that connects the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean, and is a key conduit for international trade.
Oceania[edit]
The largest port in Australia is the Port of Melbourne.
South America[edit]
According to ECLAC's "Maritime and Logistics Profile of Latin America and the Caribbean", the largest ports in South America are the Port of Santos in Brazil, Cartagena in Colombia, Callao in Peru, Guayaquil in Ecuador and the Port of Buenos Aires in Argentina.[6]
See also[edit]

Anchorage (shipping)
Megaproject

Water port topics[edit]

Bandar (Persian word for "port" or "haven")
Marina - port for recreational boating
Port operator
Ship transport

Other types of ports[edit]

Airport
Spaceport
Port of entry

Lists[edit]

Lists of ports
List of busiest cruise ports by passengers
World's busiest port
Sea rescue organisations

References[edit]



^ "Seaway System". greatlakes-seaway.com. 
^ "Feasibility Study on the network operation of Hinterland Hubs (Dry Port Concept) to improve and modernise ports' connections to the hinterland and to improve networking" (PDF). InLoc. January 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-04-13. Retrieved 2008-03-10. 
^ "Vostochny Port JSC, Geography, Location". Vostochny Port website. 2007. Retrieved 13 December 2012. ...  Vostochny Port is located in the south of Primorsky Region, in the southeast of Nakhodka bay, in Vrangel bay. This is unique natural harbor is no ice restrictions even in severe winters. ... 
^ EOS magazine, 6,2012
^ World Port Rankings 2011 (PDF)
^ "Los 10 mayores puertos de América Latina y Caribe en tráfico de contenedores". Revista de Ingeniería Naval (in Spanish). Madrid, Spain: Asociación de Ingenieros Navales y Oceánicos de España. September 28, 2016. Retrieved May 3, 2017. 



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ports and harbours.



Port Industry Statistics, American Association of Port Authorities
Information on yachting facilities at ports around the world from Noonsite.com
Social & Economic Benefits of PORTS from "NOAA Socioeconomics" website initiative
Antunes, Cátia: Early Modern Ports, 1500-1750, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: November 2, 2011.







v
t
e


Ports and harbors



Types



Home port
Fuelling station
Inland harbor
Inland port
Landing
Outport
Port of entry
Trust port
Dry port
Anchorage
Wharf
Natural gas terminals
Oil terminals
Coal terminals
Container terminals
Free port
Naval base





Individual sites



Lists of ports
By sea or ocean
By continent
By country





Rankings



World's busiest port
Busiest container ports
Busiest transshipment ports
Busiest by tonnage
Busiest by cruise passengers





Port management



Infrastructure
Port authority
Port state control
Harbour engineer
Port operator
Security
Ship transport
Port operations simulator
Terminal Operating System





Conventions



SOLAS
MARPOL 73/78
STCW
Ballast Water Management Convention





Organizations



Port operating companies
Port workers' trade unions








 Category
 Commons
 Wiktionary "Port"
 Wiktionary "Harbor"
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Public infrastructure



assets
and
facilities



Airports
Bridges
Broadband
Canals
Critical infrastructure
Dams
Electricity generation
Energy development
Hazardous waste
Hospitals
Levees
Lighthouses
Municipal solid waste
Parks
Ports
Public housing
Public spaces
Public transport
Public utilities
Public works
Rail transport
Roads
Sewage
State schools
Telecommunications
Wastewater
Water supply network
Wind power





concepts



Appropriation
Infrastructure asset management
Build–operate–transfer
Design–build
Earmark
Engineering contracts
Externality
Fixed cost
Government debt
Life-cycle assessment
Lindahl tax
Maintenance, repair, and operations
Natural monopoly
Property tax
Public capital
Public finance
Public good
Public sector
Public–private partnership
Renovation
Spillover effect
Supply chain
Taxation
Upgrade





issues
and
ideas



Air traffic control
Brownfield land
Bus rapid transit
Carbon footprint
Congestion pricing
Containerization
Ethanol fuel
Fuel efficiency
Fuel tax
Groundwater
High-speed rail
Hybrid vehicles
Land-use planning
Mobile data terminal
Pork barrel
Recycling
Renewable resources
Reverse osmosis
Smart grid
Smart growth
Stormwater
Sustainable urban infrastructure
Traffic congestion
Transit-oriented development
Urban sprawl
Waste-to-energy
Weatherization
Wireless





fields
of study



Architecture
Civil engineering
Electrical engineering
Mechanical engineering
Public economics
Public policy
Urban planning





examples



Akashi Kaikyō Bridge
Autobahn
Brooklyn Bridge
Bus rapid transit systems
Channel Tunnel
Controlled-access highway systems
Electric power transmission
High-speed trains
Hong Kong International Airport
Hoover Dam
Humber Bridge
Kansai International Airport
Millau Viaduct
Nuclear power
Offshore wind farms
Panama Canal
Port of Shanghai
San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge
Solar power
Three Gorges Dam
Trans-Alaska pipeline
Transcontinental railroads












v
t
e


Real estate developments



Commercial



Airport
Business park
Commercial area
Mixed-use development
Office building
Port

inland


Retail park
Riverfront
Shopping mall / center
Shopping streets and districts
Warehouse District





Industrial



Business cluster
Industrial district
Industrial park
Technology centers





Residential



Apartment complex
Bungalow court
City block
Company town
Golf course community
Gated community
Housing estate
Intentional community
Mixed-use development
Model dwellings for the poor
Multi-family residential
Private community
Public housing
Residential area
Retirement community
Revenue house
Single room occupancy
Subdivision
Tract housing





Science / Education



Campus
Research park

list


Satellite campus
Science park





Municipal



Arcology
Garden city movement
Model village
Planned cities
Planned community
Urban open space

parks







Buildings



Apartment
House

types


Skyscraper
Tower block
Villa





Miscellaneous



Brownfield land
Cemetery
Cluster development
Construction
Context theory
Eminent domain
Greenfield land
Greyfield land
Land-use planning
Park
Parking
Playground
Redevelopment
Regional planning
Urban design
Urban planning
Zoning









Authority control



GND: 4022859-9
NDL: 00566851











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Port&oldid=815249930"					Categories: Ports and harboursNautical terminologyHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Articles needing additional references from December 2012All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers