





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



"Predator" and "prey" redirect here. For other uses of "predator", see Predator (disambiguation). For other uses of "prey", see Prey (disambiguation).




A polar bear (Ursus maritimus) as the predator feeding on a bearded seal in Svalbard, Norway






Meat ants cooperating to feed on a cicada far larger than themselves


In an ecosystem, predation is a biological interaction where a predator (an organism that is hunting) feeds on its prey (the organism that is attacked).[1] Predators may or may not kill their prey prior to feeding on it, but the act of predation often results in the death of the prey and the eventual absorption of the prey's tissue through digestion. It could also constitute a chase, stalking, or attack of prey. Thus predation is often, though not always, carnivory. Other categories of consumption are herbivory (eating parts of plants), fungivory (eating parts of fungi), and detritivory (the consumption of dead organic material). All of these are consumer-resource systems.[2] It can often be difficult to separate various types of feeding behaviors.[1] For example, some parasites prey on their host and then lay their eggs on it, for their offspring to feed on it while it continues to live, or on its decaying corpse after it has died. The key characteristic of predation is the predator's direct impact on the prey population.
Selective pressures (coevolution) imposed on one another often leads to an evolutionary arms race between prey and predator, resulting in various antipredator adaptations. Ways of classifying predation include grouping by trophic level or diet, by specialization, and by the predator's interaction with prey.



Contents


1 By function

1.1 True predation
1.2 Grazing
1.3 Parasitism
1.4 Parasitoidism


2 Ecological interactions

2.1 Specialization
2.2 Trophic level
2.3 As competition
2.4 Biodiversity
2.5 Optimal foraging
2.6 Social predation
2.7 Size-selective predation
2.8 Antipredator adaptations
2.9 Population dynamics
2.10 Evolution
2.11 Humans


3 See also
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links



By function[edit]
Main article: Consumer-Resource Systems
Predators can be classified by their consumer-resource interactions[2] with their prey. Two factors are considered here: how close the predator and prey (or host) are, and whether the prey is directly killed by the predator, where true predation and parasitoidism involve certain death.
True predation[edit]




Lion and cub eating an African buffalo


A true predator is one that kills and eats another living thing. Predators may hunt actively for prey in pursuit predation, or sit and wait for prey to approach within striking distance, as in ambush predators. Some predators kill large prey and dismember or chew it prior to eating it, such as a jaguar or a human; others may eat their prey whole, as does a bottlenose dolphin swallowing a fish, or a stork swallowing a frog. Some predation entails venom that subdues a prey before the predator ingests it, as in the box jellyfish, or disables it, as in the cone shell. In some cases, the venom contributes to the digestion of the prey, as in rattlesnakes and some spiders. In contrast, baleen whales eat millions of microscopic plankton at once, swallowing them alive. Seed and egg predation are true predation, as seeds and eggs are potential organisms. Predators need not eat prey entirely; for example, some predators cannot digest bones. Some may eat only part of an organism, but still consistently cause its death.
Grazing[edit]
Main article: Grazing
Grazing organisms generally do not kill their prey. While some herbivores like zooplankton live on unicellular phytoplankton and therefore inevitably kill what they eat, many others only eat a small part of the plants that they graze. Many species of plant are adapted to regrow after grazing damage. For example, the growing meristems of grasses are not at the tips as they are in most flowering plants, but at the base of the leaves. Similarly, kelp is grazed in subtidal kelp forests, but continuously regrows at the base of the blade. Animals may also be 'grazed' upon; female mosquitoes land on hosts briefly to feed on blood.[3]
Parasitism[edit]




Parasitoid strategy (sooner or later killing its host) compared with typical parasite (not killing its host) and predator (killing its prey immediately). There is a continuum between these.


Main article: Parasitism
Parasites can at times be difficult to distinguish from grazers. Their feeding behavior is similar in many ways, however they are noted for their close association with their host species. While a grazing species such as an elephant may travel many kilometers in a single day, grazing on many plants in the process, parasites form very close associations with their hosts, usually having only one or at most a few in their lifetime. This close living arrangement may be described by the term symbiosis, "living together", but unlike mutualism the association significantly reduces the fitness of the host.[2] Parasitic organisms range from the macroscopic mistletoe, a parasitic plant, to microscopic internal parasites such as cholera. Some species however have looser associations with their hosts. Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) larvae may feed parasitically on only a single plant, or they may graze on several nearby plants. It is therefore wise to treat this classification system as a continuum.
Parasitoidism[edit]
Main article: Parasitoid
Parasitoids are organisms living in or on their host and feeding directly upon it, eventually leading to its death. They are much like parasites in their close symbiotic relationship with their host or hosts. Like the previous two classifications parasitoid predators do not kill their hosts instantly. However, unlike parasites, they are very similar to true predators in that the fate of their prey is quite inevitably death. A well-known example is the ichneumon wasps, solitary insects living a free life as an adult, then laying eggs on or in another species such as a caterpillar. Its larva(e) feed on the growing host causing it little harm at first, but soon devouring the internal organs until finally destroying the nervous system resulting in prey death. By this stage the young wasp(s) are developed sufficiently to move to the next stage in their life cycle. Though limited mainly to the insect orders Hymenoptera, Diptera and Coleoptera, parasitoids make up as much as 10% of all insect species.[4][5]
Ecological interactions[edit]
Specialization[edit]




Platydemus manokwari is a flatworm predator of land snails.


Further information: Generalist and specialist species
Predators are often highly specialized, such as to hunt only one species of prey. Others are more opportunistic generalists, such as leopards, dogs and alligators. The specialists are usually particularly well suited to capturing their preferred prey. The prey in turn, are often equally suited to escape that predator. This is called an evolutionary arms race and tends to keep the populations of both species in equilibrium. Some predators specialize in certain classes of prey, not just single species. Some will switch to other prey (with varying degrees of success) when the preferred target is extremely scarce, and they may also resort to scavenging or a herbivorous diet if possible.
Trophic level[edit]




A secondary consumer in action: a mantis (Tenodera aridifolia) eating a bee


See also: Trophic level and Trophic dynamics
Predators are often another organism's prey, and likewise prey are often predators. Though blue jays prey on insects, they may in turn be prey for cats and snakes, and snakes may be the prey of hawks. One way of classifying predators is by trophic level. Organisms that feed on autotrophs, the producers of the trophic pyramid, are known as herbivores or primary consumers; those that feed on heterotrophs such as animals are known as secondary consumers. Secondary consumers are a type of carnivore, but there are also tertiary consumers eating these carnivores, quaternary consumers eating them, and so forth. Because only a fraction of energy is passed on to the next level, this hierarchy of predation must end somewhere, and very seldom goes higher than five or six levels (for example, a lion that preys upon large herbivores such as wildebeest, which in turn eat grasses). A predator at the top of any food chain is called an apex predator; examples include the sperm whale, Komodo dragon, tiger, and most eagles and owls. Many predators eat from multiple levels of the food chain. A carnivore may eat both secondary and tertiary consumers, and its prey may itself be difficult to classify for similar reasons. Organisms showing both carnivory and herbivory are known as omnivores. Even herbivores such as the giant panda may supplement their diet with meat.
As competition[edit]
An alternative view offered by Richard Dawkins is of predation as a form of competition: the genes of both the predator and prey are competing for the body (or 'survival machine') of the prey organism.[6] This is best understood in the context of the gene centered view of evolution. Another manner in which predation and competition are connected is throughout intraguild predation. Intraguild predators are those that kill and eat other predators of different species at the same trophic level, and thus that are potential competitors.[7]
Biodiversity[edit]




Riparian willow recovery at Blacktail Creek, Yellowstone National Park, after reintroduction of wolves


Predators may increase the biodiversity of communities by preventing a single species from becoming dominant. Such predators are known as keystone species and may have a profound influence on the balance of organisms in a particular ecosystem.[8] Introduction or removal of this predator, or changes in its population density, can have drastic cascading effects on the equilibrium of many other populations in the ecosystem. For example, grazers of a grassland may prevent a single dominant species from taking over.[9]
The elimination of wolves from Yellowstone National Park had profound impacts on the trophic pyramid. Without predation, herbivores began to over-graze many woody browse species, affecting the area's plant populations. In addition, wolves often kept animals from grazing in riparian areas, which protected beavers from having their food sources encroached upon. The removal of wolves had a direct effect on beaver populations, as their habitat became territory for grazing.[10] Furthermore, predation keeps hydrological features such as creeks and streams in normal working order. Increased browsing on willows and conifers along Blacktail Creek due to a lack of predation caused channel incision because they helped slow the water down and hold the soil in place.[10]
Optimal foraging[edit]
Main articles: Optimal foraging theory and Consumer-resource systems
While successful predation results in a gain of energy, hunting invariably involves energetic costs. When hunger is not an issue, in general most predators will not seek to attack prey since the costs outweigh the benefits. For instance, a large predatory fish like a shark that is well fed in an aquarium will typically ignore the smaller fish swimming around it (while the prey fish take advantage of the fact that the apex predator is apparently uninterested). Surplus killing represents a deviation from this type of behaviour. The treatment of consumption in terms of cost-benefit analysis is known as optimal foraging theory, and has been quite successful in the study of animal behavior. Some adaptations of successful predators include speed- built for speed, weapons- sharp teeth and claws, camouflage- to avoid being seen by prey, and depth perception- eyes to the front of the head to judge size and distance.[11]
Social predation[edit]




Wolves cooperating to hunt bison


In social predation, a group of predators cooperates to kill creatures larger than those they could overpower singly. Lions, hyenas, wolves, dholes, African wild dogs, and piranhas can kill large herbivores. Social predation allows some animals to organize hunts of creatures that would easily escape a single predator; thus chimpanzees can prey upon colobus monkeys, and a cooperating group of Harris's hawks can cut off all possible escapes for a rabbit.[12]
Size-selective predation[edit]
In size-selective predation, predators select prey of a certain size. Large prey may prove troublesome for a predator, while small prey might prove hard to find and in any case provide less of a reward. This has led to a correlation between the size of predators and their prey.[13] Size may also act as a refuge for large prey. For example, adult elephants are relatively safe from predation by lions, but juveniles are vulnerable.[13]







A juvenile red-tailed hawk eating a California vole









Great blue heron with prey









Lizard eating a rat









Indian python swallowing a chital




Antipredator adaptations[edit]




Springbok stotting to advertise its ability to escape


Main article: Antipredator adaptation
Many antipredator adaptations have evolved in prey populations due to the selective pressures of predation over long periods of time. Some species mob predators cooperatively. Others such as Thomson's gazelle stot to signal to predators such as cheetahs that they will have an unprofitable chase.[14] Many prey animals are aposematically colored or patterned as a warning to predators that they are distasteful or able to defend themselves.[15] Such distastefulness or toxicity is brought about by chemical defenses, found in a wide range of prey, especially insects, but the skunk is a dramatic mammalian example.[16] Toxins are useful adaptations of prey that are utilized in order to ward of predators. Toxins are not to be confused with venom, which is generally utilized by predators. The difference between the two is that venom usually has a means of transfer or delivery and toxins refer to ingestion. These toxins do not require a method of delivery other unlike that of venom which is administered in more of a violent, intentional process. Toxins are generally one compound that can cause destruction while venom is a mixture of different compounds that can target multiple tissues. [17]




Camouflage of the dead leaf mantis makes it less visible to both its predators and prey.


Camouflage consists of not only color but also shape and pattern. This adaptation is one that allows the prey to disrupt the visual sensory mechanisms of another organism. This visual perception is cohered by these adaptations allowing the prey to be unrecognized.[18] In order for these organisms to go undetected, they need to be cryptic. Possessing cryptic abilities entails the use of blending in with ones background, by countershading, or by disruptive coloration. Disruptive coloration is a pattern that does not allow the predator to discern the body outline of that prey, thus making them undetectable.[19] The background upon which the organism is seen can be both its environment, such as a mantis resembling dead leaves, or other organisms, e.g., the stripes of zebra blending in with each other in a herd, making it difficult for lions to focus on a single target. In mimicry, an organism has a similar appearance to another species, as in the drone fly, which resembles a bee, yet has no sting. Another example of such Batesian mimicry is the io moth, (Automeris io), which has markings on its wings that resemble an owl's eyes. When an insectivorous predator disturbs the moth, it reveals its hind wings, temporarily startling the predator and giving it time to escape. Predators may also use mimicry to lure their prey, however. Female fireflies of the genus Photuris, for example, copy the light signals of other species, thereby attracting male fireflies, which are then captured and eaten (see aggressive mimicry).[20]
Population dynamics[edit]
Predators tend to lower the survival and fecundity of their prey, but on a higher level of organization, populations of predator and prey species also interact. It is obvious that predators depend on prey for survival, and this is reflected in predator populations being affected by changes in prey populations. It is not so obvious, however, that predators affect prey populations.[21] Eating a prey organism may simply make room for another if the prey population is approaching its carrying capacity.
The population dynamics of predator–prey interactions can be modelled using the Lotka–Volterra equations. These provide a mathematical model for the cycling of predator and prey populations. Predators tend to select young, weak, and ill individuals.[22]
Evolution[edit]
Predation appears to have become a major selection pressure shortly before the Cambrian period—around 550 million years ago—as evidenced by the almost simultaneous development of calcification in animals and algae,[23] and predation-avoiding burrowing. However, predators had been grazing on micro-organisms since at least 1,000 million years ago.[24][24][25][26][27]
Humans[edit]




Humans and dogs as a predatory team


Humans are to some extent predatory, fishing,[28] hunting and trapping animals using weapons and tools.[29] They also use other predatory species, such as dogs, cormorants,[30] and falcons to catch prey for food or for sport.[31]
In biological pest control, predators from a pest's natural range are introduced to control populations, at the risk of causing unforeseen problems. Besides their use in conservation biology, predators are also important for controlling pests in agriculture. Natural predators are an environmentally friendly and sustainable way of reducing damage to crops, and are an alternative to the use of chemical agents such as pesticides.[32]
See also[edit]

Bird of prey
Built for the Kill, a nature series on predators
Overpopulation in wild animals
Predator–prey reversal
Prey drive
Refuge (ecology)
Wa-Tor

References[edit]


^ a b Begon, M., Townsend, C., Harper, J. (1996). Ecology: Individuals, populations and communities (Third edition). Blackwell Science, London. ISBN 0-86542-845-X, ISBN 0-632-03801-2, ISBN 0-632-04393-8.
^ a b c Getz WM (2011). "Biomass transformation webs provide a unified approach to consumer-resource modelling". Ecology Letters. 14 (2): 113–24. doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2010.01566.x. PMC 3032891 . PMID 21199247. 
^ POLOSKY, Z. (2015). 21ST CENTURY HOMESTEAD: biological pest control. S.l.: LULU COM. pg. 118
^ Godfray, H.C.J. (1994). Parasitoids: Behavioral and Evolutionary Ecology. Princeton University Press. p. 20. ISBN 0-691-03325-0. 
^ Feener, Jr., Donald H.; Brian V. Brown (January 1997). "Diptera as Parasitoids". Annual Review of Entomology. 42 (1): 73–97. doi:10.1146/annurev.ento.42.1.73. PMID 15012308. 
^ Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selfish Gene. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-286092-5.
^ Fedriani J. M.; Fuller T. K.; Sauvajot R. M.; York E. C. (2000). "Competition and intraguild predation among three sympatric carnivores". Oecologia. 125 (2): 258–270. doi:10.1007/s004420000448. PMID 24595837. 
^ Changing the distribution of predators and prey in an ecosystem can turn things upside down. March 1, 2013 Scientific American
^ Botkin, D. and E. Keller (2003). Environmental Science: Earth as a living planet. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-38914-5. P.2.
^ a b William J. Ripple and Robert L. Beschta. "Wolves and the Ecology of Fear: Can Predation Risk Structure Ecosystems?" 2004.
^ Phelan, Jay. What is Life? A Guide to Biology. New York. W.H. Freeman & Company. 2015.
^ Beauchamp, Guy (2014). Social Predation. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-124-07228-2. 
^ a b Molles, Manuel C., Jr. (2002). Ecology: Concepts and Applications (International ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-112252-4. 
^ Caro T. M. (1986). "The functions of stotting in Thomson's gazelles: Some tests of the predictions". Animal Behaviour. 34 (3): 663–684. doi:10.1016/S0003-3472(86)80052-5. 
^ Bowers, M. D., Irene L. Brown, and Darryl Wheye. "Bird Predation as a Selective Agent in a Butterfly Population." Evolution 39.1 (1985): 93-103.
^ Conner, W. E. (2009). Tiger Moths and Woolly Bears—behaviour, ecology, and evolution of the Arctiidae. Oxford University Press. pp. 1–10. 
^ Toxins and venoms. Author: Edmund D.Brodie Mountain Lake Biological Station, Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4328, USA
^ Merilaita, S., Scott-Samuel, N. E., & Cuthill, I. C. (2017). How camouflage works. Philosophical Transactions Of The Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 372(1724), 1-9. doi:10.1098/rstb.2016.0341
^ Camouflage Author Ossi Nokelainen, Martin Stevens Centre for Ecology & Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, Penryn, TR10 9FE, UK
^ Lloyd J. E. (1965). "Aggressive Mimicry in Photuris: Firefly Femmes Fatales". Science. 149 (3684): 653–654. doi:10.1126/science.149.3684.653. 
^ Horning, M., Mellish, J.E. (2012). "Predation on an Upper Trophic Marine Predator, the Steller Sea Lion: Evaluating High Juvenile Mortality in a Density Dependent Conceptual Framework". PLoS ONE. 7 (1): e30173. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030173. PMC 3260237 . PMID 22272296. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Genovart, M.; Negre, N.; Tavecchia, G.; Bistuer, A.; Parpal, L.; Oro, D. (2010). "The young, the weak and the sick: evidence of natural selection by predation". PLOS ONE. 5 (3): e9774. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0009774. PMC 2841644 . PMID 20333305. 
^ Grant, S. W. F.; Knoll, A. H.; Germs, G. J. B. (1991). "Probable Calcified Metaphytes in the Latest Proterozoic Nama Group, Namibia: Origin, Diagenesis, and Implications". Journal of Paleontology. 65 (1): 1–18. JSTOR 1305691. PMID 11538648. 
^ a b Bengtson, S. (2002). "Origins and early evolution of predation". In Kowalewski, M., and Kelley, P.H. The fossil record of predation. The Paleontological Society Papers 8 (PDF). The Paleontological Society. pp. 289–317. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
^ McNamara, K.J. (20 December 1996). "Dating the Origin of Animals". Science. 274 (5295): 1993–1997. Bibcode:1996Sci...274.1993M. doi:10.1126/science.274.5295.1993f. 
^ Awramik, S.M. (19 November 1971). "Precambrian columnar stromatolite diversity: Reflection of metazoan appearance". Science. 174 (4011): 825–827. doi:10.1126/science.174.4011.825. PMID 17759393. 
^ Stanley (2008). "Predation defeats competition on the seafloor". Paleobiology. 34 (1): 1–21. doi:10.1666/07026.1. 
^ Gabriel, Otto; Andres von Brandt (2005). Fish catching methods of the world. Blackwell. ISBN 0-85238-280-4. 
^ Griffin, Emma (2008). Blood Sport: Hunting in Britain Since 1066. Yale University Press. 
^ Richard J. King (1 October 2013). The Devil's Cormorant: A Natural History. University of New Hampshire Press. pp. 9–. ISBN 978-1-61168-225-0. 
^ Glasier, Phillip (1998). Falconry and Hawking. Batsford. ISBN 978-0713484076. 
^ Flint, Maria Louise & Dreistadt, Steve H. (1998). Clark, Jack K., ed. Natural Enemies Handbook: The Illustrated Guide to Biological Pest Control. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-21801-7. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)


Further reading[edit]

Barbosa, P. and I. Castellanos (eds.) (2004). Ecology of predator-prey interactions. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-517120-9.
Curio, E. (1976). The ethology of predation. Berlin; New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-07720-0.

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Predation





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Predation.



Wolfram Demonstrations Project: Predator-Prey Equations by Eric W. Weisstein
Predators, three articles by Olivia Judson, NY Times, Sept. & Oct., 2009





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Feeding behaviours



Carnivores




adult



Hematophagy
Insectivore
Lepidophagy
Man-eater
Molluscivore
Mucophagy
Myrmecophagy
Ophiophagy
Piscivore
Avivore
Spongivore
Vermivore





reproductive



Oophagy
Paedophagy
Placentophagy
Breastfeeding
Weaning





cannibalistic



Animal cannibalism
Human cannibalism
Self-cannibalism
Sexual cannibalism











Herbivores



Folivore
Florivore
Frugivore
Graminivore
Granivore
Nectarivore
Palynivore
Xylophagy
Osteophagy





Cellular



Phagocytosis
Myzocytosis





Others



Bacterivore
Fungivore
Coprophagia
Detritivore
Geophagia
Omnivore
Planktivore
Saprophagy
Xenophagy





Methods



Ambush predator
Apex predator
Bait balls
Bottom feeding
Browsing
Feeding frenzy
Filter feeding
Grazing
Hypercarnivore
Hypocarnivore
Intraguild predation
Kleptoparasitism
Lunge feeding
Mesocarnivore
Pivot feeding
Ram feeding
Scavenging
Suction feeding
Trophallaxis








Predation
Antipredator adaptation
Carnivorous plant
Carnivorous fungus
Carnivorous protist
Category:Eating behaviors












v
t
e


Inter-species biological interactions in ecology






Amensalism
Commensalism
Competition
Deception in animals
Inquilinism
Mimicry
Mutualism
Neutralism
Synnecrosis
Predation

Carnivore
Herbivore
Intraguild
Parasitism
Parasitoidism
Cheating


Symbiosis

Cleaning symbiosis














v
t
e


Ecology: Modelling ecosystems: Trophic components



General



Abiotic component
Abiotic stress
Behaviour
Biogeochemical cycle
Biomass
Biotic component
Biotic stress
Carrying capacity
Competition
Ecosystem
Ecosystem ecology
Ecosystem model
Keystone species
List of feeding behaviours
Metabolic theory of ecology
Productivity
Resource





Producers



Autotrophs
Chemosynthesis
Chemotrophs
Foundation species
Mixotrophs
Myco-heterotrophy
Mycotroph
Organotrophs
Photoheterotrophs
Photosynthesis
Photosynthetic efficiency
Phototrophs
Primary nutritional groups
Primary production





Consumers



Apex predator
Bacterivore
Carnivores
Chemoorganotroph
Foraging
Generalist and specialist species
Intraguild predation
Herbivores
Heterotroph
Heterotrophic nutrition
Insectivore
Mesopredators
Mesopredator release hypothesis
Omnivores
Optimal foraging theory
Predation
Prey switching





Decomposers



Chemoorganoheterotrophy
Decomposition
Detritivores
Detritus





Microorganisms



Archaea
Bacteriophage
Environmental microbiology
Lithoautotroph
Lithotrophy
Microbial cooperation
Microbial ecology
Microbial food web
Microbial intelligence
Microbial loop
Microbial mat
Microbial metabolism
Phage ecology





Food webs



Biomagnification
Ecological efficiency
Ecological pyramid
Energy flow
Food chain
Trophic level





Example webs



Cold seeps
Hydrothermal vents
Intertidal
Kelp forests
Lakes
North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
Rivers
San Francisco Estuary
Soil
Tide pool





Processes



Ascendency
Bioaccumulation
Cascade effect
Climax community
Competitive exclusion principle
Consumer-resource systems
Copiotrophs
Dominance
Ecological network
Ecological succession
Energy quality
Energy Systems Language
f-ratio
Feed conversion ratio
Feeding frenzy
Mesotrophic soil
Nutrient cycle
Oligotroph
Paradox of the plankton
Trophic cascade
Trophic mutualism
Trophic state index





Defense/counter



Animal coloration
Antipredator adaptations
Camouflage
Deimatic behaviour
Herbivore adaptations to plant defense
Mimicry
Plant defense against herbivory
Predator avoidance in schooling fish












v
t
e


Ecology: Modelling ecosystems: Other components



Population ecology



Abundance
Allee effect
Depensation
Ecological yield
Effective population size
Intraspecific competition
Logistic function
Malthusian growth model
Maximum sustainable yield
Overpopulation in wild animals
Overexploitation
Population cycle
Population dynamics
Population modeling
Population size
Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations
Recruitment
Resilience
Small population size
Stability





Species



Biodiversity
Density-dependent inhibition
Ecological effects of biodiversity
Ecological extinction
Endemic species
Flagship species
Gradient analysis
Indicator species
Introduced species
Invasive species
Latitudinal gradients in species diversity
Minimum viable population
Neutral theory
Occupancy–abundance relationship
Population viability analysis
Priority effect
Rapoport's rule
Relative abundance distribution
Relative species abundance
Species diversity
Species homogeneity
Species richness
Species distribution
Species-area curve
Umbrella species





Species interaction



Antibiosis
Biological interaction
Commensalism
Community ecology
Ecological facilitation
Interspecific competition
Mutualism
Storage effect





Spatial ecology



Biogeography
Cross-boundary subsidy
Ecocline
Ecotone
Ecotype
Disturbance
Edge effects
Foster's rule
Habitat fragmentation
Ideal free distribution
Intermediate Disturbance Hypothesis
Island biogeography
Landscape ecology
Landscape epidemiology
Landscape limnology
Metapopulation
Patch dynamics
r/K selection theory
Resource selection function
Source–sink dynamics





Niche



Ecological niche
Ecological trap
Ecosystem engineer
Environmental niche modelling
Guild
Habitat
Marine habitats
Limiting similarity
Niche apportionment models
Niche construction
Niche differentiation





Other networks



Assembly rules
Bateman's principle
Bioluminescence
Ecological collapse
Ecological debt
Ecological deficit
Ecological energetics
Ecological indicator
Ecological threshold
Ecosystem diversity
Emergence
Extinction debt
Kleiber's law
Liebig's law of the minimum
Marginal value theorem
Thorson's rule
Xerosere





Other



Allometry
Alternative stable state
Balance of nature
Biological data visualization
Ecocline
Ecological economics
Ecological footprint
Ecological forecasting
Ecological humanities
Ecological stoichiometry
Ecopath
Ecosystem based fisheries
Endolith
Evolutionary ecology
Functional ecology
Industrial ecology
Macroecology
Microecosystem
Natural environment
Regime shift
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Theoretical ecology






List of ecology topics










v
t
e


Evolutionary ecology



Patterns of evolution



Convergent evolution

examples


Parallel evolution
Divergent evolution
Paradox of the plankton





Signals



Signalling theory
Antipredator adaptation

Alarm signal
Aposematism
Apparent death
Deimatic behaviour
Distraction display



Crypsis
Camouflage
Mimicry
Unkenreflex














Authority control



NDL: 00563545











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Predation&oldid=812992479"					Categories: PredationBiological pest controlHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 maint: Uses editors parameterCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterArticles needing additional references from March 2017All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from December 2011