






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article contains content that is written like an advertisement. Please help improve it by removing promotional content and inappropriate external links, and by adding encyclopedic content written from a neutral point of view. (February 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Prentice Hall




Parent company
Pearson Education


Founded
1913


Founder
Charles Gerstenberg and Richard Ettinger


Country of origin
United States


Headquarters location
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey


Publication types
Books


Official website
prenticehall.com


Prentice Hall is a major educational publisher owned by Pearson PLC. Prentice Hall publishes print and digital content for the 6–12 and higher-education market. Prentice Hall distributes its technical titles through the Safari Books Online e-reference service.



Contents


1 History
2 Notable titles
3 In "personal computer" history
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]
On October 13, 1913, law professor Dr. Charles Gerstenberg and his student Richard Ettinger founded Prentice Hall. Gerstenberg and Ettinger took their mothers' maiden names—Prentice and Hall—to name their new company.[1]
Prentice Hall was acquired by Gulf+Western in 1984, and became part of that company's publishing division Simon & Schuster. Publication of trade books ended in 1991. Simon & Schuster's educational division, including Prentice Hall, was sold to Pearson by G+W successor Viacom in 1998.
Notable titles[edit]
Prentice Hall is the publisher of Magruder's American Government as well as Biology by Ken Miller and Joe Levine. Their artificial intelligence series includes Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach by Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norvig and ANSI Common Lisp by Paul Graham. They also published the well-known computer programming book The C Programming Language by Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie and Operating Systems: Design and Implementation by Andrew S. Tanenbaum. Other titles include Dennis Nolan's Big Pig (1976), Monster Bubbles: A Counting Book (1976), Alphabrutes (1977), Wizard McBean and his Flying Machine (1977), Witch Bazooza (1979), Llama Beans (1979, with author Charles Keller), and The Joy of Chickens (1981).
In "personal computer" history[edit]
A Prentice Hall subsidiary, Reston Publishing, was in the foreground of technical-book publishing when microcomputers were first becoming available. It was still unclear who would be buying and using "personal computers," and the scarcity of useful software and instruction created a publishing market niche whose target audience yet had to be defined. In the spirit of the pioneers who made PCs possible, Reston Publishing's editors addressed non-technical users with the reassuring, and mildly experimental, Computer Anatomy for Beginners by Marlin Ouverson of People's Computer Company. They followed with a collection of books that was generally by and for programmers, building a stalwart list of titles relied on by many in the first generation of microcomputers users.
See also[edit]

cis-test PLC
Prentice Hall International Series in Computer Science

References[edit]



^ "About Pearson Prentice Hall". Archived from the original on May 3, 2007. Retrieved 2007-05-23. 



External links[edit]

Prentice Hall website
Prentice Hall School website
Prentice Hall Higher Education website
Prentice Hall Professional Technical Reference website







v
t
e


Pearson PLC



Pearson School



Addison-Wesley
Dorling Kindersley
Heinemann (outside US)


Modern Curriculum Press
Prentice Hall
Scott Foresman
Silver Burdett
York Notes





Pearson
Higher Education



Addison-Wesley
Allyn & Bacon
Benjamin Cummings
Longman
Prentice Hall
Propero





Pearson
Professional



Addison-Wesley Professional
Adobe Press
Apple Certified
Allyn & Bacon Professional
Cisco Press
FT Press
IBM Press
InformIT
New York Institute of Finance
Peachpit
Pearson Assessment & Information
Prentice Hall Professional
SAMS Publishing
Pearson VUE
Wharton





Other



Connections Academy
Edexcel
Pearson College
Pearson Language Tests
Wall Street Institute
80 Strand
Glen Moreno
Weetman Pearson, 1st Viscount Cowdray
Marjorie Scardino
Penguin Random House






 Category






Books portal
Companies portal







This publishing-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prentice_Hall&oldid=806714876"					Categories: Educational publishing companies of the United StatesBook publishing companies based in New JerseyComputer book publishing companiesEducational book publishing companiesTextbook publishing companiesCompanies based in Bergen County, New JerseyPublishing companies established in 19131913 establishments in the United StatesFormer Viacom subsidiariesPearson PLCPublishing stubsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2014All articles needing additional referencesArticles with a promotional tone from February 2014All articles with a promotional toneArticles with multiple maintenance issuesPages using deprecated image syntaxAll stub articles