This article is about schools for younger children between the ages of three and five. For other uses, see preschool (disambiguation).
"Preschooler" redirects here. For the stage of childhood which ranges from 3 to 5 years old, see early childhood.




Kindergarten children in Malaysia exercising




Caring for children


At home




Parents
Extended family
Au pair
Babysitting
Governess
Nanny




Outside the home




Day care
Pre-school playgroup




Educational settings




Early childhood education
Pre-kindergarten


Preschool education
Kindergarten


Elementary School
Primary School




Institutions and standards




Child protection
In loco parentis
Minor (law)




Related




Child abuse
Child Online Protection
Family law
Orphanage
Parenting







v
t
e





A preschool, also known as nursery school, pre-primary school, playschool or kindergarten, is an educational establishment or learning space offering early childhood education to children before they begin compulsory education at primary school. It may be publicly or privately operated, and may be subsidized from public funds.



Contents


1 Terminology
2 History

2.1 Origins
2.2 Spread


3 Developmental areas
4 Funding
5 Advocacy
6 Curricula
7 National variations

7.1 China
7.2 Turkey
7.3 Japan
7.4 North Korea
7.5 United States

7.5.1 Head Start


7.6 United Kingdom

7.6.1 England
7.6.2 Wales
7.6.3 Northern Ireland
7.6.4 Scotland




8 See also
9 References
10 Sources
11 Further reading
12 External links



Terminology[edit]
Terminology varies by country. In some European countries the term "kindergarten" refers to formal education of children classified as ISCED level 0 - with one or several years of such education being compulsory - before children start primary school at ISCED level 1.[1]
The following terms may be used for educational establishments for this age group:

Pre-Primary[2] from 6 weeks to 6 years old- is an educational child care service you can enroll your child(ren) in before primary school. May also be used to define services for children younger than kindergarten age, especially in countries where kindergarten is compulsory. The Pre-Primary program takes place in a Nursery School.
Nursery School (UK and US) from 0 months to 5 years old- is an pre-primary educational child care institution which includes DayCare, Preschool, Pre-K(Pre-Kindergarten), and Kindergarten.
Daycare (US) from 0 months to 2½ years old- held in a Nursery School, but can also be called "a child care service" or a "crèche".[3][4]
Preschool (US and UK) from 3 to 4 years old- held in a Nursery School; readiness has to do with whether your child is developmentally appropriate so you can start as early as 2½ years old. Preschool education is important and beneficial to your child attending nursery school.
Pre-K (or Pre-Kindergarten) from 4 to 5 years old- held in Nursery School and is an initiative to improve access to pre-primary schools for children in the USA. There is much more than teaching your child colors, numbers, shapes and so on. The children need to learn how to follow rules, feed themselves with minimal assistant, learn how to use the bathroom without needing as much help if they are wearing underwear instead of diapers. The teachers are there to help guide your child into the right path and make sure he/her is sharing and being nice to other children.
Kindergarten(US) from 5 to 6 years old- held in a Nursery School and/or some primary schools; in many parts of world (less so in English speaking countries) its refer to the first stages of formal education

History[edit]
Origins[edit]




Samuel Wilderspin, one of the founders of preschool education. 1848 engraving by John Rogers Herbert.


In an age when school was restricted to children who had already learned to read and write at home, there were many attempts to make school accessible to orphans or to the children of women who worked in factories.
In 1779, Johann Friedrich Oberlin and Louise Scheppler founded in Strassbourg an early establishment for caring for and educating pre-school children whose parents were absent during the day.[5] At about the same time, in 1780, similar infant establishments were established in Bavaria[6] In 1802, Pauline zur Lippe established a preschool center in Detmold.
In 1816, Robert Owen, a philosopher and pedagogue, opened the first British and probably globally the first infant school in New Lanark, Scotland.[7][8][9] In conjunction with his venture for cooperative mills Owen wanted the children to be given a good moral education so that they would be fit for work. His system was successful in producing obedient children with basic literacy and numeracy.[10]
Samuel Wilderspin opened his first infant school in London in 1819,[11] and went on to establish hundreds more. He published many works on the subject, and his work became the model for infant schools throughout England and further afield. Play was an important part of Wilderspin's system of education. He is credited with inventing the playground. In 1823, Wilderspin published On the Importance of Educating the Infant Poor, based on the school. He began working for the Infant School Society the next year, informing others about his views. He also wrote "The Infant System, for developing the physical, intellectual, and moral powers off all children from 1 to seven years of age".
Spread[edit]
Countess Theresa Brunszvik (1775–1861), who had known and been influenced by Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi, was influenced by this example to open an Angyalkert ('angel garden' in Hungarian) on 27 May 1828 in her residence in Buda, the first of eleven care centers that she founded for young children.[12][13] In 1836 she established an institute for the foundation of preschool centers. The idea became popular among the nobility and the middle class and was copied throughout the Hungarian kingdom.




A Kindergarten in Germany in 1954


Friedrich Fröbel (1782–1852) opened a Play and Activity institute in 1837 in the village of Bad Blankenburg in the principality of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt, Thuringia, which he renamed Kindergarten on 28 June 1840.
Women trained by Fröbel opened Kindergartens throughout Europe and around the World. The first kindergarten in the United States was founded in Watertown, Wisconsin in 1856 and was conducted in German.[14] Elizabeth Peabody founded America's first English-language kindergarten in 1860 and the first free kindergarten in America was founded in 1870 by Conrad Poppenhusen, a German industrialist and philanthropist, who also established the Poppenhusen Institute and the first publicly financed kindergarten in the United States was established in St. Louis in 1873 by Susan Blow. Canada's first private kindergarten was opened by the Wesleyan Methodist Church in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island in 1870 and by the end of the decade, they were common in large Canadian towns and cities.[15][16] The country's first public-school kindergartens were established in Berlin, Ontario in 1882 at Central School.[17] In 1885, the Toronto Normal School (teacher training) opened a department for Kindergarten teaching.[17]
Elizabeth Harrison wrote extensively on the theory of early childhood education and worked to enhance educational standards for kindergarten teachers by establishing what became the National College of Education in 1886.
Head Start was the first publicly funded preschool program in the US, created in 1965 by President Johnson for low-income families—only 10% of children were then enrolled in preschool. Due to large demand, various states subsidized preschool for low-income families in the 1980s.
Developmental areas[edit]
Main article: Early childhood education
The most important years of learning begin at birth.[18] During these early years, humans are capable of absorbing more information than later on. The brain grows most rapidly in the early years. High quality teachers and preschools can have a long-term effect on improving outcomes for disadvantaged students.[19][20]
The areas of development that preschool education covers varies. However, the following main themes are typically offered.[21][22]

Personal, social, economic and emotional development
Communication (including sign language), talking and listening
World knowledge and understanding
Creative and aesthetic development
Mathematical awareness
Physical development
Physical health
Play
Teamwork
Self-help skills
Social skills
Scientific thinking
Literacy

Preschool systems observe standards for structure (administration, class size, student–teacher ratio, services), process (quality of classroom environments, teacher-child interactions, etc.) and alignment (standards, curriculum, assessments) components. Curriculum is designed for differing ages. For example, counting to 10 is generally after the age of four.[23]
Some studies dispute the benefits of preschool education,[24] finding that preschool can be detrimental to cognitive and social development.[25][26] A study by UC Berkeley and Stanford University on 14,000 preschools revealed that while there is a temporary cognitive boost in pre-reading and math, preschool holds detrimental effects on social development and cooperation.[27] Research has also shown that the home environment has a greater impact on future outcomes than preschool.[18]
There is emerging evidence that high quality preschools are "play based," rather than attempting to provide early formal instruction in academic subjects. “Playing with other children, away from adults, is how children learn to make their own decisions, control their emotions and impulses, see from others’ perspectives, negotiate differences with others, and make friends,” according to Dr. Peter Gray, Boston College professor and an expert on the evolution of play and its vital role in child development. “In short, play is how children learn to take control of their lives.”[28]
Preschools have adopted various methods of teaching, such as Montessori, Waldorf, Head Start, HighScope,[29] Reggio Emilia approach, Bank Street and Forest kindergartens.
Funding[edit]
While a majority of American preschool programs remain tuition-based, support for some public funding of early childhood education has grown over the years. As of 2008, 38 states and the District of Columbia invested in at least some preschool programs, and many school districts were providing preschool services on their own, using local and federal funds.[30] The United States spends .04% of its GDP or $63 billion on preschool education.[2]
The benefits and challenges of a public preschool reflect the available funding. Funding can range from federal, state, local public allocations, private sources, and parental fees.[31] The problem of funding a public preschool occurs not only from limited sources but from the cost per child. As of 2007, the average cost across the lower 48 states was $6,582.[32] Four categories determine the costs of public preschools: personnel ratios, personnel qualifications, facilities and transportation, and health and nutrition services. These costs depend heavily on the cost and quality of services provided.[33] The main personnel factor related to cost is teacher qualifications. Another determinant of cost is the length of the school day. Longer sessions cost more.[32]
Collaboration has helped fund programs in several districts. Collaborations with area Head Start and other private preschools helped fund a public preschool in one district. "We’re very pleased with the interaction. It’s really added a dimension to our program that’s been very positive".[34] The National Head Start Bureau has been looking for more opportunities to partner with public schools. Torn Schultz of the Bureau states, "We’re turning to partnership as much as possible, either in funds or facilities to make sure children get everything necessary to be ready for school".[35]
Advocacy[edit]
The Universal Preschool movement is an international effort to make preschool available to families, as it is for primary education. Various jurisdictions and advocates have differing priorities for access, availability and funding sources.
In the United States, most preschool advocates support the National Association for the Education of Young Children's Developmentally Appropriate Practices.[citation needed]
The National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) and the National Association of Child Care Professionals (NACCP) publicize and promote the idea of developmentally appropriate practice, although many institutions have not taken that approach. NAEYC claimed that although 80% of kindergarten classrooms claim to be developmentally appropriate, only 20% actually are.[citation needed]
Curricula[edit]
Main article: Curricula in early childhood care and education
Curricula for pre-school children have long been a hotbed for debate. Much of this revolves around content and pedagogy; the extent to which academic content should be included in the curriculum and whether formal instruction or child-initiated exploration, supported by adults, is more effective.[36] Proponents of an academic curriculum are likely to favour a focus on basic skills, especially literacy and numeracy, and structured pre-determined activities for achieving related goals. Internationally, there is strong opposition to this type of Early childhood care and education curriculum and defence of a broad-based curriculum that supports a child’s overall development including health and physical development, emotional and spiritual well-being, social competence, intellectual development and communication skills.[37] The type of document that emerges from this perspective is likely to be more open, offering a framework which teachers and parents can use to develop curricula specific to their contexts.[38]
National variations[edit]
See also: Category:Education by country
Preschool education, like all other forms of education, is intended by the society that controls it to transmit important cultural values to the participants. As a result, different cultures make different choices about preschool education. Despite the variations, there are a few common themes. Most significantly, preschool is universally expected to increase the young child's ability to perform basic self-care tasks such as dressing, feeding, and toileting.[39]
China[edit]
The study of early childhood education (ECE) in China has been intimately influenced by the reforms and progress of Chinese politics and the economy. Currently, the Chinese government has shown interest in early childhood education, implementing policies in the form of The Guidance for Kindergarten Education (Trial Version) in 2001 and The National Education Reform and Development of Long-Term Planning Programs (2010–2020) in 2010. It has been found that China’s kindergarten education has dramatically changed since 1990. In recent years, various Western curricula and pedagogical models have been introduced to China, such as Montessori programs, Reggio Emilia, Developmentally Appropriate Practice (DAP), and the Project Approach. Many kindergartens have faced difficulties and challenges in adapting these models in their programs. Therefore, a heated debate about how the Western curricula can be appropriated in the Chinese cultural context has been initiated between early childhood researchers and practitioners. Research has revealed that the most important aim for promoting curriculum reform is to improve kindergarten teachers’ professional knowledge, such as their understanding of the concept of play and pedagogy, and perceptions of inclusion and kindergarten-based curriculum. Furthermore, within the process of reform, family education and family collaborations cannot be ignored in child development. Early childhood education in China has made dramatic progress since the 1980s. In Tobin, et al. 2009, which studies across three cultures, the continuity and change across the systems of early childhood education are evident. The project report Zhongguo Xueqian Jiaoyu Fazhan Zhanlue Yanjiu Ketizu 2010 reflects upon the development of China’s early childhood education and locates the current situation of the development of early childhood education. The historical development of Chinese early childhood education indicates three distinct cultural threads, including traditional culture, communist culture, and Western culture, that have shaped early childhood education in China, as demonstrated in Zhu and Zhang 2008 and Lau 2012. Furthermore, currently, administrative authorities intend to establish an independent budget for the ECE field in order to support early childhood education in rural areas (Zhao and Hu 2008). A higher quality of educational provisions for children living in rural areas will be another goal for the Chinese government. Many researchers have detailed the important issues of early childhood education, especially teacher education. The exploratory study in Hu and Szente 2010 (cited under Early Childhood Inclusive Education) has indicated that Chinese kindergarten teachers hold negative attitudes toward inclusion of children with disabilities, as they do not have enough knowledge and skills for working with this population. This indicates that kindergarten teachers need to improve their perceptions of children with disabilities. Furthermore, Gu 2007 has focused on the issues of new early childhood teachers’ professional development and puts forward some feasible suggestions about how new teachers deal with key events in their everyday teaching practices. With regard to families’ support of their children’s early development at home, family education should be focused and the collaborative partnership between kindergarten and family needs to be enhanced. Teachers’ attitudes toward family intervention are a vital aspect of teacher-family collaboration. Therefore, kindergarten teachers should support family members in their role as the child’s first teacher and build collaborative partnerships with family, as presented in Ding 2007. Furthermore, kindergarten teachers should be considered as active researchers in children’s role play. This supports the co-construction of their teaching knowledge in relation to children’s initiation/subjectivity in role play (Liu, et al. 2003).
Turkey[edit]
Preschool education is starting in Turkey at the age of 5 while primary level education is starting at the age of 6.
Japan[edit]






The neutrality of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (September 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Young children in a kindergarten in Japan


In Japan, development of social skills and a sense of group belonging are major goals. Classes tend to have up to 40 students, to decrease the role of the teacher and increase peer interactions. Participation in group activities is highly valued, leading some schools to for example, count a child who is standing still near a group exercise session as participating. Children are taught to work harmoniously in large and small groups, and to develop cooperativeness, kindness and social consciousness. The most important goal is to provide a rich social environment that increasingly isolated nuclear families do not provide; unstructured play time is valued.
Children are allowed to resolve disputes with each other, including physical fighting. Most behavioral problems are attributed to the child's inappropriately expressed emotional dependency. Remedies involve accepting the child, rather than treatment with drugs or punishment. Japanese culture attributes success to effort rather than inborn talent, leading teachers to ignore innate differences between children by encouraging and praising perseverance. They work to ensure that all students meet the standard rather that each reaches his or her own potential. Although preschools exhibit great variety, most target age-appropriate personal development, such as learning empathy, rather than academic programs. Academic programs tend to be more common among Westernized and Christian preschools.[40]
North Korea[edit]
Children in North Korea are taught to enjoy military games and to hate the miguk nom, or "American bastard."[41]
United States[edit]
See also: Pre-Kindergarten
In the United States, nursery school is provided in a variety of settings. In general, pre-school is meant to promote development in children through planned programs. Pre-school is defined as: "center-based programs for four-year olds that are fully or partially funded by state education agencies and that are operated in schools or under the direction of state and local education agencies".[42] Pre-schools, both private and school sponsored, are available for children from ages three to five. Many of these programs follow similar curriculum as pre-kindergarten.
In the United States, preschool education emphasizes individuality. Children are frequently permitted to choose from a variety of activities, using a learning center approach. During these times, some children draw or paint, some play house, some play with puzzles while some listen to the teacher read a story aloud. Activities vary in each session. Each child is assumed to have particular strengths and weaknesses to be encouraged or ameliorated by the teachers. A typical belief is that "children's play is their work" and that allowing them to select the type of play, the child will meet his or her developmental needs. Preschools also adopt American ideas about justice, such as the rule of law and the idea that everyone is innocent until proven guilty. Teachers actively intervene in disputes and encourage children to resolve them verbally ("use your words") rather than physically. Children may be punished with a time out or required to apologize or make reparations for misbehavior. Teachers assist children to explain what happened, before any decision to punish is made. Self-expressive language skills are emphasized through informal interactions with teachers and through structured group activities such as show and tell exercises to enable the child to describe an experience to an adult. Resources vary depending on the wealth of the students, but generally are better equipped than other cultures. Most programs are not subsidized by government, making preschools relatively expensive even though the staff is typically poorly compensated. Student-teacher ratios are lower than in other cultures, ideally about 15 students per group. Parents and teachers see teachers as extensions of or partial substitutes for parents and consequently emphasize personal relationships and consistent expectations at home and at school.[43]
In the United States, students who may benefit from special education receive services in preschools. Since the enactment of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) Public Law 101-476 in 1975 and its amendments, PL 102-119 and PL 105-17 in 1997, the educational system has moved away from self-contained special education classrooms to inclusion, leading special education teachers to practice in a wider variety of settings. As with other stages in the life of a child with special needs, the Individualized Education Plan (IEP) or an Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP) is an important way for teachers, administrators and parents to set guidelines for a partnership to help the child succeed in preschool.
Head Start[edit]
Main article: Head Start (program)
The goal of Head Start and of Early Head Start is to increase the school readiness of young children in low income families. These programs serve children from birth to age five, pregnant women, and their families. Head Start was started by the Federal Government in 1964 to help meet the needs of disadvantaged pre-school children.
The office of Economic Opportunity launched Project Head Start as an eight-week summer program in 1965. It was then transferred to the Office of Child Development in the US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare in 1969. Today it is a program within the Administration on Children, Youth and Families in the Department of Health and Human Services. Programs are administered locally by school systems and non-profit organizations.

Services provided by Head Start


Disabilities - All programs fully include children with disabilities
Education - The goal of Head Start is to ensure that those children enrolled in the program are ready to begin school. Activities are geared towards skill and knowledge domains.
Family and Community Partnerships - both groups are involved in the operation, governance and evaluation of the program.
Health - Health is seen as an important factor in a child's ability to thrive and develop. The program provides screenings to evaluate a child's overall health, regular health check-ups, and good practices in oral health, hygiene, nutrition, personal care, and safety.
Program Management and Operations - "focus on delivering high-quality child development services to children from low-income families."

However, a rigorous preschool can be developmentally detrimental to children and cause social, emotional, and educational problems later in life. Although an essential based preschool is not focused on academics and kindergarten routines, children learn a lot more valuable lessons that they will use for the rest of their life. Research has shown that of the two an essential based preschool is the better option for children, because of their specific ways of learning.
United Kingdom[edit]
In the UK, pre-school education in nursery classes or schools has some local government funding for children aged between two and four. Pre-school education can be provided by childcare centres, playgroups, nursery schools and nursery classes within primary schools. Private voluntary or independent (PVI sector) nursery education is also available throughout the UK and varies between structured pre-school education and a service offering child-minding facilities.
Nursery in England is also called FS1 which is the first year of foundation before they go into primary or infants.
The curriculum goals of a nursery school are more specific than for childcare, but less strenuous than for primary school. For example, the Scottish Early Years Framework[44] and the Curriculum for Excellence[45] define expected outcomes even at this age. In some areas, the provision of nursery school services is on a user pays or limited basis while other governments fund nursery school services.
England[edit]
A voucher system for nursery provision was introduced in England and Wales under the Major government, providing for 15 hours per week free childcare or education for three and four-year-olds, much of it provided through reception classes in primary schools. This was replaced by the Blair government with direct funding by local education authorities. Hence every child in England at the first school term after their third birthday is now entitled to 15 hours per week free childcare funding. [46] Pre-schools in England follow the Early Learning Goals, set by the Early Years Foundation Stage,[47] for education produced by the Department for Children, Schools and Families which carries on into their first year of school at the age of four. This year of school is usually called Reception. The Early Learning Goals cover the main areas of education without being subject driven. These areas include[48]

Personal, social and emotional development (prime area)
Communication and Language (prime area)
Physical education (prime area)
Literacy (specific area)
Mathematics (specific area)
Understanding the World (specific area)
Expressive Art & Design (specific area)

Until the mid-1980s, nursery schools only admitted pupils in the final year (three terms) leading up to their admission to primary school, but pupils now attend nursery school for four or five terms. It is also common practise for many children to attend nursery much earlier than this. Many nurseries have the facilities to take on babies, using the 'Early Years Foundation Stage', framework as a guide to give each child the best possible start to becoming a competent learner and skilful communicator.
Wales[edit]
Provision in Wales followed England until devolution, and subsequently diverged. Now early years education in Wales is provided half-time for children aged 3–4 (Nursery) and full-time for those between the ages of 4 and 5 (Reception). Since 2005 it has been a statutory duty for all Local Education Authorities to secure sufficient nursery education in their area for children from the term following their third birthday.
Currently, the Early Years curriculum in Wales, produced by the Welsh Assembly Government Department for Children, Education, Lifelong Learning and Skills,is set out in the booklet "Desirable Outcomes for Children's Learning Before Compulsory School Age".[49] However, a new 'Foundation Phase' covering 3-7 year olds is being rolled out across Wales from 2008, with a focus on 'learning through play',[50] which covers seven areas of learning:

Personal and Social Development and Well Being
Language, Literacy and Communication Skills
Mathematical Development
Bilingualism and Multi-cultural Understanding
Knowledge and Understanding of the World
Physical Development
Creative Development

Northern Ireland[edit]
In Northern Ireland funded Nursery School places can be applied for from ages 3 and up. Preschool education is delivered also by PreSchools, also referred to as Playschools or Playgroups. A Nursery School is allowed to enrol up to 26 children into a class, with the curriculum being delivered by a qualified teacher and a Nursery Assistant. A preschool, which delivers the same curriculum, is also permitted to admit a maximum of 26 children to any single session. However, the regulations for personnel differ. The Preschool must have a Supervisor with an NVQ 3 qualification in Child Care (or Equivalent). There must be one qualified and vetted adult for every 8 children. Funding is applied for through PEAGs (Preschool Education Advisory Group). Both nursery and preschool settings are inspected by the Education and Training Inspectorate. Preschools are also subject to inspection by local Social Services.
Starting in the year of 2010, Ireland passed a law stating that all children of the age 3 years and 2 months and less than 4 years and 7 months are qualified to attend a preschool free of charge. Before this law was passed there was a large number of children who did not attend an Early Childhood Education Program. The programs that were offered operated voluntary and required the parents to pay a steep fee per child. This left many families with no option but to keep the kids at home. The government soon realized that a large number of children were having trouble in their first years of primary school and parents were having to stay home becoming jobless. Once the government issued the free preschool scheme, Ireland's preschool enrollment rate increased to about 93%.[51][52]
Scotland[edit]
In Scotland a voucher system for part-time pre-school provision was introduced in parallel with England and Wales under the Major government, but with a strong emphasis on age-appropriate education rather than simply childcare, and avoiding the use of reception classes in primary schools. Now children are entitled to a place in a nursery class when they reach their third birthday. This gives parents the option of two years of funded pre-school education before beginning primary one, the first year of compulsory education. Nursery children who are three years old are referred to as ante-pre-school whilst children who are four years old are termed pre-school. Pre-school education in Scotland is planned around the Early Level of the Curriculum for Excellence which identifies Outcomes & Experiences around the following eight curricular areas:

Expressive Arts,
Health & Wellbeing,
Languages,
Mathematics,
Religious & Moral Education,
Sciences
Social Studies
Technologies

Responsibility for the review of care standards in Scottish nurseries rests with the Care Commission.
See also[edit]

Daycare
Education theory
Heutagogy
Miriam Roth (1910–2005) - Israeli writer and scholar of children's books, kindergarten teacher, and educator
Pedagogy
Reggio Emilia approach
Challenger schools
Poisonous pedagogy
Children's television series

References[edit]


^ https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/fpfis/mwikis/eurydice/images/2/24/Compulsory_Education_in_Europe_2016_2017.pdf
^ a b Stephens, Terence (2013-11-28). "Preschool Report". ChildCareIntro.com. Retrieved 2013-12-09. 
^ Turner, Martin; Rack, John Paul (2004). The study of dyslexia. Birkhäuser, ISBN 978-0-306-48531-2
^ Dustmann, Christian; Fitzenberger, Bernd; Machin, Stephen (2008). The economics of education and training. Springer, ISBN 978-3-7908-2021-8
^ Samuel Lorenzo Knapp (1846), ‘’Female biography: containing notices of distinguished women’’ Philadelphia: Thomas Wardle. p. 230
^ Manfred Berger, "Kurze Chronik der ehemaligen und gegenwärtigen Ausbildungsstätten für Kleinkindlehrerinnen, Kindergärtnerinnen, Hortnerinnen ... und ErzieherInnen in Bayern“ Archived 4 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine. in '‘Das Kita-Handbuch ‘‘, ed. Martin R. Textor
^ Vag, Otto (March 1975). "The Influence of the English Infant School in Hungary". International Journal of Early Childhood. Springer. 7 (1): 132–136. doi:10.1007/bf03175934. 
^ New Lanark Kids: Robert Owen
^ Education in Robert Owen's New Society: the New Lanark Institute and schools
^ "Socialist - Courier: Robert Owen and New Lanark". Socialist-courier.blogspot.co.uk. Retrieved 2013-11-27. 
^ Wilderspin, Samuel (1823). The Importance of Educating the Infant Poor. London. 
^ Budapest Lexikon, 1993
^ Public Preschool Education In Hungary: A Historical Survey, 1980
^ "Watertown Historical Society". Watertown Historical Society. Retrieved 21 June 2015. 
^ Olsen, M.I. 1955. "The development of play schools and kindergartens and an analysis of a sampling of these institutions in Alberta. Master’s thesis, University of Alberta."
^ Larry Prochner, "A History of Early Education and Child Care in Canada, 1820-1966" in Early Childhood Care and Education in Canada (eds. Larry Prochner and Nina Howe), Vancouver: UBC Press, 2000
^ a b Larry Prochner, History of Early Childhood Education in Canada, Australia and New Zealand, UBC Press 2009
^ a b The Early Years Framework (PDF). Scottish Government. 2008. ISBN 978-0-7559-5942-6. 
^ Schaefer, Stephanie; Cohen, Julie. (December 2000). "Making Investments in Young Children: What the Research on Early Care and Education Tells Us". National Association of Child Advocates. 
^ Hanford, Emily (October 2009). "Early Lessons". American Radio Works. Retrieved 2009-11-08. 
^ The foundation stage: education for children aged 3 to 5 Archived 7 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ A Curriculum Framework for Children 3 to 5 Archived 3 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Age Appropriate Curriculum, Developmental Milestones, and Readiness: What My Child Should Be Learning and When
^ "Creative Learning Center Preschool DayCare Child". Creative Learning Center. Retrieved 2017-03-21. 
^ 542
^ John, Martha Tyler (April 1986). "Can Preschool Be Detrimental to Cognitive Growth?". 
^ "University of California - UC Newsroom | New report examines effects nationwide of preschool on kids' development". Universityofcalifornia.edu. 2005-11-02. Retrieved 2013-11-27. 
^ Gray, Peter. "Free to Learn," Basic Books 2016.
^ High Scope
^ Wat, Albert; Gayl, Chrisanne (July 2009). Beyond the School Yard: Pre-K Collaborations with Community-Based Partners (Report). Washington, D.C.: Pew Center on the States. pp. 24 pp. Retrieved 2010-01-31. 
^ Levin & Schwartz 2007, p. 4.
^ a b Levin & Schwartz 2007.
^ Levin & Schwartz 2007, p. 14.
^ Reeves 2000.
^ Reeves 2000, p. 6.
^ Katz, L. Curriculum Disputes in Early Childhood Education. ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood Education. EDO-PS-99-13.
^ Bennett, J. 2004. Curriculum in early childhood education and care. UNESCO Policy Brief on Early Childhood. No. 26, September 2004.
^ Marope, P.T.M.; Kaga, Y. (2015). Investing against Evidence: The Global State of Early Childhood Care and Education (PDF). Paris, UNESCO. pp. 243–265. ISBN 978-92-3-100113-0. 
^ Davidson, Tobin & Wu 1989, pp. 188-221.
^ Davidson, Tobin & Wu 1989, pp. 12–71.
^ Lee, Jean H. (24 June 2012). "In North Korea, learning to hate US starts early". Associated Press. 
^ Pre-kindergarten study Archived 1 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Davidson, Tobin & Wu 1989, pp. 126–187.
^ Early Years Framework, Scottish Government, January 2009
^ Curriculum for Excellence Archived 1 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine., Scottish Government
^ BBC Parenting, Help with Child Care Archived 3 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Appendix 2: early years foundation stage". www.gov.uk. Retrieved 21 June 2015. 
^ QCA Foundation Stage Archived 10 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ DELLS - Desirable outcomes for children’s learning before compulsory school age
^ Welsh Assembly Government | What is the Foundation Phase? Archived 12 September 2008 at the UK Government Web Archive
^ "Early Childhood." Department of Education and Skills. N.p., n.d. Web. 24 Nov. 2015. http://www.education.ie/en/The-Education-System/Early-Childhood/
^ "Free Pre-School Year in Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE)." Guide for Parents. N.p., n.d. Web. 24 Nov. 2015. http://www.dcya.gov.ie/viewdoc.asp?fn=%2Fdocuments%2Fchildcare%2FECCE_guideforparents.htm


Sources[edit]
Davidson, Dana H.; Tobin, Joseph Jay; Wu, David Y. H. (1989). Preschool in three cultures: Japan, China, and the United States. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press. pp. 188–221. ISBN 0-300-04235-3. 
Further reading[edit]

Buysee, V.; P. W. Wesley (2005). Consultation in Early Childhood Settings. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing. ISBN 1-55766-774-8. 
Center for Public Education. (2007, March). Retrieved 2 July 2009, from http://www.centerforpubliceducation.org/Main-Menu/Pre-kindergarten/Pre-Kindergarten/Pre-kindergarten-What-the-research-shows.html
Condillac, E. B. (1746/1970, 2001). Essai sur l'origine des connaissances [Essay on the origin of human knowledge] in Oeuvres Completes Tome 1. Genève: Slatkine reprints. Retrieved from http://www.slatkine.com/. In addition, translated from the French of the Abbé de Condillac by Hans Aarsleff, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Condillac, E. B. (1749/1970, 1982). Traité des systèmes [Treatise on the systems] in Oeuvres Completes Tome 2. Genève: Slatkine reprints. Retrieved from http://www.slatkine.com/. In addition, translated from the French of the Abbé de Condillac by Franklin Philip, Philosophical Writings of Etienne Bonnot, Abbé de Condillac (Vol. I), Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Condillac, E. B. (1754/1982). Traité des sensations [Treatise on the sensations]. Genève: Slatkine reprints. Retrieved from http://www.slatkine.com/. In addition, translated from the French of the Abbé de Condillac by Franklin Philip, Philosophical Writings of Etienne Bonnot, Abbé de Condillac, and (Vol. I), Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Condillac, E. B. (1756). An essay on the origin of human knowledge. In Locke’s Essay on the Human Understanding. Translated from the French of the Abbé de Condillac by Thomas Nugent. London, England: J. Nourse. Retrieved 23 September 2008 from https://books.google.com/books?id=rp_go5DhQqQC .
Fay, J. & Funk, D. (1995). Teaching with love & logic. Golden, CO: The Love & Logic Press, Inc.
Glasser, W. (1984). Self-importance boosts learning. The School Administrator 45, 16-18.
Glasser, W. (1996). "Then and now. The theory of choice". Learning. 25 (3): 20–22. Retrieved 30 September 2013. 
Heyman, G., Dweck, C., & Cain, K. (1992). Young children’s vulnerability to self-blame and helplessness: Relationship to beliefs about goodness. Child Development, 63, 401-415.
Individuals with Disabilities Individualizing Education Act (IDEA) Data. (2006). Part B child count data [Table]. Retrieved 25 May 2008, from https://web.archive.org/web/20130727110604/http://www.ideadata.org/PartBData.asp
Itard, J. M. G. (1962). The wild boy of Aveyron. (G. Humphrey & M. Humphrey, Trans.). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. (Original works published 1801 and 1806).
Levin, H. M.; Schwartz, H. L. (2007b). "Educational vouchers for universal pre-schools" (PDF). Economics of Education Review. 26: 3–16. doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2005.10.006. 
Levin, H.M.; Schwartz, H.L. (2007). "What is the cost of a preschool program?". National Center for the study of Privatization in Education.  Symposium conducted at the meeting of the AEFA Annual Conference, Baltimore, Maryland.
McCollum, J. A.; Yates, T. (1994). "Dyad as focus, triad as means: A family-centered approach to supporting parent-child interactions". Infants and Young Children. 6 (4): 54–63. doi:10.1097/00001163-199404000-00008. 
Reeves, K. (2000). Preschool in the public schools. American Association of School Administrators.  1-9
Skinner, B. F. (1954). "The science of learning and the art of teaching". Harvard Educational Review. 24 (2): 86–87. 

External links[edit]

 The dictionary definition of preschool at Wiktionary







v
t
e


Human biological and psychological development



Before birth



Embryo
Fetus





After birth



Infant
Toddler
Early childhood
Childhood

Child


Preadolescence
Adolescence
Adulthood
Middle age
Old age





Definitions



Minor
Age of majority





Events and phases



Gestational age
Prenatal development
Birth
Child development

stages


Cognitive development of infants
Human development
Adult development
Puberty
Ageing
Senescence
Death





Developmental psychology



Antenatal
Positive youth development
Young adult
Positive adult development
Maturity






Theorists and
theories




Freud (1856–1939) (Psychosexual development)
Piaget (1896–1980) (Theory of cognitive development)
Vygotsky (1896–1934) (Cultural-historical psychology)
Erikson (1902–1994) (Psychosocial development)
Bowlby (1907–1990) (Attachment theory)
Bronfenbrenner (1917–2005) (Ecological systems theory)
Kohlberg (1927–1987) (Stages of moral development)
Commons (b. 1939), Fischer (b. 1943), Kegan (b. 1946), Demetriou (b. 1950), and others (Neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development)
Evolutionary developmental psychology












v
t
e


Educational years






Pre-kindergarten / Preschool
Kindergarten
First grade
Second grade
Third grade
Fourth grade
Fifth grade
Sixth grade
Seventh grade
Eighth grade
Ninth grade
Tenth grade
Eleventh grade
Twelfth grade
Thirteenth grade












v
t
e


Stages of formal education







Early childhood education
Primary education
Secondary education
Tertiary education









Preschool
→
Kindergarten
→

















Elementary school
→









Infant
→
Junior
→
























High school
→









Junior high school
→
Senior high school
→
























Higher education
 
Vocational
Further
continuing









Undergraduate
→
Postgraduate
 



























Alternative education

Homeschooling


Adult education
 Portal













v
t
e


School types



By educational stage




Early childhood



Preschool
Pre-kindergarten
Kindergarten





Primary



Elementary school
First school
Infant school
Junior school
Primary school





Secondary



Adult high school
Comprehensive school
Grammar school
Gymnasium
High school
Lyceum
Middle school
Secondary school
Sixth form college
Studio school
University-preparatory school
University technical college
Upper school





Tertiary







Continuing education
Further education
Professional school
Vocational school





Higher



Academy
College
Community college
Graduate school
Institute of technology
Junior college
University
Upper division college
Vocational university
Seminary











By funding / eligibility



Academy (England)
Charter school
Comprehensive school
For-profit education
Free education
Free school (England)
Independent school
UK Independent school

preparatory
public


Private school
Selective school
Separate school
State or public school
State-integrated school (New Zealand)





By style of education



Adult education
Alternative school
Boarding school
Day school
Folk high school
Free skool
Homeschool
International school
K-12
Madrasa
Magnet school
Montessori school
One-room schools
Parochial school
Ranch school
Sink school
Virtual school
Vocal school
Yeshiva





By scope



College preparatory
Compulsory education
Democratic education
Gifted education
Remedial education
Vocational education





Historical







Ancient higher-learning institutions

Platonic Academy
Lyceum


Monastic schools
Cathedral schools
Medieval universities






Schools imposed on
indigenous peoples




in Canada
in New Zealand
in the United States
in South Africa





Informal or illegal



in Ireland
in Greece
in South Tyrol











 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Topics in education







General



Glossary
Index
Outline
Aims and objectives
Anthropology
Assessment
Economics
Evaluation
History
Leadership
Philosophy
Policy
Politics
Psychology
Research
Rights
Sociology
Technology
Theory
Types of institutions





By subject



Agricultural
Art
Bilingual
Business
Chemistry
Design
Economics
Engineering
Environmental
Euthenics
Health
Language
Legal
Mathematics
Medical
Military
Music
Nursing
Peace
Performing arts
Philosophy
Physical
Physics
Reading
Religious
Science
Sex
Teacher
Technology
Values
Vocational
More...





Alternative



Autodidacticism
Education reform
Gifted education
Homeschooling
Religious education
Special education
More...





Wikimedia



Books
Definitions
Images
Learning resources
News
Quotes
Texts















v
t
e


Stages of formal education







Early childhood education
Primary education
Secondary education
Tertiary education









Preschool
→
Kindergarten
→

















Elementary school
→









Infant
→
Junior
→
























High school
→









Junior high school
→
Senior high school
→
























Higher education
 
Vocational
Further
continuing









Undergraduate
→
Postgraduate
 



























Alternative education

Homeschooling


Adult education
 Portal














Education by region










v
t
e


Education in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)











v
t
e


Education in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Education in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Education in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Education in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Education in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject






hu∫





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Preschool&oldid=816933545"					Categories: School typesEarly childhood educationEarly childhood education in the United StatesChildhoodHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWebarchive template other archivesUse dmy dates from July 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2013Articles with unsourced statements from November 2013NPOV disputes from September 2015All NPOV disputes