

President pro tempore of the United States Senate








Incumbent
Orrin Hatch (R)
since January 6, 2015



Style
Mr. President
(Informal and within the Senate)
The Honorable
(Formal)


Appointer
Elected by the U.S. Senate


Term length
At the pleasure of the Senate, and until another is elected or their term of office as a Senator expires


Constituting instrument
U.S. Constitution


Inaugural holder
John Langdon
April 6, 1789


Formation
March 4, 1789


Succession
Third[1]


Deputy
Any senator, typically a member of the majority party, designated by the President pro tempore




This article is part of a series on the


Politics of the
United States of America







Federal Government


Constitution of the United States


Law
Taxation








Legislature


United States Congress

 



House of Representatives


Speaker Paul Ryan (R)


Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R)


Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D)


Congressional districts




United States Senate


President Mike Pence (R)


President Pro Tempore Orrin Hatch (R)


President Pro Tempore Emeritus Patrick Leahy (D)


Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R)


Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D)








Executive


President of the United States


Donald Trump (R)



Vice President of the United States


Mike Pence (R)



Cabinet
Federal agencies
Executive Office








Judiciary


Supreme Court of the United States


Chief Justice John Roberts


Kennedy
Thomas
Ginsburg
Breyer
Alito
Sotomayor
Kagan
Gorsuch



Courts of Appeals
District Courts (list)


Other tribunals








Elections


Presidential elections
Midterm elections


Off-year elections








Political parties


Democratic
Republican



Third parties








Federalism


State Government



Governors


Legislatures (List)


State courts




Local government











Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





The President pro tempore of the United States Senate (also president pro tem) is the second-highest-ranking official of the United States Senate. Article One, Section Three of the United States Constitution provides that the Vice President of the United States is, despite not being a U.S. Senator, the President of the Senate, and mandates that the Senate must choose a President pro tempore to act in the Vice President's absence. Unlike the Vice President, the President pro tempore is an elected member of the Senate, able to speak or vote on any issue. Selected by the Senate at large, the President pro tempore has enjoyed many privileges and some limited powers.[2] During the Vice President's absence, the President pro tempore is empowered to preside over Senate sessions. In practice, neither the Vice President nor the President pro tempore usually presides; instead, the duty of presiding officer is rotated among junior U.S. Senators of the majority party to give them experience in parliamentary procedure.[3]
Since 1890, the most senior U.S. Senator in the majority party has generally been chosen to be President pro tempore and holds the office continuously until the election of another. This tradition has been observed without interruption since 1949.[4] Since enactment of the current Presidential Succession Act in 1947, the president pro tempore is third in the line of succession to the presidency, after the vice president and the Speaker of the House of Representatives and ahead of the Secretary of State.[5]
The current President pro tempore of the Senate is Utah Republican Orrin Hatch. Elected on January 6, 2015,[6] he is the 90th person to serve in this office. On January 2, 2018, Hatch announced his pending retirement from the Senate, effective January 3, 2019.[7]



Contents


1 Power and responsibilities
2 History
3 Related officials

3.1 Acting president pro tempore

3.1.1 Permanent acting president pro tempore


3.2 Deputy president pro tempore
3.3 President pro tempore emeritus


4 Salary
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Power and responsibilities[edit]
The office of president pro tempore is created by Article I, Section 3 of the Constitution:[8]

The Senate shall choose their other Officers, and also a President pro tempore, in the absence of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise the Office of President of the United States.

Although the position is in some ways analogous to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the powers of the president pro tempore are far more limited. In the Senate, most power rests with party leaders and individual senators, but as the chamber's presiding officer, the president pro tempore is authorized to perform certain duties in the absence of the vice president, including ruling on points of order.[9] Additionally, under the 25th Amendment to the Constitution, the president pro tempore and the speaker are the two authorities to whom declarations must be transmitted that the president is unable to perform the duties of the office, or is able to resume doing so. The president pro tempore is third in the line of presidential succession, following the vice president and the speaker.[5][9] Additional duties include appointment of various congressional officers, certain commissions, advisory boards, and committees and joint supervision of the congressional page school.[9] The president pro tempore is the designated legal recipient of various reports to the Senate, including War Powers Act reports under which he or she, jointly with the speaker, may have the president call Congress back into session. The officeholder is an ex officio member of various boards and commissions. With the secretary and sergeant at arms, the president pro tempore maintains order in Senate portions of the Capitol and Senate buildings.[9][10]
History[edit]




Benjamin Wade came within one vote of being the first president pro tempore to succeed to the presidency after the impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson in 1868


The office of president pro tempore was established by the Constitution of the United States in 1789. The first president pro tempore, John Langdon, was elected on April 6 the same year.[9] Originally, the president pro tempore was appointed on an intermittent basis when the vice president was not present to preside over the Senate. Until the 1960s, it was common practice for the vice president to preside over daily Senate sessions, so the president pro tempore rarely presided unless the vice presidency became vacant.[11] Until 1891, the president pro tempore only served until the return of the vice president to the chair or the adjournment of a session of Congress. Between 1792 and 1886, the president pro tempore was second in the line of presidential succession following the vice president and preceding the speaker.[11]
On three occasions during the 19th century, the Senate was without both a president and a president pro tempore:

July 9–11, 1850, following Millard Fillmore's accession to the presidency upon the death of Zachary Taylor, until William R. King was elected president pro tempore;
September 19–October 10, 1881, following Chester Arthur's accession to the presidency upon the death of James A. Garfield, until Thomas F. Bayard was elected president pro tempore;
November 25–December 7, 1885, following the death of Vice President Thomas A. Hendricks, until John Sherman was elected president pro tempore.

When President Andrew Johnson, who had no vice president, was impeached and tried in 1868, Senate President pro tempore Benjamin Franklin Wade was next in line to the presidency. Wade's radicalism is thought by many historians to be a major reason why the Senate, which did not want to see Wade in the White House, acquitted Johnson.[12] The President pro tempore and the Speaker of the House were removed from the presidential line of succession in 1886. Both were restored to it in 1947, though this time with the president pro tempore following the speaker.[9]
William P. Frye served as President pro tempore from 1896 to 1911 (54th–62nd Congress), a tenure longer than anyone else. He resigned from the position due to ill health a couple of months before his death. Electing his successor proved difficult, as Senate Republicans, then in the majority, were split between progressive and conservative factions, each promoting its own candidate. Likewise, the Democrats proposed their own candidate. As a result of this three-way split, no individual received a majority vote. It took four months for a compromise solution to emerge: Democrat Augustus Bacon would serve for a single day, August 14, 1911, during the vice president's absence. Thereafter, Bacon and four Republicans—Charles Curtis, Jacob Gallinger, Henry Cabot Lodge, and Frank Brandegee—would alternate as president pro tempore for the remainder of the Congress.[9]
In January 1945, the 79th Congress elected Kenneth McKellar, who at the time was the Senator with the longest continuous service, to be President pro tempore. Since then, it has become customary for the majority party's senior member to hold this position. Arthur Vandenberg (in 1947–1949) was the last president pro tempore not to be the senior member of the majority party, aside from the single day accorded Milton Young (in December 1980), who was the retiring senior member of the Republican Party, which would hold the majority in the incoming 97th Congress.[4]
Three presidents pro tempore subsequently became Vice President: John Tyler, William R. King and Charles Curtis. Tyler is the only one to become president (in April 1841, following the death of William Henry Harrison).
Related officials[edit]
Acting president pro tempore[edit]
While the president pro tempore does have other official duties, the holders of the office have, like the vice president, over time ceased presiding over the Senate on a daily basis, owing to the mundane and ceremonial nature of the position.[11] Furthermore, as the president pro tempore is now usually the most senior senator of the majority party, he or she most likely also chairs a major Senate committee and has other significant demands on his or her time. Therefore, the president pro tempore has less time now than in the past to preside daily over the Senate. Instead, junior senators from the majority party are designated acting president pro tempore to preside over the Senate.[13] This allows junior senators to learn proper parliamentary procedure.[3] The acting president pro tempore is usually reappointed daily by the president pro tempore.[14]
Permanent acting president pro tempore[edit]
In June 1963, because of the illness of president pro tempore Carl Hayden, Senator Lee Metcalf was designated permanent acting president pro tempore. No term was imposed on this designation, so Metcalf retained it until he died in office in 1978.[10]
Deputy president pro tempore[edit]




Hubert Humphrey (D-Minnesota) was the first Deputy President pro tempore in 1977–1978


The ceremonial post of deputy president pro tempore was created for Hubert Humphrey, a former vice president, in 1977 following his losing bid to become the Senate majority leader.[15] The Senate resolution creating the position stated that any former president or former vice president serving in the Senate would be entitled to this position, though none has served since Humphrey's death in 1978,[10] and former vice president Walter Mondale, who sought his former Senate seat in Minnesota in 2002, is the only one to have tried. Andrew Johnson is the only former president to have subsequently served in the Senate.
George J. Mitchell was elected deputy president pro tempore in 1987, because of the illness of president pro tempore John C. Stennis, similar to Metcalf's earlier designation as permanent acting president pro tempore. The office has remained vacant since 1989 and no senator other than Humphrey and Mitchell has held it since its creation.[10] Mitchell is the only person to have served as deputy president pro tempore who was neither a former president nor former vice president of the United States.
The post is largely honorary and ceremonial, but comes with a salary increase. By statute, the compensation granted to the position holder equals the rate of annual compensation paid to the president pro tempore, majority leader, and minority leader. (See 2 U.S.C. § 6112.)[10]
President pro tempore emeritus[edit]




Patrick Leahy (D-Vermont), former president pro tempore, and current president pro tempore emeritus.


Since 2001, the honorary title of president pro tempore emeritus has been given to a senator of the minority party who has previously served as president pro tempore. The position has been held by Strom Thurmond (R-South Carolina) (2001–2003), Robert Byrd (D-West Virginia) (2003–2007), Ted Stevens (R-Alaska) (2007–2009) and Patrick Leahy (D-Vermont) (2015–present). From 2009 to 2015, no senator met the requirements for the position.
The position was created for Thurmond when the Democratic Party regained a majority in the Senate in June 2001.[16] With the change in party control, Democrat Robert Byrd of West Virginia replaced Thurmond as president pro tempore, reclaiming a position he had previously held from 1989 to 1995 and briefly in January 2001. Thurmond's retirement from the Senate on January 3, 2003, coincided with a change from Democratic to Republican control, making Stevens president pro tempore and Byrd the second president pro tempore emeritus. Byrd returned as president pro tempore, and Stevens became the third president pro tempore emeritus, when the Democrats gained control of the Senate in 2007.[10] While a president pro tempore emeritus has no official duties, he is entitled to an increase in staff[17] and advises party leaders on the functions of the Senate.
The office's accompanying budget increase was removed toward the end of the 113th Congress, shortly before Patrick Leahy was to become the first holder of the title in six years. Quoted in CQ Roll Call, Leahy commented, "They didn't keep their commitment. They want to treat us differently than we treated them, and so they've got that right. It seems kind of petty, but it really doesn't matter to me. I've got plenty of funding, plenty of good staff."[18]
Salary[edit]
The salary of the president pro tempore for 2012 was $193,400, equal to that of the majority leaders and minority leaders of both houses of Congress. If there is a vacancy in the office of vice president, then the salary would be the same as that of the vice president, $230,700.[10]
See also[edit]

List of Presidents pro tempore of the United States Senate
Seniority in the United States Senate
Acting Vice President of the United States

References[edit]



^ "3 U.S. Code § 19 - Vacancy in offices of both President and Vice President; officers eligible to act". 
^ Senate Historical Office; With a preface by Senator Robert C. Byrd, President pro tempore (2008). Erickson, Nancy (Secretary of the Senate), ed. Pro Tem: Presidents Pro Tempore of the United States Senate since 1789 (PDF). U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-16-079984-6. Retrieved January 9, 2017. 
^ a b "Hillary takes Senate gavel–for an hour". CNN. January 24, 2001. Archived from the original on January 20, 2010. 
^ a b Davis, Christopher M. (December 20, 2012). The President Pro Tempore of the Senate: History and Authority of the Office (Report). Congressional Research Service. Retrieved February 23, 2015. 
^ a b Mount, Steve. "Constitutional Topic: Presidential Line of Succession". USConstitution.net. Steve Mount. Retrieved October 19, 2009. 
^ Burr, Thomas (January 6, 2015). "Hatch now third in line for presidency as Senate president pro tem". The Salt Lake Tribune.
^ Sullivan, Sean; Scherer, Michael (January 2, 2018). "Republican Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah will retire, opening door for a Romney candidacy". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 3, 2017. 
^ Kathy Gill. "US Senate Organization". About.com. The New York Times Company. Retrieved October 19, 2009. 
^ a b c d e f g "President Pro Tempore". United States Senate. Retrieved May 2, 2017. 
^ a b c d e f g Sachs, Richard C. (January 22, 2003). "The President Pro Tempore of the Senate: History and Authority of the Office" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. Retrieved December 9, 2008. 
^ a b c Richard E. Berg-Andersson (June 7, 2001). "A Brief History of Congressional Leadership". The Green Papers. Retrieved November 17, 2009. 
^ Smith, Gene (1977). High Crimes and Misdemeanors: The Impeachment and Trial of Andrew Johnson. William Morrow & Company. ISBN 0-688-03072-6. 
^ Gold, Martin B.; Gupta, Dimple. "The Constitutional Option to Change Senate Rules and Procedures: A Majoritarian Means to Over Come the Filibuster*" (PDF). Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy. 28 (1): 211. 
^ "APPOINTMENT OF A SENATOR TO THE CHAIR - Rules of the Senate - United States Senate Committee on Rules and Administration". 
^ "Hubert H. Humphrey". virtualology.com. Evisum Inc. 2000. Retrieved December 24, 2009. 
^ S.Res. 103, adopted, June 6, 2001. "Thanking and Electing Strom Thurmond President pro tempore emeritus."
^ 2 U.S.C. § 32b
^ Lesniewski, Niels (December 10, 2014). "Leahy: 'Kind of Petty' Not to Fund Emeritus Office in 'Cromnibus'". CQ Roll Call. Retrieved January 7, 2015. 



External links[edit]

"President pro tempore". Official website of the United States Senate. Retrieved November 27, 2008. 



Current U.S. presidential line of succession


Preceded by
Speaker of the House of Representatives
Paul Ryan
3rd in line
Succeeded by
Secretary of State
Rex Tillerson








v
t
e


Presidents pro tempore of the United States Senate






Langdon
Lee
Langdon
Izard
H Tazewell
Livermore
Bingham
Bradford
Read
Sedgwick
Laurance
Ross
Livermore
Tracy
Howard
Hillhouse
Baldwin
Bradley
Brown
Franklin
Anderson
Smith
Bradley
Milledge
Gregg
Gaillard
Pope
Crawford
Varnum
Gaillard
Barbour
Gaillard
Macon
Smith
L Tazewell
White
Poindexter
Tyler
W R King
Southard
Mangum
Sevier
Atchison
W R King
Atchison
Cass
Bright
Stuart
Bright
Mason
Rusk
Fitzpatrick
Bright
Fitzpatrick
Foot
Clark
Foster
Wade
Anthony
Carpenter
Anthony
Ferry
Thurman
Bayard
Davis
Edmunds
Sherman
Ingalls
Manderson
Harris
Ransom
Harris
Frye
Office rotated 1911–1913

Bacon
Curtis
Gallinger
Brandegee
Lodge


Clarke
Saulsbury
Cummins
Moses
Pittman
W H King
Harrison
Glass
McKellar
Vandenberg
McKellar
Bridges
George
Hayden
Russell
Ellender
Eastland
Magnuson
Young
Magnuson
Thurmond
Stennis
Byrd
Thurmond
Byrd
Thurmond
Byrd
Stevens
Byrd
Inouye
Leahy
Hatch















v
t
e


United States Congress






House of Representatives
Senate
(114th←115th→116th)
Lists of congressional lists










Members and leaders







Members




Current



By length of service
Freshmen
Youngest members
Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico
Delegates





Senate



Current

by seniority


Dean of the Senate
Former U.S. Senators

living


Earliest serving
Earliest living
Expelled or censured
Classes
Born outside the U.S.





House



Current

by seniority


Dean of the House
Former U.S. Representatives

living


Oldest living
Earliest serving
Expelled, censured, and reprimanded








Leaders




Senate



President (list)
President pro tempore (list)
Majority and minority leaders
Assistant party leaders
Democratic Caucus (Chair
Secretary
Policy Committee Chair)
Republican Conference (Chair
Vice-Chair
Policy Committee Chair)





House



Speaker
Leaders
Bipartisan Legal Advisory Group
Democratic Caucus
Republican Conference








Districts



List
Apportionment





Caucuses,
women and
minorities



Congressional caucus
African Americans in the House

Congressional Black Caucus


African Americans in the Senate
Arab and Middle-Eastern members
Asian Pacific American members

Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus


Hispanic and Latino members

Congressional Hispanic Caucus
Congressional Hispanic Conference


Jewish members
LGBT members

LGBT Equality Caucus


Native American members
Women in the House

Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues


Women in the Senate





Related



By length of service historically
















Powers, privileges, procedure, committees, history, and media







Powers



Article I
Copyright
Commerce (Dormant)
Contempt of Congress
Declaration of war
Impeachment
Naturalization
"Necessary and Proper"
Power of enforcement
Taxing/spending





Privileges and
benefits



Salaries
Franking
Immunity





Procedure



Act of Congress (list)
Appropriation bill
Blue slip
Budget resolution
Censure
Closed sessions

House
Senate


Cloture
Concurrent resolution
Continuing resolution
Dear colleague letter
Discharge petition
Engrossed bill
Enrolled bill
Expulsion
Joint resolution
Joint session (list)
Lame-duck session
Majority of the majority (Hastert Rule)
Multiple referral
Procedures (House)
Quorum call
Reconciliation
Rider
Saxbe fix
Sponsorship
Suspension of the rules
Unanimous consent
Veto

Line-item veto
Pocket veto
Veto override







Senate-specific



Advice and consent
Classes
Executive communication
Executive session
Filibuster
Jefferson's Manual
Senate Journal
Morning business
Nuclear option
Presiding Officer
Recess appointment
Reconciliation
Riddick's Senate Procedure
Senate hold
Senatorial courtesy
Seniority
Standing Rules
Tie-breaking votes
Traditions
Treaty Clause





Committees



Chairman and ranking member
Of the Whole
Conference
Discharge petition
Hearings
Markup
Oversight
List (Joint)
List (House)
List (Senate)
Select and special
Standing
Subcommittees





Items



Gavels
Mace of the House
Seal of the Senate





History



Biographical Directory
Divided government
House
Gerrymandering
Party control
Senate
Senate election disputes
Senatorial memoirs
Representative memoirs





Media



C-SPAN
Congressional Quarterly
The Hill
Politico
Roll Call
















Offices, employees, services, and the Capitol Complex







Legislative
offices



Congressional staff
Government Accountability Office (Comptroller General)
Architect of the Capitol
Capitol Police (Capitol Police Board)
Capitol Guide Service (Capitol Guide Board)
Congressional Budget Office (CBO)
Compliance
Library of Congress
Government Publishing Office (GPO)
Technology Assessment





Offices




Senate



Curator
Historical
Library





House



Congressional Ethics
Emergency Planning, Preparedness, and Operations
Interparliamentary Affairs
Legislative Counsel
Law Revision Counsel
Library








Employees




Senate



Secretary
Chaplain
Curator
Inspector General
Historian
Librarian
Pages
Parliamentarian
Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper





House



Chaplain
Chief Administrative Officer
Clerk
Doorkeeper
Floor Operations
Floor Services Chief
Historian
Pages (Page Board)
Parliamentarian
Postmaster
Reading Clerk
Sergeant at Arms








Library of
Congress



Congressional Research Service (reports)
Copyright Office (Register of Copyrights)
Law Library
Poet Laureate
THOMAS
Adams Building
Jefferson Building
Madison Building





Government
Publishing Office



Public Printer
Congressional Pictorial Directory
Congressional Record
Official Congressional Directory
United States Government Manual
Serial Set
Statutes at Large
United States Code





Capitol



Brumidi Corridors
Congressional Prayer Room
Crypt
Dome

Statue of Freedom


Rotunda
Hall of Columns
Statuary Hall
Visitor Center
The Apotheosis of Washington
Statue of Freedom
Declaration of Independence painting
Scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States
Apotheosis of Democracy
First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln
Surrender of General Burgoyne
Surrender of Lord Cornwallis
Revolutionary War Door
Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way
Vice President's Room
Vice Presidential Bust Collection





Office
buildings




Senate



Dirksen
Hart

Mountains and Clouds


Russell





House



Building Commission
Cannon
Ford
Longworth
O'Neill
Rayburn








Other
facilities



Botanic Garden
Health and Fitness Facility
House Recording Studio
Senate chamber
Old Senate Chamber
Old Supreme Court Chamber
Power Plant
Webster Page Residence
Subway














Websites
House of Representatives
Senate












v
t
e


Presidential line of succession in the United States of America






Vice President (Mike Pence)
Speaker of the House of Representatives (Paul Ryan)
President pro tempore of the Senate (Orrin Hatch)
Secretary of State (Rex Tillerson)
Secretary of the Treasury (Steven Mnuchin)
Secretary of Defense (Jim Mattis)
Attorney General (Jeff Sessions)
Secretary of the Interior (Ryan Zinke)
Secretary of Agriculture (Sonny Perdue)
Secretary of Commerce (Wilbur Ross)
Secretary of Labor (Alex Acosta)
Secretary of Health and Human Services (Eric Hargan)
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (Ben Carson)
Secretary of Transportation (Elaine Chao[a])
Secretary of Energy (Rick Perry)
Secretary of Education (Betsy DeVos)
Secretary of Veterans Affairs (David Shulkin)
Secretary of Homeland Security (Kirstjen Nielsen)










^ Although Elaine Chao is the current Secretary of Transportation, she is not a natural-born citizen (acquired U.S. citizenship by naturalization) and thus ineligible for the Presidency.













						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=President_pro_tempore_of_the_United_States_Senate&oldid=818467554"					Categories: Presidents pro tempore of the United States SenateLegislative deputy speakersUnited States SenateSenior legislatorsHidden categories: Use mdy dates from April 2012