

President of the
Russian Federation
Президент Российской Федерации



Presidential standard






Incumbent
Vladimir Putin
since 7 May 2012



Style
Mr. President
(formal)
Comrade Supreme Commander
(among the military)
His Excellency[1]
(international correspondence)


Member of
State Council
Security Council
Supreme Eurasian Economic Council


Residence
Kremlin Senate
(working)
Grand Kremlin Palace
(ceremonial)
Novo-Ogaryovo
(residential)


Seat
Moscow


Appointer
Direct popular vote


Term length
6 years
(one consecutive re-election)


Inaugural holder
Boris Yeltsin


Formation

1991

Passage of presidency law:
24 April 1991[2]
Constitutional amendments:
24 May 1991 [3]
First inauguration:
10 July 1991

(Modern status is defined by the Constitution, adopted on 12 December 1993)


Succession
Prime Minister of Russia


Salary
3.6 million rubles annually


Website
(in Russian) президент.рф
(in English) eng.kremlin.ru





Russia






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the Russian Federation







Constitution
Law





Mental Health Law
Russian Criminal Code
Tax Code








Presidency


President: Vladimir Putin



Presidential Administration
Security Council
State Council









Executive


Prime Minister: Dmitry Medvedev



Government
Cabinet (54th)









Legislature


Federal Assembly



Federation Council
Chairman: Valentina Matviyenko



State Duma
7th convocation
Chairman: Vyacheslav Volodin








Judiciary


Constitutional Court
Supreme Court
Prosecutor General
Supreme Court of Arbitration
Legal system








Elections


Presidential elections
Legislative elections
Central Election Commission
Electoral geography
Political parties
List of presidential candidates








Federalism


Federal subjects
Heads of federal subjects
Regional parliaments








Foreign relations


European Union
NATO
United Nations
Arab–Israeli conflict








Related topics


Administrative divisions
Armed forces
Civic Chamber
Accounts Chamber
E-Government
Opposition
Human rights
Political abuse of psychiatry









Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





The President of the Russian Federation (Russian: Президент Российской Федерации, tr. Prezident Rossiiskoi Federatsii) is the elected head of state, Supreme Commander-in-Chief, and holder of the highest office in the Russian Federation. The current President of Russia is Vladimir Putin.
In 1991, the office was briefly known as the President of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (Russian: Президент Российской Советской Федеративной Социалистической Республики) until 25 December 1991. According to the 1978 Russian Constitution, the President of Russia was head of the executive branch and headed the Council of Ministers of Russia. According to the current 1993 Constitution of Russia, the President of Russia is not a part of the Government of Russia, which exercises executive power.[4]
In all cases where the President of the Russian Federation is unable to fulfill his duties, they shall be temporarily delegated to the Prime Minister, who becomes Acting President of Russia.[5] The Chairman of the Federation Council is the third important position after the President and the Prime Minister. In the case of incapacity of both the President and Prime Minister, the chairman of the upper house of parliament becomes acting head of state.[6][7]
The power includes execution of federal law, alongside the responsibility of appointing federal ministers, diplomatic, regulatory and judicial officers, and concluding treaties with foreign powers with the advice and consent of the State Duma and the Federation Council. The president is further empowered to grant federal pardons and reprieves, and to convene and adjourn the Federal Assembly under extraordinary circumstances. The president also directs the foreign and domestic policy of the Russian Federation.
The president is elected directly through a popular vote to a six-year term. The law prohibits anyone from ever being elected to the presidency for a third consecutive term. In all, 3 individuals have served 4 presidencies spanning 6 full terms. On May 7, 2012, Vladimir Putin became the 4th and current president.



Contents


1 Selection process

1.1 Eligibility
1.2 Election
1.3 Inauguration
1.4 Vacancy or disability


2 Insignia

2.1 Chain of office
2.2 Standard (flag)
2.3 Special copy of the Constitution
2.4 Legal basis of the insignia


3 Powers and duties

3.1 Guarantor of the Constitution
3.2 Nominations
3.3 Legislation
3.4 Domestic policy
3.5 Foreign policy
3.6 Ceremonial duties


4 Residences
5 Political affiliation
6 Transport
7 Post-presidency

7.1 Living former Presidents
7.2 Presidential centers


8 List of presidents

8.1 Presidential administrations


9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Selection process[edit]
Eligibility[edit]
A candidate for office must be a citizen of the Russian Federation who is at least 35 years old and has "permanently resided" in Russia for at least 10 years.[8]
The Constitution of Russia limits the election of one person to the Presidency to two consecutive terms. Since the constitution contains no ruling on a total number of terms that a President may serve, a former president may seek re-election after sitting out one complete term.[9]
Election[edit]
The election of the President is mainly regulated by the Presidential Election Law (PEL) and the Basic Guarantees of Electoral Rights (BGL).[10]
The Federation Council calls the presidential elections.[11] If it does not call a presidential election that is due, the Central Election Commission will call the presidential election.[12] The Election Day is the second Sunday of the month and the presidential electoral constituency is the territory of the Russian Federation as a whole. Each faction in the State Duma, the lower house of the Russian parliament has the right to nominate a candidate for the presidential elections. The minimum number of signatures for a presidential candidate fielded by a political party with no parliamentary representation is 100,000, down from 2 million before amendments to the law.[13]
Terms were extended from four to six years in 2008, during Dmitry Medvedev's administration.[14] The President is elected in a two-round system every six years, with a two consecutive term limitation.[15] If no candidate wins by an absolute majority in the first round, a second election round is held between two candidates with the most votes.[15] The last presidential election was in 2012, and the next is expected in 2018.[16]
Inauguration[edit]
Main article: Russian presidential inauguration




Vladimir Putin takes the Presidential Oath in 2012.


Inauguration of the President of Russia is conducted six years after the previous inauguration (since 2000, this 7 May). If the President was elected in early elections, he takes the oath, thirty days after the announcement of the results.
Before executing the powers of the office, a president is constitutionally required to take the presidential oath:[17]

I swear in exercising the powers of the President of the Russian Federation to respect and safeguard the rights and freedoms of man and citizen, to observe and protect the Constitution of the Russian Federation, to protect the sovereignty and independence, security and integrity of the State, to faithfully serve the people.

Vacancy or disability[edit]
See also: Acting President of Russia
Vacancies in the office of President may arise under several possible circumstances: death, resignation and removal from office. In all cases when the President is unable to perform his duties, his powers are temporarily transferred to the Prime Minister until the new President takes office.
Insignia[edit]
After the oath of office has been taken by the elected president, these following insignia are handed over to the president. These devices are used to display the rank of his office and are used on special occasions.
Chain of office[edit]




Chain of office



Presidential standard



The first insignia that is issued is the chain of office with an emblem. The central emblem is the red cross of the Order "For Merit to the Fatherland", with arms in equal size, charged with the Russian coat of arms. On the reverse of the cross, the words "Benefit, Honor and Glory" appear in the form of a circle. A golden wreath is used to connect the cross with the rest of the chain. There are 17 "links" in the emblem, with nine consisting of the Russian coat of arms. The other eight consist of a rosette, also bearing the motto "Benefit, Honor and Glory." At the inauguration of Vladimir Putin, the emblem was placed on a red pillow, positioned on the left side of the podium. According to the Presidential website, the emblem is placed inside the Kremlin and is used only on certain occasions.
Standard (flag)[edit]
The standard is a square version of the Russian flag, charged in the center with the Russian coat of arms. Golden fringe is added to the standard. Copies of the standard are used inside his office, at the Kremlin, other state agencies, and while the president is traveling in a vehicle inside Russia. A 2:3 ratio version of the flag is used when the President is at sea. This is the most used symbol to denote the presence of the Russian President.
Special copy of the Constitution[edit]
The President also has a special copy of the Russian Constitution that is used during the inauguration. This copy has a hard, red cover with gold lettering. An image of the Russian coat of arms appears in silver. The special copy is kept in the Presidential Library.
Legal basis of the insignia[edit]
These insignia and the procedure were established by the presidential decree 1138 from 5 August 1996.[18] and modified by decree 832 from 6 May 2000.[19] In the new decree the special copy of the Constitution was removed as the third symbol of the Russian Presidency; the other two symbols remained intact because they were and are regulated by separate decrees. Nonetheless, the special copy of the Constitution still exists and serves for inauguration purposes only without being officially presented as a symbol of the Russian Presidency.
Powers and duties[edit]




President Vladimir Putin delivering the 2012 Address to the Federal Assembly


Guarantor of the Constitution[edit]
As the guarantor of the Constitution and the entire system of constitutional law, the President ensures that the constitutions, laws and regulations of the constituent territories of the Russian Federation be in full compliance with the country’s Constitution and federal laws.
Nominations[edit]
The President is highly active in appointing top officials in the country. He nominates candidates for official state positions, who must ultimately be appointed based on parliamentary vote. The President submits nominations to the Federation Council, the upper house of the parliament, for judges of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court and the Supreme Arbitration Court, as well as for Prosecutor General of Russia. A proposal to relieve the Prosecutor General of his duties must also be submitted to the Federation Council. The President submits to the State Duma, the lower house of parliament, nominations for appointment to the office of the Chairman of the Central Bank, and likewise submits to the State Duma any proposal to relieve the Chairman of the Central Bank of his duties.[20]
Legislation[edit]
Under the procedure stipulated by the Constitution, the President exercises his right to submit draft legislation, as well as the right to sign bills into law or to veto them.
The President has the right to suspend laws and regulations issued by executive bodies of Russia’s constituent territories if such laws and regulations contravene the Constitution, federal laws or international obligations of the Russian Federation, or violate human and civil rights and liberties, pending the resolution of the issue in an appropriate court.
The president is further empowered to grant federal pardons and reprieves, and to convene and adjourn either or both houses of the Federal Assembly under extraordinary circumstances.
Other powers of the President in the sphere of legal activities and in his interaction with the Parliament include calling elections to the State Duma, dissolving the State Duma in certain cases, and calling referendum.
Domestic policy[edit]
Under the Constitution, the President is not empowered to determine the full range of short-, middle-, and long-term objectives and targets of domestic policy, but only its basic guidelines. They are to be implemented both by the President himself and by the Government of Russia within the bounds of their authority. The President’ fundamental positions on domestic policy issues are expressed in his written decisions regarding draft federal constitutional laws and draft federal laws, as well as his letters explaining the reasons for rejecting draft federal laws.
Within the bounds of the authority granted to the head of state by the Constitution and other laws, the President also shapes the basic domestic policy guidelines by issuing legal regulations and through organizational and regulatory activity, such as issuing decrees and executive orders. Each year the President is required to make an Address to the Federal Assembly regarding the situation in the country and the internal and foreign policy of the state.
Foreign policy[edit]




President Dmitry Medvedev with US President Barack Obama in 2009.


The President is invested with extensive rights to implement the state's foreign policy. The President determines Russia's position in international affairs and represents the state in international relations, conducts negotiations and signs ratification documents. The President appoints and recalls diplomatic representatives of Russia to foreign states and international organizations. These appointments are preceded by consultations with the respective committees or commissions of the two houses of the Federal Assembly. The President signs international treaties.
Ceremonial duties[edit]
An important ceremonial role of the President is awarding state awards. State Awards of the Russian Federation are the highest form of official recognition given to individuals for service to the nation in the fields of defense, state-building, economics, science, culture, art, education, health care, public safety, rights advocacy and charity. The state awards of the Russian Federation include the title of Hero of the Russian Federation, Hero of Labour of the Russian Federation as well as orders, medals, emblems and honorary titles. New state honors and awards can be established by the President, who also presents these honors to the recipients in an official ceremony. A Commission for State Honors, which works on a voluntary basis, helps the President to objectively assess potential recipients.
Residences[edit]




Kremlin Senate, is the working residence of the President of Russia






Cabinet of the President of Russia


The primary working President's residence is the Senate building (also known as 1st building) in the Moscow Kremlin complex.[21] Also the President can use the Grand Kremlin Palace (used for official ceremonies and meetings). Earlier, the President also could use the socalled 14th Administrative Corpus Building (the reserve residence), but in 2016 it was demolished.[21][22]
Since 2000 the current home residence of the President is Novo-Ogaryovo (Russian: Ново-Огарёво). It was planned that it would remain at the disposal of Vladimir Putin after his term ended, as Gorki-9 (Russian: Горки-9) (also called Barvikha (Russian: Барвиха), but actually near it) had remained at the disposal of Boris Yeltsin after his retirement.
Also, the President has several vacation residences outside of Moscow.[23]

Rus' (Russian: Русь), Zavidovo, Tver Oblast
Congress Palace or Constantine Palace complex (Russian: Дворец конгрессов, Константиновский дворец), Strelna, Saint Petersburg, reconstructed for 300th Saint Petersburg anniversary
Bocharov Ruchey (Russian: Боча́ров Руче́й, lit. Bocharov creek), Sochi
Shuyskaya Chupa (Russian: Шу́йская Чупа́) at a distance of 25 km from Petrozavodsk, Karelia
Dolgiye Borody (Russian: Долгие Бороды) (also known as Uzhin Russian: Ужи́н) at a distance of 20 km from Valday, Novgorod Oblast
Volzhskiy Utyos sanatorium (Russian: Во́лжский утёс, lit. Cliff-upon-Volga) on Kuybyshev Reservoir shore
Tantal tourist centre (Russian: Танта́л, lit. Tantalum) on Volga bank, at a distance of 25 km from Saratov
Sosny (Russian: Со́сны, lit. pines) on Yenisei bank, near Krasnoyarsk
Angarskie hutora (Russian: Анга́рские хутора́, lit. Steadings of Angarsk) at a distance of 47 km from Irkutsk
Maly istok (Russian: Ма́лый исто́к, lit. The small headspring) inside Ekaterineburg forestry

Political affiliation[edit]
None of the Russian presidents to date were ever a member of a political party while in office. In 2012, commenting on stepping down from the post of United Russia party leader, Vladimir Putin said "The constitution doesn’t forbid the president to be a member of any party, but in the spirit of how our political life has evolved, a president is first and foremost a consolidating figure for all the political forces of the country, for all citizens".[24]
Transport[edit]
National transport services for the Russian President and the Presidential state car are provided by the Special Purpose Garage (SPG).[25] The SPG is a unit within the Federal Protective Service.

Limousines





ZIL-41047 Presidential executive car.





ZiL
Mercedes-Benz


Escort cars

Mercedes-Benz (including G-Class)
Chevrolet


Honorary escort (motorcycles)

Ural
BMW







Ilyushin Il-96-300PU – The official Russian presidential aircraft


Air transport services for the President are provided by the airline company Rossiya Airlines.[26]
Main article: Russian presidential aircraft

Airplanes for long-distance travel

Ilyushin Il-96-300PU (long-range) – main aircraft
Ilyushin Il-62M (long-range)
Dassault Falcon 900 (long-range)
Tupolev Tu-154 (medium-range)
Yakovlev Yak-40 (short-range)
Tupolev Tu-214PU


Helicopters

Mil Mi-8



The presidential aircraft uses the same colour scheme as standard Rossiya aircraft, except for the use of the Russian coat of arms or the Presidential Standard on the empennage instead of the flag of Russia.
In the spring of 2013 a helipad was constructed in the Moscow Kremlin. According to the Chief of the Kremlin Property Agency construction of a helicopter pad for the President cost 200 million rubles (about $6.4 mln). The helipad is located in the Kremlin's Tainitsky Garden close to exterior walls.[27]
Post-presidency[edit]




President Vladimir Putin with former President Boris Yeltsin on 12 June 2001


On 16 August 1995, President Boris Yeltsin signed a decree "On some social guarantees of persons holding public positions of the Russian Federation and the position of federal public servants." 15 June 1999 went to President Yeltsin's decree on amendments and additions to the previous decree. On 11 November 1999 Prime Minister Vladimir Putin signed a decree on the implementation of the amended decree of 15 June 1999.
On 31 December 1999, the day of the resignation of Boris Yeltsin, the president issued a decree "On guarantees of the Russian Federation President, stop exercising his powers, and his family," and the eponymous federal law was adopted by 25 January 2001.
This law establishes the legal, social and other guarantees of the Russian Federation President, stops the execution of its powers in connection with the expiration of his term of office or in advance in the event of his resignation or permanent incapacity for health reasons to exercise the powers belonging to him and his family:

President of Russia, ceased to carry out its mandate, regardless of age, is entitled to a monthly lifetime pay of 75% of the monthly remuneration of the President of Russia.
In the case of the President's death his family members are entitled to a monthly allowance in the amount equal to six times the minimum old-age pension, established by the federal law on the day of his death.
President of Russia, ceased to carry out its mandate, has immunity. He can not be held criminally or administratively liable for acts committed by them during the execution of the President's powers, as well as arrested, detained, interrogated and subjected to a personal search, if these actions are carried out in the course of proceedings relating to the execution of his powers as President.

Beginning in 1999, all living former presidents were granted a pension, an office, and a staff. The pension has increased numerous times. Retired presidents receive a pension based on the salary of the government. All former presidents, their spouses, and their children until age 16 are protected by the Federal Protective Service until the president's death. A spouse who remarries or divorced from president is no longer eligible for Federal Protective Service protection.
Living former Presidents[edit]
As of January 2018, there is only one living former president (if Vladimir Putin, who was president from 2000 to 2008 and became president again in 2012, is excluded). The most recent death of a former president was that of Boris Yeltsin (1991–1999) on April 23, 2007, aged 76.







Dmitry Medvedev
(2008–2012)
(1965-09-14) September 14, 1965 (age 52)




Presidential centers[edit]




Boris Yeltsin Presidential Center


In May 2008, the Federal law №68, "On centers of historical heritage of presidents of the Russian Federation ceased to carry out its powers", was adopted.[28] According to this law, the objectives of the centers are the study and public presentation of historical heritage of Presidents of Russia as an integral part of the modern history of Russia, the development of democratic institutions and the rule of law. The centers will be built for each former President of Russia. The first such center dedicated to Boris Yeltsin was opened in 2015 in Yekaterinburg. In the future the creation of presidential centers for Vladimir Putin and Dmitry Medvedev is also planned.[29]
List of presidents[edit]
Main article: List of presidents of Russia


Name
Term of office
Length of term


Boris Yeltsin
1991–1999
7003309600000000000♠8 years, 174 days


Vladimir Putin (1st & 2nd terms)
1999–2008
7003305000000000000♠8 years, 128 days


Dmitry Medvedev
2008–2012
7003146100000000000♠4 years, 0 days


Vladimir Putin (3rd term)
2012–present
7003206700000000000♠5 years, 241 days


Presidential administrations[edit]


Presidency of Boris Yeltsin
Presidency of Vladimir Putin
Presidency of Dmitry Medvedev


See also[edit]


List of Presidents of Russia
List of Russian presidential candidates
Lifespan timeline of Presidents of Russia
Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation
First Lady of Russia
Prime Minister of Russia
Acting President of Russia
List of heads of state of Russia
List of leaders of Russia
President of the Soviet Union
Russian presidential administration
Security Council of Russia


References[edit]


^ UNITED NATIONS HEADS OF STATE HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MINISTERS FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS Protocol and Liaison Service
^ RSFSR Law "On President of the Russian SFSR
^ RSFSR Law on amendments to the Constitution of the RSFSR
^ I.E. Kozlova and O. E. Kutafin, Konstitutsionnoe Pravo Rossii (Constitutional Law of Russia) (4th ed, 2006) p. 383
^ "Конституция Российской Федерации". Eng.constitution.kremlin.ru. Retrieved 3 March 2014. 
^ "Пост Председателя Совета Федерации РФ – это третий пост в стране. В случае недееспособности президента и премьера именно председатель верхней палаты парламента должен возглавить государство". Ria.ru. Retrieved 3 March 2014. 
^ ""Почему у нас третье лицо в государстве Председатель Совета Федерации? Потому что это федерация, он не распускается, он действует постоянно." – Сергей Шахрай". Newstube.ru. Retrieved 3 March 2014. 
^ The Constitution of the Russian Federation : A Contextual Analysis, Henderson, Jane
^ "Chapter 4. The President of the Russian Federation | The Constitution of the Russian Federation". www.constitution.ru. Retrieved 2017-07-22. 
^ thato, phengo; begang, Rita James (2009). Voting and Elections the World Over. Global Perspectives on Social Issues Series. Lexington Books. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-7391-3090-2. 
^ Constitution of Russia article 102:1
^ Kozlova and O. E. Kutafin, Konstitutsionnoe Pravo Rossii (Constitutional Law of Russia) (4th ed, 2006) p. 373.
^ "Medvedev Signs Off on Election, Party Signature Laws". RIA Novosti. 2 May 2012. Retrieved 1 July 2012. 
^ Sefanov, Mike (22 December 2008). "Russian presidential term extended to 6 years". CNN. 
^ a b Gueorguieva & Simon 2009, p. 79.
^ Herszenhorn, David M. (5 March 2012). "Observers Detail Flaws in Russian Election". New York Times. Retrieved 5 March 2012. 
^ Constitution of Russia. Chapter 4. Article 82.
^ Coбpaниe зaкoнoдaтeльcтвa Рoccийcкoй Фeдepaции 1996, №33, ar. 3976
^ Coбpaниe зaкoнoдaтeльcтвa Рoccийcкoй Фeдepaции 2000, №19, ar. 2068
^ "Authority and Duties of the President". Archive.kremlin.ru. Archived from the original on 10 February 2014. Retrieved 3 March 2014. 
^ a b The Presidential Residences Archived 28 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine. (in English)
^ Завершён демонтаж 14-го корпуса Кремля
^ Vladimir Putin Residences, Kommersant, #18(3594), 7 February 2007
^ "Putin steps down as United Russia head". Themoscownews.com. 24 April 2012. Archived from the original on 28 February 2014. Retrieved 3 March 2014. 
^ President's transports. Cars (in Russian) Archived 24 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "President's transports. Air transport". Archived from the original on 23 April 2008. Retrieved 2008-04-23.  (in Russian)
^ "Putin's Kremlin Helipad Cost $6.4 Mln – Official". RIA Novosti. Retrieved 18 May 2013. 
^ Федеральный закон от 13 мая 2008 г. N 68-ФЗ "О центрах исторического наследия президентов Российской Федерации, прекративших исполнение своих полномочий"
^ В России появятся Медведев Центр и Путин Центр


Attribution note: Material from the powers and duties section of this article was originally published by the website of the Office of the President of Russia.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Presidents of Russia.



Official site of the President of Russia
´Vladimir Putin will once again become Russia’s president´ – The Economist, 3 March 2012







v
t
e


Russia articles



History




Timeline



Proto-Indo-Europeans
Scythians
East Slavs
Rus' Khaganate
Kievan Rus'
Novgorod Republic
Vladimir-Suzdal
Grand Duchy of Moscow
Tsardom of Russia
Russian Empire
Russian Republic
Russian SFSR
Soviet Union
Russian Federation





By topic



Economy
Military
Journalism ‎
Postal











Geography







Subdivisions
Borders
Earthquakes
Geology
European Russia
Caucasus Mountains
North Caucasus
Caspian Sea
Ural Mountains
West Siberian Plain
Siberia
Russian Far East
North Asia
Extreme points
Cities and towns
Islands
Lakes
Rivers
Volcanoes
Climate








Politics







Conscription
Constitution
Elections
Federal budget
Foreign relations
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of press

Media


Government
Human rights
Judiciary
Law

Citizenship


Civil Service
Law enforcement (Prisons)
Liberalism
Military
Opposition
Political parties
President of Russia








Economy







Agriculture
Aircraft industry
Car industry
Banking
Central Bank
Corruption
Defence industry
Economic regions
Energy
Fishing industry
Forestry
Gambling
Mining
Petroleum industry
Russian ruble
Russian oligarchs
Space industry
Shipbuilding
Trade unions
Taxation
Tourism
Transport
Telecommunications
Waste








Society







Demographics
Citizens
Abortion
Alcoholism
Crime
Education
Healthcare
Ethnic groups
Languages
LGBT
Immigration

Illegal


Prostitution
Racism
Religion
Suicide
Water supply and sanitation
Women





Culture



Architecture
Art
Literature
Ballet
Cinema
Graffiti
Inventions
Media
Music
Public holidays
Opera
Language
Cuisine
Martial arts
Folklore
Television
Internet
National anthem
Coat of arms
National flag
Sports












Outline



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Presidents of the Russian Federation



Presidents



Boris Yeltsin
Vladimir Putin
Dmitry Medvedev
Vladimir Putin








Acting Presidents



Alexander Rutskoy
Viktor Chernomyrdin
Vladimir Putin












v
t
e


Russian Presidential Administrations






1 Yeltsin (1991–1999)
2 & 4 Putin (2000–2008 & 2012–present)
3 Medvedev (2008–2012)















v
t
e


Government of the Russian Federation




Offices subordinated to the President of Russia






Ministry of Internal Affairs



Police of the Russian Federation





Ministry for Affairs of Civil Defence,
Emergencies and Disaster Relief



Russian State Fire Service
State Inspectorate for Small Ships





Ministry of Foreign Affairs



Agency of CIS affairs





Ministry of Defence



Service of Military-Technical Cooperation
Service of Technical and Export Control
Service for Defence Contracts
Agency of Special Construction





Ministry of Justice



Federal Penitentiary Service
Service of Court Bailiffs





Presidential Services
and Directorates



Foreign Intelligence Service
Federal Security Service
Federal Drug Control Service of Russia
Federal Protective Service
Special Communications Service
State Courier Service
Chief Directorate of Special Programs of the President
Federal Financial Monitoring
Directorate of the President
National Guard of Russia
Security Council of Russia






Offices subordinated to Government of Russia head by the Chairman



Ministry of Health



Service of Supervision in the Sphere of Public Health Services
Medical and Biologic Agency





Ministry of Culture



Federal Archival Agency
Federal Agency for Tourism





Ministry of Education
and Science



Service for Supervision in the Sphere of Education and Science
Service for Intellectual Property, Patents and Trademarks
Agency of Education
Agency of Science and Innovation
Federal Youth Agency





Ministry of Natural Resources
and Environment



Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring
Service of Supervision in Sphere of Wildlife Management
Agency of Water Resources
Agency on the use of Mineral Resources





Ministry of Industry and Trade



Agency of Technical Regulation and Metrology





Ministry for Development of Russian Far East

 



Ministry of Communications
and Mass Media



Agency of Communication
Agency on Information Technologies
Federal Agency on Press and Mass Communications of the Russian Federation
Federal Service for Supervision of Communications, Information Technology and Mass Media





Ministry of Agriculture



Service of Veterinary and Phytosanitary Supervision
Agency of Forestry
Agency of Fisheries





Ministry of Sport









Ministry of Construction, Housing and Utilities









Ministry of Transport



Federal Service of Supervision of Transport
Air Transport Agency
Road Agency
Agency of Railway Transport
Agency of Sea and River Transport





Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs



Federal Service for Labour and Employment





Ministry of Finance



Federal Tax Service
Service of Insurance Supervision
Service of Financial-Budgetary Supervision
Treasury





Ministry of Economic
Development



Agency for State Reserves
Agency for State Property Management
State Statistics





Ministry of Energy



Russian Energy Agency





Governmental committees,
services and agencies



Federal Migratory Service
Federal Antimonopoly Service
Federal Service for Supervision of Consumer Rights Protection and Human Welfare
Service for Hydrometeorology and the Monitoring of the Environment
Federal Customs Service
Service of Ecological, Technological and Nuclear Supervision
Service on Tariffs
Federal Financial Monitoring Service
Financial Market Service
Federal Space Agency
Agency for Deliveries of Military and Special Equipment of Material Means
Agency on the Arrangement of the State Boundary
Service for State Registration, Cadastre and Cartography












v
t
e


Heads of state and government of Europe



Heads
of state




UN members  
and observers



Albania
Andorra
Armenia1
Austria
Azerbaijan1
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus1
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia1
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan1
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation1
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Sovereign Military Order of Malta
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey1
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City





Partially recognised2



Abkhazia1
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus1
South Ossetia1





Unrecognised states3



Artsakh1
Transnistria





Former countries



Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Serbia and Montenegro
Soviet Union1
Yugoslavia








Heads of
government




UN members  
and observers



Albania
Andorra
Armenia1
Austria
Azerbaijan1
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus1
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia1
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan1
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation1
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Sovereign Military Order of Malta
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey1
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City





Partially recognised2



Abkhazia1
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus1
South Ossetia1





Unrecognised states3



Artsakh1
Transnistria





Former countries



Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Serbia and Montenegro
Soviet Union1
Yugoslavia











1. Partially or entirely in Asia, depending on geographical definition.
2. Recognised by at least one United Nations member.
3. Not recognised by any United Nations members.












v
t
e


Heads of state of the Group of 20






 Macri
 Elizabeth II (Governor-General: Cosgrove)
 Temer
 Elizabeth II (Governor General: Payette)
 Xi
 Tusk
 Macron
 Steinmeier
 Kovind
 Jokowi



 Mattarella
 Akihito
 Peña Nieto
 Putin
 Salman
 Zuma
 Moon
 Erdoğan
 Elizabeth II
 Trump










Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 141021468
LCCN: no96011667
ISNI: 0000 0004 0619 8986
GND: 5164199-9











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=President_of_Russia&oldid=817224503"					Categories: Presidents of RussiaGovernment of Russia1991 establishments in RussiaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with Russian-language external linksArticles containing Russian-language textUse dmy dates from October 2016Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers