This article is about the Canadian province. For the sub-Antarctic islands, see Prince Edward Islands.
"PEI" redirects here. For other meanings of "PEI", see Pei (disambiguation).


Prince Edward Island


Île-du-Prince-Édouard (French)
Epekwitk (Mi'kmaq)









Flag

Coat of arms





Motto(s): Latin: Parva sub ingenti
(The small protected by the great)







BC
AB
SK
MB
ON
QC
NB
PE
NS
NL
YT
NT
NU







Confederation
July 1, 1873 (8th)


Capital
Charlottetown


Largest city
Charlottetown


Largest metro
Charlottetown





Government


 • Lieutenant Governor
Antoinette Perry


 • Premier
Wade MacLauchlan (Liberal)


Legislature
Legislative Assembly of Prince Edward Island


Federal representation
(in Canadian Parliament)


House seats
4 of 338 (1.2%)


Senate seats
4 of 105 (3.8%)





Area[1]


 • Total
5,660 km2 (2,190 sq mi)


 • Land
5,660 km2 (2,190 sq mi)


 • Water
0 km2 (0 sq mi)  0%


Area rank
Ranked 13th


 
0.1% of Canada


Population (2016)


 • Total
142,907 [2]


 • Estimate (2017 Q4)
152,784 [3]


 • Rank
Ranked 10th


 • Density
25.25/km2 (65.4/sq mi)


Demonym(s)
Prince Edward Islander, Islander


Official languages
English (de facto)





GDP


 • Rank
10th


 • Total (2011)
C$5.353 billion[4]


 • Per capita
C$36,740 (13th)


Time zone
Atlantic: UTC-4


Postal abbr.
PE


Postal code prefix
C


ISO 3166 code
CA-PE


Flower
Pink lady's slipper


Tree
Red oak


Bird
Blue jay


Website
www.princeedwardisland.ca


Rankings include all provinces and territories


Prince Edward Island (PEI or P.E.I.; French: Île-du-Prince-Édouard) is a province of Canada consisting of the island of the same name, as well as several much smaller islands. Prince Edward Island is one of the three Maritime Provinces and is the smallest province in both land area and population. It is part of the traditional lands of the Mi'kmaq, and became a British colony in the 1700s and was federated into Canada as a province in 1873. Its capital is Charlottetown. According to the 2016 census, the province of Prince Edward Island has 142,907 residents.
The backbone of the economy is farming; it produces 25% of Canada's potatoes. The island has several informal names: "Garden of the Gulf," referring to the pastoral scenery and lush agricultural lands throughout the province; and "Birthplace of Confederation" or "Cradle of Confederation",[5] referring to the Charlottetown Conference in 1864, although PEI did not join Confederation until 1873, when it became the seventh Canadian province. Historically, PEI is one of Canada's older settlements and demographically still reflects older immigration to the country, with Celtic, Anglo-Saxon and French surnames being dominant to this day.
PEI is located about 200 kilometres (120 miles) north of Halifax, Nova Scotia and 600 kilometres (370 miles) east of Quebec City. It consists of the main island and 231 minor islands.[6] Altogether, the entire province has a land area of 5,686.03 km2 (2,195.39 sq mi).[2] The main island is 5,620 km2 (2,170 sq mi) in size,[6] slightly larger than the U.S. state of Delaware. It is the 104th-largest island in the world and Canada's 23rd-largest island. PEI is the only subnational jurisdiction of North America outside the Caribbean to have no mainland territory, and the only such jurisdiction to have no land boundary.[7]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Geography

2.1 Climate
2.2 Geology
2.3 Water supply
2.4 Flora and fauna


3 History

3.1 French colony

3.1.1 Battle at Port-la-Joye (1745)
3.1.2 Battle at Port-la-Joye (1746)
3.1.3 Expulsion of the Acadians


3.2 British colony

3.2.1 Land distribution
3.2.2 Raid on Charlottetown (1775)


3.3 Confederation


4 Demographics

4.1 Language
4.2 Religion


5 Economy
6 Government and politics

6.1 Municipalities


7 Transportation
8 Education
9 Health care
10 Culture and sports

10.1 Arts
10.2 Festivals
10.3 Sports


11 Notable people
12 Sister province
13 See also
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Etymology[edit]




1834 Edward Scriven engraving of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn, after W. Beechey's portrait


The island is named for Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn (1767–1820), the fourth son of King George III and the father of Queen Victoria. Prince Edward has been called "Father of the Canadian Crown."[8] The following island landmarks are also named after the Duke of Kent:

Prince Edward Battery, Victoria Park, Charlottetown
Kent College (Established in 1804 by Lieutenant Governor Edmund Fanning and his Legislative Council, the college would eventually become the University of Prince Edward Island), Charlottetown
Kent Street, Charlottetown
West Kent Elementary School
Kent Street, Georgetown

In French, the island is called today Île-du-Prince-Édouard, but its former French name, from the time of New France until it was rebaptized by the British in 1798, was Île Saint-Jean (St. John's Island). The island is known in Scottish Gaelic as Eilean a' Phrionnsa (lit. "the Island of the Prince", the local form of the longer 'Eilean a' Phrionnsa Iomhair/Eideard') or Eilean Eòin for some Gaelic speakers in Nova Scotia though not on PEI (lit. "John's Island" in reference to the island's former name); in Míkmaq as Abegweit or Epekwitk roughly translated "land cradled in the waves".
Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of Prince Edward Island






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







A wooden boardwalk in Prince Edward Island National Park in Greenwich


Prince Edward Island is located in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, west of Cape Breton Island, north of the Nova Scotia peninsula, and east of New Brunswick. Its southern shore bounds the Northumberland Strait. The island has two urban areas. The largest surrounds Charlottetown Harbour, situated centrally on the island's southern shore, and consists of the capital city Charlottetown, and suburban towns Cornwall and Stratford and a developing urban fringe. A much smaller urban area surrounds Summerside Harbour, situated on the southern shore 40 km (25 mi) west of Charlottetown Harbour, and consists primarily of the city of Summerside. As with all natural harbours on the island, Charlottetown and Summerside harbours are created by rias.
The island's landscape is pastoral. Rolling hills, woods, reddish white sand beaches, ocean coves and the famous red soil have given Prince Edward Island a reputation as a province of outstanding natural beauty. The provincial government has enacted laws to preserve the landscape through regulation, although there is a lack of consistent enforcement, and an absence of province-wide zoning and land-use planning.[citation needed] Under the Planning Act of the province, municipalities have the option to assume responsibility for land-use planning through the development and adoption of official plans and land use bylaws. Thirty-one municipalities have taken responsibility for planning. In areas where municipalities have not assumed responsibility for planning, the Province remains responsible for development control.




The landward side of sand dunes in Cavendish


The island's lush landscape has a strong bearing on its economy and culture. The author Lucy Maud Montgomery drew inspiration from the land during the late Victorian Era for the setting of her classic novel Anne of Green Gables (1908). Today, many of the same qualities that Montgomery and others found in the island are enjoyed by tourists who visit year-round. They enjoy a variety of leisure activities, including beaches, various golf courses, eco-tourism adventures, touring the countryside, and enjoying cultural events in local communities around the island.
The smaller, rural communities as well as the towns and villages throughout the province, retain a slower-paced, old-world flavour. Prince Edward Island has become popular as a tourist destination for relaxation. The economy of most rural communities on the island is based on small-scale agriculture. Industrial farming has increased as businesses buy and consolidate older farm properties.
The coastline has a combination of long beaches, dunes, red sandstone cliffs, salt water marshes, and numerous bays and harbours. The beaches, dunes and sandstone cliffs consist of sedimentary rock and other material with a high iron concentration, which oxidises upon exposure to the air. The geological properties of a white silica sand found at Basin Head are unique in the province; the sand grains cause a scrubbing noise as they rub against each other when walked on, and have been called the "singing sands".
Large dune fields on the north shore can be found on barrier islands at the entrances to various bays and harbours. The magnificent sand dunes at Greenwich are of particular significance. The shifting, parabolic dune system is home to a variety of birds and rare plants; it is also a site of significant archeological interest.
Despite Prince Edward Island's small size and reputation as a largely rural province, it is the most densely populated province in Canada.




Prince Edward Island amongst the Maritimes


Climate[edit]
The climate of the island is considered to be moderate and strongly influenced by the surrounding seas.[9][10] As such, it is milder than inland locations owing to the warm waters from the Gulf of St. Lawrence.[11] The climate is characterized by changeable weather throughout the year; it has some of the most variable day-to-day weather in Canada, in which specific weather conditions seldom last for long.[10]
During July and August, the average daytime high in PEI is 23 °C (73 °F); however, the temperature can sometimes exceed 30 °C (86 °F) during these months. In the winter months of January and February, the average daytime high is −3.3 °C (26 °F). The Island receives an average yearly rainfall of 855 millimetres (33.7 in) and an average yearly snowfall of 285 centimetres (112 in).
Winters are moderately cold and long but are milder than inland locations, with clashes of cold Arctic air and milder Atlantic air causing frequent temperature swings.[10] The climate is considered to be more continental than oceanic since the Gulf of St. Lawrence freezes over, thus eliminating any moderation.[10] The mean temperature is −7 °C (19 °F) in January.[11] During the winter months, the island usually has many storms (which may produce rain as well as snow) and blizzards since during this time, storms originating from the North Atlantic or the Gulf of Mexico frequently pass through.[10] Springtime temperatures typically remain cool until the sea ice has melted, usually in late April or early May. Summers are moderately warm, but rarely uncomfortable, with the daily maximum temperature only occasionally reaching as high as 30 °C (86 °F). Autumn is a pleasant season, as the moderating Gulf waters delay the onset of frost, although storm activity increases compared to the summer. There is ample precipitation throughout the year, although it is heaviest in the late autumn, early winter and mid spring.
Geology[edit]
Between 250 and 300 million years ago, freshwater streams flowing from ancient mountains brought silt, sand and gravel into what is now the Gulf of St. Lawrence. These sediments accumulated to form a sedimentary basin, and make up the island's bedrock. When the Pleistocene glaciers receded about 15,000 years ago, glacial debris such as till were left behind to cover most of the area that would become the island. This area was connected to the mainland by a strip of land, but when ocean levels rose as the glaciers melted this land strip was flooded, forming the island. As the land rebounded from the weight of the ice, the island rose up to elevate it further from the surrounding water.[9][12][13]
Most of the bedrock in Prince Edward Island is composed of red sandstone, part of the Permian aged Pictou Group.[14]
Although commercial deposits of minerals have not been found, exploration in the 1940s for natural gas beneath the northeastern end of the province resulted in the discovery of an undisclosed quantity of gas.[15] The Island was reported by government to have only 0.08 tcf of "technically recoverable" natural gas. Twenty exploration wells for hydrocarbon resources have been drilled on Prince Edward Island and offshore. The first reported well was Hillsborough No.#1, drilled in Charlottetown Harbour in 1944 (the world’s first offshore well), and the most recent was New Harmony No.#1 in 2007. Since the resurgence of exploration in the mid-1990s, all wells that have shown promising gas deposits have been stimulated through hydraulic fracture or “fracking”. All oil and natural gas exploration and exploitation activities on the Island are governed by the Oil and Natural Gas Act R.S.P.E.I. 1988, Cap. 0-5 and its associated regulations and orders.[16]
Water supply[edit]
The Province of Prince Edward Island is completely dependent on groundwater for its source of drinking water. As groundwater flows through an aquifer it is naturally filtered. The water for City of Charlottetown is extracted from thirteen wells in three wellfields and distributed to customers. The water removed is replenished by precipitation.[17]
Infrastructure in Charlottetown that was installed in 1888 is still in existence. With the age of the system in the older part of Charlottetown, concern has been raised regarding lead pipes. The Utility has been working with its residents on a lead replacement program. A plebiscite in 1967 was held in Charlottetown over fluoridation, and residents voted in favour. Under provincial legislation, the Utility is required to report to its residents on an annual basis. It is also required to do regular sampling of the water and an overview is included in each annual report.[17] The Winter River watershed provides about 92 per cent of the 18 million litre water supply for the city of Charlottetown,[18] which had difficulty in each of 2011, 2012 and 2013 with its supply,[18][19][20] until water meters were installed.[19]
Minister of Communities, Land and Environment Robert Mitchell tabled a discussion paper on the proposed Water Act for the province on 8 July 2015. The use of groundwater came under scrutiny as the potato industry, which accounts for $1 billion every year and 50% of farm receipts,[21] has pressed the government to lift a moratorium on high-capacity water wells for irrigation. The release of the discussion paper was to set off a consultation process in the autumn of 2015.[22]
Detailed information about the quality of drinking water in PEI communities and watersheds can be found at the Department of Environment, Labour and Justice. It provides a summary of the ongoing testing of drinking water done by the Prince Edward Island Analytical Laboratories. Average drinking water quality results are available, and information on the following parameters are provided: alkalinity, cadmium, calcium, chloride, chromium, iron, magnesium, manganese, nickel, nitrate, pH, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, and sulfate, as well as the presence of pesticides.[23] Water testing services are provided for a variety of clients through the PEI Analytical Laboratories, which assesses according to the recommendations of the Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality published by Health Canada.[24]
Flora and fauna[edit]
Prince Edward Island used to have native moose, bear, caribou, wolf, and other larger species. Due to hunting and habitat disruption these species are no longer found on the island. Some species common to P.E.I. are red foxes, coyote,[25] blue jays, and robins. Skunks and raccoons are common non-native species. Species at risk in P.E.I. include piping plovers, american eel, bobolinks, little brown bat, and beach pinweed.[26]
Some species are unique to the province. In 2008, a new ascomycete species, Jahnula apiospora (Jahnulales, Dothideomycetes), was collected from submerged wood in a freshwater creek on Prince Edward Island, Canada.[27] North Atlantic right whales, one of the rarest whale species, were once thought to be rare visitors into St. Lawrence regions until 1994, have been showing dramatic increases (annual concentrations were discovered off Percé in 1995 and gradual increases across the regions since in 1998),[28] and since in 2014, notable numbers of whales have been recorded around Cape Breton to Prince Edward Island as 35 to 40 whales were seen in these areas in 2015.[29]
History[edit]
Main article: History of Prince Edward Island




Lighthouse on Panmure Island


Since before the influx of Europeans, the Mi'kmaq First Nations have inhabited Prince Edward Island as part of the region of Mi'kma'ki. They named the Island Epekwitk, meaning "cradled on the waves"; Europeans represented the pronunciation as Abegweit.[30] Another name is Minegoo.[31] The Mi'kmaq's legend is that the island was formed by the Great Spirit placing on the Blue Waters some dark red crescent-shaped clay.[31] There are two Mi'kmaq First Nation communities on Epekwitk today.[32]
French colony[edit]
In 1534, Jacques Cartier was the first European to see the island.[30] In 1604, France claimed the lands of the Maritimes, including Prince Edward Island, establishing the French colony of Acadia. The island was named Île Saint-Jean by the French. The Mi'kmaq never recognized the claim but welcomed the French as trading partners and allies.
Battle at Port-la-Joye (1745)[edit]
After the Siege of Louisbourg (1745) during the War of the Austrian Succession, the New Englanders also captured Île Saint-Jean (Prince Edward Island). An English detachment landed at Port-la-Joye. Under the command of Joseph de Pont Duvivier, the French had a garrison of 20 French troops at Port-la-Joye.[33] The troops fled and New Englanders burned the capital to the ground. Duvivier and the twenty men retreated up the Northeast River (Hillsborough River), pursued by the New Englanders until the French troops received reinforcements from the Acadian militia and the Mi'kmaq.[34] The French troops and their allies were able to drive the New Englanders to their boats, nine New Englanders killed, wounded or made prisoner. The New Englanders took six Acadian hostages, who would be executed if the Acadians or Mi'kmaq rebelled against New England control.[34] The New England troops left for Louisbourg. Duvivier and his 20 troops left for Quebec. After the fall of Louisbourg, the resident French population of Île Royal were deported to France. The Acadians of Île Saint-Jean lived under the threat of deportation for the remainder of the war.[35]




Charles Deschamps de Boishébert et de Raffetot


Battle at Port-la-Joye (1746)[edit]
Main article: Battle at Port-la-Joye
The New Englanders had a force of two war ships and 200 soldiers stationed at Port-La-Joye. To regain Acadia, Ramezay was sent from Quebec to the region to join forces with the Duc d'Anville Expedition. Upon arriving at Chignecto, he sent Boishebert to Île Saint-Jean on a reconnaissance to assess the size of the New England force.[36] After Boishebert returned, Ramezay sent Joseph-Michel Legardeur de Croisille et de Montesson along with over 500 men, 200 of whom were Mi'kmaq, to Port-La-Joye.[37] In July 1746, the battle happened near York River.[38] Montesson and his troops killed forty New Englanders and captured the rest. Montesson was commended for having distinguished himself in his first independent command.[39]
Expulsion of the Acadians[edit]
Roughly one thousand Acadians lived on the island, many of whom had fled to the island from mainland Nova Scotia during the first wave of the British-ordered expulsion in 1755, reaching a population of 5,000.[40] However, many more were forcibly deported during the second wave of the expulsion after the Siege of Louisbourg (1758).[41] In the Île Saint-Jean Campaign (1758) General Jeffery Amherst ordered Colonel Andrew Rollo to capture the island. Many Acadians died in the expulsion en route to France; on December 13, 1758, the transport ship Duke William sank and 364 died. A day earlier the Violet sank and 280 died; several days later Ruby sank with 213 on board.[42]
British colony[edit]
Great Britain claimed the island as part of Nova Scotia in 1763, when France gave up its claim to the island. This was under the terms of the Treaty of Paris which settled the Seven Years' War. The island was split into a separate colony in 1769, which the British called St. John's Island (also the Island of St. John's). The high influx of Scottish Highlanders in the late 1700s resulted in P.E.I. having the highest provincial percentage of Scottish immigrants in Canada. (Not to underestimate the highest percentage of Scottish on nearby Cape Breton Island, however only being a part thereof the province of Nova Scotia.) This, in turn, led to a higher proportion of Scottish Gaelic speakers and thriving culture surviving on P.E.I. than Scotland itself, as the settlers avoided English influence overseas. Hence the formally existing Prince Edward Island Highland Regiment founded in 1875.
The first British governor of St. John's Island, Walter Patterson, was appointed in 1769. Assuming office in 1770, he had a controversial career during which land title disputes and factional conflict slowed the initial attempts to populate and develop the island under a feudal system. In an attempt to attract settlers from Ireland, in one of his first acts (1770) Patterson led the island's colonial assembly to rename the island "New Ireland", but the British Government promptly vetoed this as exceeding the authority vested in the colonial government; only the Privy Council in London could change the name of a colony.[43]
Land distribution[edit]
In the mid-1760s, a survey team divided the Island into 67 lots. On July 1, 1767, these properties were allocated to supporters of King George III by means of a lottery. Ownership of the land remained in the hands of landlords in England, angering Island settlers who were unable to gain title to land on which they worked and lived. Significant rent charges (to absentee landlords) created further anger. The land had been given to the absentee landlords with a number of conditions attached regarding upkeep and settlement terms; many of these conditions were not satisfied. Islanders spent decades trying to convince the Crown to confiscate the lots, however the descendants of the original owners were generally well connected to the British government and refused to give up the land.
In 1853, the Island government passed the Land Purchase Act which empowered them to purchase lands from those owners who were willing to sell, and then resell the land to settlers for low prices. This scheme collapsed when the Island ran short of money to continue with the purchases. Many of these lands also were fertile, and were some of the key factors to sustaining Prince Edward Island's economy.
Raid on Charlottetown (1775)[edit]
During the American Revolutionary War Charlottetown was raided in 1775 by a pair of American-employed privateers.[44] Two armed schooners, Franklin and Hancock, from Beverly, Massachusetts, made prisoner of the attorney-general at Charlottetown, on advice given them by some Pictou residents after they had taken eight fishing vessels in the Gut of Canso.[45]
During and after the American Revolutionary War, from 1776 to 1783, the colony's efforts to attract exiled Loyalist refugees from the rebellious American colonies met with some success. Walter Patterson's brother, John Patterson, one of the original grantees of land on the island, was a temporarily exiled Loyalist and led efforts to persuade others to come.
The 1787 dismissal of Governor Patterson and his recall to London in 1789 dampened his brother's efforts, leading John to focus on his interests in the United States (one of John's sons, Commodore Daniel Patterson, became a noted United States Navy hero, and John's grandsons, Rear Admiral Thomas H. Patterson and Lt. Carlile Pioou). Edmund Fanning, also a Loyalist exiled by the Revolution, took over as the second governor, serving until 1804. His tenure was more successful than Patterson's.[citation needed]
On November 29, 1798, during Fanning's administration, Great Britain granted approval to change the colony's name from St. John's Island to Prince Edward Island to distinguish it from similar names in the Atlantic, such as the cities of Saint John, New Brunswick and St. John's in Newfoundland. The colony's new name honoured the fourth son of King George III, Prince Edward Augustus, the Duke of Kent (1767–1820), who subsequently led the British military forces on the continent as Commander-in-Chief, North America (1799–1800), with his headquarters in Halifax. (Prince Edward later became the father of the future Queen Victoria.)
During the 19th century the colony of Prince Edward Island began to attract "adventurous Victorian families looking for elegance on the sea. Prince Edward Island became a fashionable retreat in the nineteenth century for British nobility."[46]
Confederation[edit]




The flag of the Dominion of Prince Edward Island.


In September 1864, Prince Edward Island hosted the Charlottetown Conference, which was the first meeting in the process leading to the Quebec Resolutions and the creation of Canada in 1867. Prince Edward Island did not find the terms of union favourable and balked at joining in 1867, choosing to remain a colony of the United Kingdom. In the late 1860s, the colony examined various options, including the possibility of becoming a discrete dominion unto itself, as well as entertaining delegations from the United States, who were interested in Prince Edward Island joining the United States.[citation needed]




Prince Edward Island, then St. John's Island, map 1775


In 1871, the colony began construction of a railway and, frustrated by Great Britain's Colonial Office, began negotiations with the United States.[citation needed] In 1873, Canadian Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald, anxious to thwart American expansionism and facing the distraction of the Pacific Scandal, negotiated for Prince Edward Island to join Canada. The Dominion Government of Canada assumed the colony's extensive railway debts and agreed to finance a buy-out of the last of the colony's absentee landlords to free the island of leasehold tenure and from any new immigrants entering the island (accomplished through the passage of the Land Purchase Act, 1875).[47] Prince Edward Island entered Confederation on July 1, 1873.[48]
As a result of having hosted the inaugural meeting of Confederation, the Charlottetown Conference, Prince Edward Island presents itself as the "Birthplace of Confederation" and this is commemorated through several buildings, a ferry vessel, and the Confederation Bridge (constructed 1993 to 1997). The most prominent building in the province honouring this event is the Confederation Centre of the Arts, presented as a gift to Prince Edward Islanders by the 10 provincial governments and the Federal Government upon the centenary of the Charlottetown Conference, where it stands in Charlottetown as a national monument to the "Fathers of Confederation". The Centre is one of the 22 National Historic Sites of Canada located in Prince Edward Island.[49][50]
Demographics[edit]
Main article: Demographics of Prince Edward Island


Historical populations


Year
Pop.
±%


1851
62,678
—    


1861
80,857
+29.0%


1871
94,021
+16.3%


1881
108,891
+15.8%


1891
109,078
+0.2%


1901
103,259
−5.3%


1911
93,728
−9.2%


1921
88,615
−5.5%


1931
88,038
−0.7%


1941
95,047
+8.0%


1951
98,429
+3.6%


1956
99,285
+0.9%


1961
104,629
+5.4%


1966
108,535
+3.7%


1971
111,635
+2.9%


1976
118,225
+5.9%


1981
122,506
+3.6%


1986
126,640
+3.4%


1991
129,765
+2.5%


1996
134,557
+3.7%


2001
135,294
+0.5%


2006
135,851
+0.4%


2011
140,204
+3.2%


2016
142,907
+1.9%


Source: Statistics Canada[51][52]


According to the 2011 National Household Survey,[53][54] the largest ethnic group consists of people of Scottish descent (39.2%), followed by English (31.1%), Irish (30.4%), French (21.1%), German (5.2%), and Dutch (3.1%) descent. Prince Edward Island's population is largely white; there are few visible minorities. Chinese Canadians are the largest visible minority group of Prince Edward Island, comprising 1.3% of the province's population.[53] Almost half of respondents identified their ethnicity as "Canadian."
* among provinces.
† Preliminary 2006 census estimate.
Source: Statistics Canada[55][56]
Language[edit]




Mother tongue in Prince Edward Island (red: English, blue: French). The only part of the province to have a Francophone majority is the Evangeline Region.


The Canada 2016 Census showed a population of 142,910. Of the 140,020 singular responses to the census question concerning mother tongue, the most commonly reported languages were as follows:


Rank
Language
Number
Percent


1.
English
128,005
94.9%


2.
French
4,865
3.5%


3.
Mandarin
2,165
1.6%


4.
Arabic
575
0.4%


5.
Dutch
465
0.3%


6.
Tagalog
365
0.3%


7.
German
320
0.2%


8.
Spanish
305
0.2%


9.
Chinese languages, not otherwise specified
295
0.2%


10.
Cantonese
210
0.2%


11.
Nepali
200
0.1%


12.
Farsi
175
0.1%


13.
Russian
140
0.1%


14.
Korean
120
<0.1%


In addition, there were 460 responses of both English and a 'non-official language'; 30 of both French and a 'non-official language'; 485 of both English and French; and 20 of English, French, and a 'non-official language'. (Figures shown are for the number of single language responses and the percentage of total single-language responses.)[57]
Religion[edit]
Traditionally the population has been evenly divided between Catholic and Protestant affiliations. The 2001 census indicated number of adherents for the Roman Catholic Church with 63,240 (47%) and various Protestant churches with 57,805 (43%). This included the United Church of Canada with 26,570 (20%); the Presbyterian Church with 7,885 (6%) and the Anglican Church of Canada with 6,525 (5%); those with no religion were among the lowest of the provinces with 8,705 (6.5%).[58] If one considers that the founders of the United Church of Canada were largely Presbyterians in Prince Edward Island, the Island has one of the highest percentages of Presbyterians in the country. The Island also has one of the largest number of Free Church of Scotland buildings in Canada, though attendance at many of these churches is very low today.
Economy[edit]




Fisheries form one of the major industries of Prince Edward Island








File:CAN-S1932a-Bank of Prince Edward Island-10 Dollars (1872).jpg
1872 $10 Bank of Prince Edward Island banknote depicting fishing







Sandstone cliffs at North Cape shrouded in fog






Rolling hills cover a significant portion of the island's landscape.


The provincial economy is dominated by the seasonal industries of agriculture, tourism, and the fishery. The province is limited in terms of heavy industry and manufacturing, though the McCain's food conglomerate runs expansion operations from PEI.
Agriculture remains the dominant industry in the provincial economy, as it has since colonial times. The Island has a total land area of 1.4 million acres (570,000 hectares) with approximately 594,000 acres (240,383 hectares) cleared for agricultural use.[59] In 2006, the Census of Agriculture counted 1700 farms on the Island.[60] During the 20th century, potatoes replaced mixed farming as the leading cash crop, accounting for one-third of provincial farm income.[citation needed] The number of acres under potato production in 2010 was 88,000,[21] while soy accounted for 55,000.[61] There are approximately 330 potato growers on PEI, with the grand majority of these being family farms, often with multiple generations working together.[21] The province currently accounts for a third of Canada's total potato production, producing approximately 1.3 billion kilograms (1,400,000 short tons) annually.[21] Comparatively, the state of Idaho produces approximately 6.2 billion kilograms (6,800,000 short tons) annually, with a population approximately 9.5 times greater.[62] The province is a major producer of seed potatoes, exporting to more than twenty countries around the world.[21] An estimated total of 70% of the land is cultivated and 25% of all potatoes grown in Canada originate from P.E.I.[63] The processing of frozen fried potatoes, green vegetables, and berries is a leading business activity.[64]
As a legacy of the island's colonial history, the provincial government enforces extremely strict rules for non-resident land ownership, especially since the PEI Lands Protection Act of 1982.[65] Residents and corporations are limited to maximum holdings of 400 and 1,200 hectares respectively. There are also restrictions on non-resident ownership of shorelines.[65]




Farmland on Prince Edward Island.


The island's economy has grown significantly over the last decade in key areas of innovation. Aerospace, Bioscience, ICT and Renewable energy have been a focus for growth and diversification. Aerospace alone now accounts for over 25% of the province's international exports and is the island's fourth largest industry at $355 million in annual sales. The Bioscience industry employs over 1300 people and generates over $150 million in sales.[66]
Many of the province's coastal communities rely upon shellfish harvesting, particularly lobster fishing[67] as well as oyster fishing and mussel farming.
The sale of carbonated beverages such as beer and soft drinks in non-refillable containers, such as aluminum cans or plastic bottles, was banned in 1976 as an environmental measure in response to public concerns over litter. Beer and soft drink companies opted to use refillable glass bottles for their products which were redeemable at stores and bottle depots.
Though often environmental and economic agendas may be at odds, the ‘ban the can’ legislation along with being environmentally driven, was also economically motivated as it protected jobs. Seaman's Beverages, a bottling company and carbonated beverage manufacturer, was established in 1939 and a major employer in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island.[68] Making it illegal to retail cans led to a bigger share of the carbonated beverage market for Seamans. Seamans Beverages was eventually acquired by Pepsi Bottling Group Inc in 2002 prior to the lifting of the legislation.[69]
The introduction of recycling programs for cans and plastic bottles in neighbouring provinces in recent years (also using a redemption system) has seen the provincial government introduce legislation to reverse this ban with the restriction lifted on May 3, 2008.[70][71][72]
Prince Edward Island has one of Canada's highest provincial retail sales tax rate at 9%. The tax is applied to almost all goods and services except some clothing, food and home heating fuel. The tax, along with the Federal Goods and Services Tax, is incorporated into the Harmonized Sales Tax in the province.
The provincial government provides consumer protection in the form of regulation for certain items, ranging from apartment rent increases to petroleum products including gas, diesel, propane and heating oil. These are regulated through the Prince Edward Island Regulatory and Appeals Commission (IRAC).[73] IRAC is authorized to limit the number of companies who are permitted to sell petroleum products.
At present, approximately fifteen percent of electricity consumed on the island is generated from renewable energy (largely wind turbines); the provincial government has set renewable energy targets as high as 30-50% for electricity consumed by 2015. Until wind generation, the province relied entirely on electricity imports on a submarine cable from New Brunswick. A thermal oil-fired generating station in Charlottetown is also available. Electricity rates in the province were in 2011 the highest in Canada, at a domestic rate of 0.161 $/kWh. The province imports about 85 per cent of its power through New Brunswick. The maintenance shutdown of Point Lepreau nuclear plant forced the province to acquire most of its electrons on the expensive open market. The result was a steep price hikes of about 25 per cent in the three years to 2011 but the province later subsidised rates.[74] Residents were to pay 11.2 per cent more for electricity when the harmonized sales tax was adopted in April 2013, according to the P.E.I. Energy Accord that was tabled in the legislature on 7 December 2012.[75] and passed as the Electric Power (Energy Accord Continuation) Amendment Act, which establishes electric pricing from 1 April 2013 to 1 March 2016. Regulatory powers are derived for IRAC from the Electric Power Act.[76] Since 1918 Maritime Electric has delivered electricity to customers on the Island. The utility is currently owned and operated by Fortis Inc.[77]
The average family income on Prince Edward Island is $62,110/year,[78] and the minimum wage of $10.50/hour as of July 1, 2015.[79]
Government and politics[edit]
Main articles: Government of Prince Edward Island and Politics of Prince Edward Island
The provincial government is responsible for such areas as health and social services, education, economic development, labour legislation and civil law. These matters of government are carried out in the provincial capital, Charlottetown.
Prince Edward Island is governed by a parliamentary government within the construct of constitutional monarchy; the monarchy in Prince Edward Island is the foundation of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches.[80] The sovereign is Queen Elizabeth II, who also serves as head of state of 15 other Commonwealth countries, each of Canada's nine other provinces, and the Canadian federal realm, and resides predominantly in the United Kingdom. As such, the Queen's representative, the Lieutenant Governor of Prince Edward Island (presently Antoinette Perry), carries out most of the royal duties in Prince Edward Island.[81]
The direct participation of the royal and viceroyal figures in any of these areas of governance is limited; in practice, their use of the executive powers is directed by the Executive Council, a committee of ministers of the Crown responsible to the unicameral, elected Legislative Assembly and chosen and headed by the Premier of Prince Edward Island (presently Wade MacLauchlan), the head of government. To ensure the stability of government, the lieutenant governor will usually appoint as premier the person who is the current leader of the political party that can obtain the confidence of a plurality in the Legislative Assembly. The leader of the party with the second-most seats usually becomes the Leader of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition (presently Jamie Fox) and is part of an adversarial parliamentary system intended to keep the government in check.[82]
Each of the 27 Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) is elected by simple plurality in an electoral district. General elections are called by the lieutenant governor on the first Monday in October four years after the previous election, or may be called, on the advice of the premier, should the government lose a confidence vote in the legislature.[83] Traditionally, politics in the province have been dominated by both the Liberal Party and the Progressive Conservative Party.
The Mi'kmaq Confederacy of PEI is the tribal council and provincial territorial organization in the province that represents both the Lennox Island and Abegweit First Nations.
Municipalities[edit]
See also: List of municipalities in Prince Edward Island


Ten largest communities by population

Community
2011
2001


Charlottetown
32,545a
32,455


Summerside
15,654b
14,433


Stratford
8,043
6,314


Cornwall
5,375
4,412


Montague
2,034c
1,095


Kensington
1,445
1,379


Souris
1,162
1,238


Alberton
1,081
975


Tignish
998
846


Georgetown
678
680


aCensus agglomeration population: 58,358.
bCensus agglomeration population: 16,200.
cCensus agglomeration population: 6,011.


Transportation[edit]




Cardigan River, one of The Three Rivers


Prince Edward Island's transportation network has traditionally revolved around its seaports of Charlottetown, Summerside, Borden, Georgetown, and Souris —linked to its railway system, and the two main airports in Charlottetown and Summerside, for communication with mainland North America. The railway system was abandoned by CN in 1989 in favour of an agreement with the federal government to improve major highways.
Until 1997, the province was linked by two passenger-vehicle ferry services to the mainland: one, provided by Marine Atlantic, operated year-round between Borden and Cape Tormentine, New Brunswick; the other, provided by Northumberland Ferries Limited, operates seasonally between Wood Islands and Caribou, Nova Scotia. A third ferry service provided by CTMA operates all year round with seasonal times between Souris and Cap-aux-Meules, Quebec, in the Magdalen Islands.




Confederation Bridge


On June 1, 1997, the Confederation Bridge opened, connecting Borden-Carleton to Cape Jourimain, New Brunswick. The world's longest bridge over ice-covered waters,[84] it replaced the Marine Atlantic ferry service. Since then, the Confederation Bridge's assured transportation link to the mainland has altered the province's tourism and agricultural and fisheries export economies.
Several airlines service the Charlottetown Airport (CYYG); the Summerside Airport (CYSU) is an additional option for general aviation.
The Island has the highest concentration of roadways in Canada. The provincially managed portion of the network consists of 3,824 kilometres (2,376 mi) of paved roadways and 1,558 kilometres (968 mi) of non-paved or clay roads.
The province has very strict laws regarding use of road-side signs. Billboards and the use of portable signs are banned. There are standard direction information signs on roads in the province for various businesses and attractions in the immediate area. Some municipalities' by-laws also restrict the types of permanent signs that may be installed on private property.
There is an extensive bicycling / hiking trail that spans the island. The Confederation Trail is a 470 kilometres (290 mi) recreational trail system. The land was once owned and used by Canadian National Railway (CN) as a rail line on the island.
Education[edit]




Holland College


Prince Edward Island is home to one university, the University of Prince Edward Island (UPEI), located in the city of Charlottetown.
The university was created by the Island legislature to replace Prince of Wales College and St. Dunstan's University. UPEI is also home to the Atlantic Veterinary College, which offers the region's only veterinary medicine program.
Holland College is the provincial community college, with campuses across the province, including specialised facilities such as the Atlantic Police Academy, Marine Training Centre, and the Culinary Institute of Canada.
Prince Edward Island is also home to Maritime Christian College. It is also home to Immanuel Christian School, a private Christian School in Charlottetown.
Prince Edward Island's public school system has an English school district named the English Language School Board,[85] as well as a Francophone district, the Commission scolaire de langue française. The English language districts have a total of 10 secondary schools and 54 intermediate and elementary schools while the Francophone district has 6 schools covering all grades. 22 per cent of the student population is enrolled in French immersion. This is one of the highest levels in the country.
Today 23.5 per cent of residents aged 15 to 19 have bilingual skills, an increase of 100 per cent in a decade. Prince Edward Island, along with most rural regions in North America, is experiencing an accelerated rate of youth emigration. The provincial government has projected that public school enrollment will decline by 40% during the 2010s.
Health care[edit]
See also: Health care in Canada




Panorama of the banks of the Hunter River in New Glasgow






The coast of Prince Edward Island around Cavendish


The province has a single health administrative region (or district health authority) called Health PEI. Health PEI receives funding for its operations and is regulated by the Department of Health and Wellness.
Many PEI homes and businesses are serviced by central sewage collection and/or treatment systems. These are operated either by a municipality or a private utility. Many industrial operations have their own wastewater treatment facilities. Staff members with the Department of Environment, Labour and Justice provide advice to operators, as needed, on proper system maintenance.[86] The IRAC regulates municipal water and sewer in the province,[87] now under the Environmental Protection Act.[88] Since around 1900, the residents of the City of Charlottetown have benefited from a central sanitary sewer service. Early disposal practices, while advanced for their time, eventually were found to compromise the ecological integrity of the nearby Hillsborough River and the Charlottetown Harbour. By 1974, the Commission had spearheaded the development of a primary wastewater treatment plant, known as the Charlottetown Pollution Control Plant, together with the construction of several pumping stations along the City’s waterfront, and outfall piping deep into the Hillsborough River.[89]
There are eight hospitals in the province.

Queen Elizabeth Hospital (Charlottetown)
Prince County Hospital (Summerside)
Kings County Memorial Hospital (Montague)
Community Hospital (O'Leary)
Souris Hospital (Souris)
Western Hospital (Alberton)
Hillsborough Hospital (Charlottetown) - the province's only psychiatric hospital

Prince Edward Island offers programs and services in areas such as acute care, primary care, home care, palliative care, public health, chronic disease prevention, and mental health and addictions, to name a few. The provincial government has opened several family health centres in recent years in various rural and urban communities. A provincial cancer treatment centre at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital provides support to those dealing with various types of cancer-related illnesses. A family medicine residency program was established in 2009 with the Dalhousie University Faculty of Medicine as a means to encourage new physicians to work in Prince Edward Island.
Long-term-care services are also available with several programs in place to support seniors wishing to remain independent in their communities. Many medications for seniors are subsidized through a provincial pharmaceutical plan, however, Prince Edward Island remains one of the only provinces lacking a catastrophic drug coverage program for its residents.
The provincial government has several programs for early illness detection, including mammography and pap screening clinics. There are also asthma education and diabetes education programs, as well as prenatal programs, immunization programs and dental health risk prevention programs for children. The government is also attempting to implement a comprehensive integrated Electronic Health Record system.
The provincial government has recently committed to enhancing primary care and home care services and has invested in health care facilities in recent capital budgets; mostly replacements and upgrades to provincial government operated nursing homes and hospitals.
Some specialist services require patients to be referred to clinics and specialists in neighbouring provinces. Specialist operations and treatments are also provided at larger tertiary referral hospitals in neighbouring provinces such as the IWK Health Centre and Queen Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre in Nova Scotia or the Saint John Regional Hospital, Moncton Hospital, and Dr. Georges-L.-Dumont University Hospital Centre in New Brunswick.
Ground ambulance service in Prince Edward Island is provided under contract by Island EMS. Air ambulance service is provided under contract by LifeFlight.
In recent decades, Prince Edward Island's population has shown statistically significant and abnormally high rates of diagnosed rare cancers, particularly in rural areas. Health officials, ecologists and environmental activists point to the use of pesticides for industrial potato farming as a primary contaminant.[90]
Prince Edward Island is the only province in Canada that does not provide abortion services through its hospitals. The last abortion was performed in the province in 1982 prior to the opening of the Queen Elizabeth Hospital which saw the closure of the Roman Catholic-affiliated Charlottetown Hospital and the non-denominational Prince Edward Island Hospital; a condition of the "merger" being that abortions not be performed in the province. In 1988, following the court decision R. v. Morgentaler, the then-opposition Progressive Conservative Party of Prince Edward Island tabled a motion demanding that the ban on abortions be upheld at the province's hospitals; the then-governing Prince Edward Island Liberal Party under Premier Joe Ghiz acquiesced and the ban was upheld.[91] The Government of Prince Edward Island will fund abortions for women who travel to another province. Women from Prince Edward Island may also travel to the nearest private user-pay clinic, where they must pay for the procedure using their own funds. Formerly this was the Morgentaler Clinic in Fredericton, New Brunswick[92][93][94][95][96] until this clinic closed due to lack of funds in July 2014.[97] The clinic was reopened under new ownership in 2016 as Clinic 554 with expanded services.[98] During that gap, women had to travel to Halifax or further. In 2016, the Liberal government led by Premier Wade MacLauchlan announced they would open a women's reproductive health clinic to provide abortions within the province.[99]
Culture and sports[edit]
See also: Music of Prince Edward Island




Sandstone arch off the coast of Darnley


Arts[edit]
The island's cultural traditions of art, music and creative writing are supported through the public education system. There is an annual arts festival, the Charlottetown Festival, hosted at the Confederation Centre of the Arts.
Lucy Maud Montgomery, who was born in Clifton (now New London) in 1874, wrote some 20 novels and numerous short stories that have been collected into anthologies. Her first Anne book Anne of Green Gables was published in 1908. The musical play Anne of Green Gables has run every year at the Charlottetown festival for more than four decades. The sequel, Anne & Gilbert, premiered in the Playhouse in Victoria in 2005. The actual location of Green Gables, the house featured in Montgomery's Anne books, is in Cavendish, on the north shore of PEI.
Elmer Blaney Harris founded an artists colony at Fortune Bridge and set his famous play Johnny Belinda on the island. Robert Harris was a well-known artist.
Prince Edward Island's documented music history begins in the 19th century with religious music, some written by the local pump and block maker and organ-importer, Watson Duchemin. Several big bands including the Sons of Temperance Band and the Charlottetown Brass Band were active. Today, Acadian, Celtic, folk, and rock music prevail, with exponents including Gene MacLellan, his daughter Catherine MacLellan, Al Tuck, Lennie Gallant, Two Hours Traffic and Paper Lions. The celebrated singer-songwriter Stompin' Tom Connors spent his formative years in Skinners Pond. Celtic music is certainly the most common traditional music on the island, with fiddling and step dancing being very common. This tradition, largely Scottish, Irish and Acadian in origin is very similar to the music of Cape Breton and to a lesser extent, Newfoundland and is unique to the region. Due to the Islands influence as a former Highlander Clans Scottish colony, a March 4/4 for bagpipes was composed in honour of Prince Edward Island.[100] There is also an annual jazz festival, the P.E.I. Jazz and Blues Festival.[101]
Festivals[edit]
See also: Category:Festivals in Prince Edward Island
There is an annual arts festival, the Charlottetown Festival, hosted at the Confederation Centre of the Arts as well as the Island Fringe Festival that takes place around Charlottetown.[102] An annual jazz festival, the P.E.I. Jazz and Blues Festival.[101] is a one-week-long series of concerts taking place at several venues including Murphy's Community Center, outdoor stages, and churches in Charlottetown. The moving of its date to mid August caused in 2011 a serious loss in funding from Ottawa's regional development agency ACOA.[103] The musician's line up in 2011 included Oliver Jones, Sophie Milman, Matt Dusk, Jack de Keyzer, Jack Semple, Meaghan Smith, Meaghan Blanchard, Hupman Brothers, Alex Dean, Charlie A'Court, Sean Ferris, Jimmy Bowskill, West End Blues Band, Bad Habits, Brian McConnell and Mellotones.[citation needed] There is also Canada Rocks, and the Cavendish Beach Music Festival. With agriculture and fishery playing a large role in the economy, P.E.I. has been marketed as a food tourism destination.[104] Several food festivals have become popular such as the Fall Flavours festival and the Shellfish Festival.
Sports[edit]

Water sports are very popular on Prince Edward Island during the summer, perhaps because the Gulf of St. Lawrence and the Northumberland Strait are warmer than the Atlantic Ocean off the shores of nearby New England.
In 1991, Prince Edward Island hosted the Canada Winter Games.
In 2009, Prince Edward Island hosted the Canada Summer Games.
The Charlottetown Islanders play in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League.
The Island Storm play in the National Basketball League of Canada.
The Summerside Western Capitals play in the Maritime Junior A Hockey League.
In 2008 and 2009, Prince Edward Island hosted the Tour de PEI, a province-wide cycling race consisting of women from around the world.
The most common sports played on the Island are hockey, curling, golf, horse racing, baseball, soccer, rugby, football and basketball.

Notable people[edit]

Milton James Rhode Acorn - poet/playwright
Francis Bain – author, scientist, farmer
Catherine Callbeck - former premier, first woman to be elected as premier in a general election
Dave Cameron - Calgary Flames assistant coach
Alex Campbell – former premier
George Coles – former premier, Father of Confederation
Jared Connaughton – former Olympic sprinter
Lloyd Duffy – thoroughbred jockey, harness racing driver
Mike Duffy – television journalist, senator
Gerard Gallant – Vegas Golden Knights head coach
Millie Gamble - early amateur photographer
Joe Ghiz - former premier
George Godfrey - boxer
Francis Longworth Haszard - politician, jurist
Haywire – rock band
Hangman Hughes (aka Kowboy Mike Hughes) - professional wrestler
Lorie Kane - professional golfer
Forbes Kennedy - retired NHL player
Joey Kitson - singer
David Laird - framer of the Indian Act and first resident Lieutenant Governor of the Northwest Territories
Amber MacArthur - broadcasting personality and author
Alexander Wallace Matheson - politician
John Alexander Mathieson - educator, politician, jurist
David (Eli) MacEachern – Olympic gold medalist and world champion in bobsledding
Martha MacIsaac – actress
Adam McQuaid – Boston Bruins defenceman
Lucy Maud Montgomery - author
Heather Moyse - two-time Olympic gold medalist in bobsledding
Steve Ott - retired NHL player
Claire Rankin - actress
Brad Richards – retired NHL Player
James Jeffrey Roche – poet and diplomat
Jacob Gould Schurman – educator and diplomat
Michael Smith – chef and television host
Mark Strand - poet
Joe O'Brien - harness racing driver, trainer
Lemuel Cambridge Owen - shipbuilder, banker
Edward Palmer - lawyer, politician
Paper Lions- pop band
James Colledge Pope - businessman, former premier
William Henry Pope - land agent, lawyer, jurist
Whitney Rose - country musician
Jonathan Torrens – actor and television host
Two Hours Traffic – pop band
Weston Thomas "Bucko" Trainor - hockey player
Alexander Bannerman Warburton - former premier
George Wood- professional baseball player

Sister province[edit]
Hainan Province, China, has been the sister province of Prince Edward Island since 2001. This came about after Vice-Governor Lin Fanglue stayed for two days to hold discussions about partnership opportunities and trade.[105]
See also[edit]


Prince Edward Island portal
Acadia portal







Book: Canada




Main article: Outline of Prince Edward Island

Acadiensis, scholarly history journal covering Atlantic Canada
Index of Canada-related articles
List of people from Prince Edward Island

References[edit]


^ "Land and freshwater area, by province and territory". Statistics Canada. February 1, 2005. Retrieved August 5, 2012. 
^ a b "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, 2016 and 2011 censuses". Statistics Canada. February 6, 2017. Retrieved May 8, 2017. 
^ "Population by year of Canada of Canada and territories". Statistics Canada. September 26, 2014. Retrieved March 20, 2016. 
^ "Gross domestic product, expenditure-based, by province and territory (2011)". Statistics Canada. November 19, 2013. Retrieved September 26, 2013. 
^ Prince Edward Island. Britannica Concise Encyclopedia. 2013. 
^ a b Natural Resources Canada (August 2009). "The Atlas of Canada - Sea Islands". Retrieved August 5, 2012. 
^ The U.S. state of Hawaii is a part of Oceania, not North America.
^ Tidridge, Nathan. Prince Edward, Duke of Kent: Father of the Canadian Crown. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 2013.
^ a b "Prince Edward Island". The Canadian Encyclopedia. Retrieved 17 May 2015. 
^ a b c d e "The Climate of Prince Edward Island". The Climates of Canada. Environment Canada. Archived from the original on 2008-09-20. Retrieved 7 June 2015. 
^ a b "Climate and Weather". Government of Prince Edward Island. Retrieved 7 June 2015. 
^ Russel, F. The Atlantic Coast. The Illustrated Natural History of Canada. Natural Science of Canada Ltd. Toronto. 1970. pp. 30-31. LCCCN 70109048
^ Parks Canada, Teacher Resource Centre, Prince Edward Island National Park of Canada Retrieved: April 6, 2011
^ Lexicon of Canadian Geological Units. "Pictou Group". Retrieved June 16, 2013. 
^ thecanadianencyclopedia.ca: "Prince Edward Island - Mining"
^ nrcan.gc.ca: "Prince Edward Island’s Shale and Tight Resources"
^ a b carlottetown.pe.ca: "Water Utility"
^ a b cbc.ca: "Water supply worries prompt Charlottetown meeting", 30 Nov 2011
^ a b cbc.ca: "Charlottetown opens emergency water supply", 10 Jul 2012
^ cbc.ca: "Charlottetown relies on secondary water source", 14 Aug 2013
^ a b c d e "PEI Potato". PEI Potato. Retrieved July 2015.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ cbc.ca: "Water Act white paper tabled by P.E.I. government", 8 Jul 2015
^ gov.pe.ca: "Environment - Drinking Water Quality"
^ gov.pe.ca: "Getting your water tested"
^ "Macphail Woods: Watersheds". macphailwoods.org. Retrieved 2016-12-11. 
^ Canada, Parks Canada Agency, Government of. "Parks Canada - Prince Edward Island National Park - especesenperil-speciesatrisk". www.pc.gc.ca. Retrieved 2016-12-11. 
^ "Freshwater ascomycetes: Jahnula apiospora (Jahnulales, Dothideomycetes), a new species from Prince Edward Island, Canada". Retrieved 29 September 2013. 
^ http://baleinesendirect.org/une-baleine-noire-en-vue-merci-dappeler-urgences-mammiferes-marins/
^ http://thechronicleherald.ca/novascotia/1312707-right-whales-off-cape-breton-going-the-wrong-way-for-shipping-fishing
^ a b Island Information: Quick Facts, website of the Government of Prince Edward Island, 2010-04-27. Retrieved on October 25, 2010.
^ a b Sark, John Joe (1988). Micmac Legends of Prince Edward Island. Lennox Island Band Council & Ragwee Press. p. 6. ISBN 0920304915. 
^ Fraser, Sara (7 Mar 2017). "'It's all Mi'kmaq land': Why First Nations claim P.E.I. as their own". CBC News. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ Harvey, p. 110
^ a b Harvey, p. 111
^ Harvey, p. 112
^ Boishebert Canadian Biography On Line
^ John Clarence Webster's, "Memorial on Behalf of Sieur de Boishebert" (Saint John: Historical Studies No. 4, Publications of the New Brunswick Museum, 1942) at p. 11.
^ "Mi'kmaw History - Timeline (Post-Contact)". Muiniskw.org. 2011-08-04. Retrieved 2012-05-19. 
^ "LEGARDEUR DE CROISILLE ET DE MONTESSON, JOSEPH-MICHEL - Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online". Biographi.ca. 2007-10-18. Retrieved 2012-05-19. 
^ The Canadian Encyclopedia, Hurtig Publishers, Edmonton, Alberta, (1988) p. 1753.
^ Johnston, A. J. B. (2007). Endgame 1758: The Promise, the Glory and the Despair of Louisbourg's Last Decade. University of Nebraska Press. p. 366. 
^ Earl Lockerby. The Deportation of the Acadians from Prince Edward Island.
^ Brendan O'Grady, Exiles and Islanders: The Irish Settlers of Prince Edward Island, p. 15)
^ PEI Provincial Government. "Historical Milestones". Retrieved August 17, 2007. 
^ Julian Gwyn. Frigates and Foremasts. University of British Columbia. 2003. p. 58
^ PEI history Government of Canada
^ "Assembly Timeline" (PDF). Legislative Assembly of Prince Edward Island. Government of Prince Edward Island. Retrieved October 22, 2011. 
^ Library and Archives Canada. "Canadian Confederation, Provinces and Territories, Prince Edward Island". Retrieved December 27, 2009. 
^ "Prince Edward Island". Directory of Designations of National Historic Significance of Canada. Parks Canada. Retrieved October 23, 2011. 
^ Confederation Centre of the Arts National Historic Site of Canada. Canadian Register of Historic Places. Retrieved October 23, 2011.
^ "Population urban and rural, by province and territory". 
^ "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, 2006 and 2001 censuses – 100% data". 
^ a b [1], National Household Survey (NHS) Profile, 2011
^ Statistics Canada (2002). "Population of Canada's Provinces". Retrieved April 3, 2007. 
^ PEI population trend (Statistics Canada).
^ Population urban and rural, by province and territory (Statistics Canada, 2005).
^ "Prince Edward Island [Economic region], Prince Edward Island and Canada [Country] (table). Census Profile". Ottawa: Statistics Canada. September 13, 2017. Retrieved October 13, 2017. 
^ "Religions in Canada". 2.statcan.ca. Retrieved February 23, 2011. 
^ gov.pe.ca: "Agriculture on Prince Edward Island"
^ statcan.gc.ca: "Census of Agriculture counts 1700 farms in Prince Edward Island"
^ maisonneuve.org: "When the Monks Come to Town", 18 Jun 2013
^ "Idaho Potato Production". Potatopro.com. November 12, 2008. Retrieved February 23, 2011. 
^ Weihs, Jean (1995). Facts about Canada, its provinces and territories. New York: H.W. Wilson Co. p. 159. ISBN 9780824208646. 
^ Prince Edward Island (P.E.I.). Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. 2013. 
^ a b irac.pe.ca: "The Prince Edward Island Lands Protection Act - Frequently Asked Questions Including Information on Non-Resident, Corporate & Global Permit Applications for Land Acquisition in Prince Edward Island"
^ "PEI BioScience Cluster - Prince Edward Island BioAlliance - Overview". peibioalliance.com. Retrieved 2016-12-11. 
^ Lobster Fishing
^ "Government of Prince Edward Island". 
^ "Pepsi Bottling Group To Acquire Seaman's Beverages". SmartBrief. 2002-04-03. Retrieved 2014-01-14. 
^ Government of PEI. "PEI Bans the Can". Archived from the original on January 7, 2006. Retrieved April 3, 2007. 
^ CBC (April 26, 2007). "End to can ban receives full support of legislature". CBC News. Retrieved April 27, 2007. 
^ Government of PEI. "Government to lift "can-ban" May 3 beverage container management system encourages returns and recycling". Retrieved April 26, 2008. 
^ Island Regulatory and Appeals Commission (PEI Government).
^ cbc.ca: "Electricity in Prince Edward Island", 30 Mar 2011
^ cbc.ca: "Electricity rates rising 11.2% next year", 7 Dec 2012
^ irac.pe.ca: "Electric Regulation"
^ maritimeelectric.com: "About Us"
^ "Summary Tables". 0.statcan.ca. Retrieved 2012-05-19. 
^ Government of PEI. "Minimum Wage Order". Archived from the original on January 4, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2015. 
^ Canadian Heritage (February 2009). "Department of Canadian Heritage Portfolio" (PDF) (2nd ed.). Queen's Printer for Canada: 3–4. ISBN 978-1-100-11529-0. Retrieved May 23, 2011. 
^ Office of the Lieutenant Governor of Prince Edward Island. "Role > Role and Responsibilities". Queen's Printer for Prince Edward Island. Retrieved September 13, 2012. 
^ Library of Parliament. "The Opposition in a Parliamentary System". Queen's Printer for Canada. Retrieved May 23, 2011. 
^ Elizabeth II (2008). "Election Act" (PDF). 4.1(2)(b): Queen's Printer for Prince Edward Island. Retrieved September 13, 2012. 
^ "Confederation Bridge". September 2009.  (official website).
^ "New School Board". 
^ gov.pe.ca: "Central Wastewater Systems"
^ irac.pe.ca: "PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND - MUNICIPAL WATER & SEWERAGE UTILITIES - GENERAL RULES & REGULATIONS"
^ irac.pe.ca: "CHAPTER E-9 - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ACT - DRINKING WATER AND WASTEWATER FACILITY OPERATING REGULATIONS"
^ charlottetown.pe.ca: "City of Charlottetown Wastewater Treatment Expansion & Upgrading" (ca 2001)
^ Mittelstaedt, Martin (December 6, 2006). "Pesticides are what's killing our kids". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved April 3, 2007. 
^ Boesveld, Sarah (December 23, 2011). "P.E.I. to 'stay with status quo' on abortions". National Post. Retrieved August 25, 2012. 
^ Wright, Teresa (July 7, 2008). "Abortion policy to remain same: Ghiz". The Guardian. Charlottetown, PUI. Retrieved May 13, 2010. 
^ "P.E.I. won't change abortion policy". CBC News. July 19, 2000. Retrieved May 13, 2010. 
^ "Abortion information line disconnected". CBC News. January 29, 2008. Retrieved May 13, 2010. 
^ Arthur, Joyce (November 2000). "Canada Health Act Violates Abortion Services: Five Basic Principles Not Met". Pro-Choice Action Network. Retrieved May 13, 2010. 
^ "Your province and tax-funded abortions". Life Canada Inc. 2003. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008. Retrieved May 13, 2010. 
^ "Morgentaler clinic in N.B. to close, citing no provincial funding". CBC News. Retrieved 2016-12-11. 
^ "New health centre in old Morgentaler clinic in N.B. to provide abortions". CBC News. Retrieved 2016-12-11. 
^ "P.E.I. moves to provide abortion services on the Island". CBC News. Retrieved 2016-12-11. 
^ Archie Cairns - Book 1 Pipe Music 'Prince Edward Island' March 4/4, 1995
^ a b "P.E.I. Jazz and Blues Festival". Retrieved August 10, 2011. 
^ "About the Island Fringe Festival". Island Fringe Festival. Retrieved 27 January 2017. 
^ "Jazz festival loses ACOA funding". CBC news. cbc.ca. Aug 9, 2011. Retrieved August 10, 2011. 
^ "P.E.I. to become 'Canada's Food Island'". CBC News. Retrieved 2016-12-11. 
^ "Ilê-du-Prince-Edouard: Communiqué (Vice-Governor from Chinese Sister Province Visits Prince Edward Island)". Gov.pe.ca. Retrieved 2012-05-19. 


Further reading[edit]


Arsenault, Georges (1989). The Island Acadians, 1720–1980. Charlottetown: Ragweed Press. ISBN 978-0-920304-81-5. OCLC 42887917. 
Baglole, Harry (1977). Exploring Island History: A Guide to the Historical Resources of Prince Edward Island. Belfast, P.E.I.: Ragweed Press. ISBN 0-920304-01-X. OCLC 4114534. 
Bolger, Francis (1973). Canada's Smallest Province: A History of Prince Edward Island. Charlottetown: Prince Edward Island 1973 Centennial Commission. OCLC 1031515.  Also under OCLC 223434609
Beck, E Boyde; Burden, P John (1996). Prince Edward Island : an (un)authorized history. Charlottetown: Acorn Press. ISBN 978-0-9698606-1-7. OCLC 36817364. 
Bumsted, JM (1987). Land, settlement, and politics on eighteenth-century Prince Edward Island. Kingston, ON: McGill-Queen's University Press. ISBN 978-0-7735-0566-7. OCLC 17199722. Retrieved September 16, 2009. 
Clark, Andrew Hill (1959). Three Centuries and the Island. A Historical Geography of Settlement and Agriculture in Prince Edward Island, Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. OCLC 203962.  A very broad look at the historical geography of P.E.I.
Ives, Edward D (1999). Drive Dull Care Away: Folksongs from Prince Edward Island. Charlottetown: Institute of Island Studies. ISBN 978-0-919013-34-6. OCLC 123276052. Retrieved September 16, 2009. 
Johnston, A.J.B.; Francis, Jesse (2013). Ni'n na L'nu: The Mi'kmaq of Prince Edward Island. Charlottetown: Acorn Press. ISBN 978-1-894838-93-1. 
MacKinnon, Frank (1995). Church politics and education in Canada : the P.E.I. experience. Calgary: Detselig Enterprises. ISBN 978-1-55059-104-0. OCLC 35292426. 
MacKinnon, Wayne (1973). The Life of the Party: A History of the Liberal Party in Prince Edward Island. Summerside, P.E.I.: Prince Edward Island Liberal Party. 
Sharpe, Errol (1976). A people's history of Prince Edward Island. Toronto: Steel Rail. ISBN 0-88791-003-3. OCLC 2893908. 
Verner Smitheram; David Milne; Satadal Dasgupta (1982). The Garden transformed: Prince Edward Island, 1945-1980. Charlottetown: Ragweed Press. ISBN 978-0-920304-10-5. OCLC 9469420. 
Livingston, Walter Ross (1931). Responsible Government in Prince Edward Island: A Triumph of Self-Government under the Crown. Iowa City, IA: University of Iowa Press. OCLC 1678512. Retrieved September 16, 2009. 
Weale, David; Baglole, Harry (1973). The Island and Confederation: the end of an era. Summerside, P.E.I.: Williams and Crue. OCLC 1340051. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Prince Edward Island.





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Prince Edward Island.



The Government of Prince Edward Island Government official website
University of Prince Edward Island Digital Historical Archives
Prince Edward Island at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
The Government Prince Edward Island Visitor's Guide
CBC Digital Archives – PEI Elections: Liberal landslides and Tory tides
Confederation Bridge
City of Charlottetown
PEI info
Mi'kmaq Confederacy home page





Links to related articles











v
t
e


 Subdivisions of Prince Edward Island



Subdivisions



Counties
Parishes
Townships
Municipalities
Population centres





Cities



Charlottetown
Summerside





Towns



Alberton
Borden-Carleton
Cornwall
Georgetown
Kensington
Montague
North Rustico
O'Leary
Souris
Stratford





Incorporated
communities



Abrams Village
Afton
Alexandra
Annandale-Little Pond-Howe Bay
Bedeque and Area
Belfast
Bonshaw
Brackley
Breadalbane
Brudenell
Cardigan
Central Kings
Clyde River
Crapaud
Darlington
Eastern Kings
Ellerslie-Bideford
Grand Tracadie
Greenmount-Montrose
Hampshire
Hazelbrook
Hunter River
Kingston
Kinkora
Lady Slipper
Linkletter
Lorne Valley
Lot 11 and Area
Lower Montague
Malpeque Bay
Meadowbank
Miltonvale Park
Miminegash
Miscouche
Morell
Mount Stewart
Murray Harbour
Murray River
New Haven-Riverdale
North Shore
North Wiltshire
Northport
Pleasant Grove
Resort Municipality
Sherbrooke
Souris West
St. Felix
St. Louis
St. Nicholas
St. Peters Bay
Tignish
Tignish Shore
Tyne Valley
Union Road
Valleyfield
Victoria
Warren Grove
Wellington
West River
Winsloe South
York





Unincorporated
communities



Bedeque
Belmont
Cavendish
Central Bedeque
Foxley River
Freeland
Hebron
Knutsford
Long River
Mont-Carmel








 Category:Prince Edward Island
 Portal:Prince Edward Island
 WikiProject:Prince Edward Island












v
t
e


 Provinces and territories of Canada



Provinces



Alberta
British Columbia
Manitoba
New Brunswick
Newfoundland and Labrador
Nova Scotia
Ontario
Prince Edward Island
Quebec
Saskatchewan





Territories



Northwest Territories
Nunavut
Yukon





Historical



Former colonies and territories in Canada
Territorial evolution of Canada after 1867
Proposed provinces and territories of Canada





Related



Area
Bibliography
Extreme points
Government spending
Gross domestic product
Language policies
Mountains
Museums
Name etymologies
Population
Regions
Symbols
Topics
Unemployment








 Book
 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


 Canada



History




Year list
(Timeline)



Pre-colonization
New France (1534–1763)
British Canada (1763–1867)
Post-Confederation (1867–1914)
World Wars and Interwar Years (1914–1945)
Modern times: 1945–1960
1960–1981
1982–1992
since 1992





Topics



Constitutional
Crown & Aboriginals
Economic
Etymology
Former colonies & territories
Immigration
Military
Monarchical
National Historic Sites
Persons of significance
Territorial evolution
Women








Provinces
and territories




Provinces



Alberta
British Columbia
Manitoba
New Brunswick
Newfoundland and Labrador
Nova Scotia
Ontario
Prince Edward Island
Quebec
Saskatchewan





Territories



Northwest Territories
Nunavut
Yukon








Government



Law
Constitution
Monarch
Governor General
Parliament (Senate
House of Commons)
Prime Minister

list


Courts

Supreme Court


Military
Local government
Foreign relations
Law enforcement





Politics



Elections
LGBT rights
Multiculturalism





Geography




Regions
(west to east)



Pacific Northwest
Western Canada
Great Plains

Canadian Prairies


Northern Canada
Canadian Shield
Great Lakes
Central Canada
The Maritimes
Eastern Canada
Atlantic Canada





Topics



Animals
Cities
Earthquakes
Islands
Mountains
National Parks
Plants
Great Lakes
Regions
Rivers
Volcanoes








Economy



Agriculture
Banking
Bank of Canada
Dollar
Communications
Companies
Energy
Fishing
Oil
Stock exchange
Taxation
Tourism
Transportation
Science and technology
Social programs
Poverty





Society



Education
Healthcare
Crime
Values





Demographics




Topics



Canadians
Immigration
Languages
Religion
2001 Census
2006 Census
2011 Census
Population





Top 100s



Metropolitan areas and agglomerations
Population centres
Municipalities








Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Festivals
Folklore
People
Holidays
Identity
Literature
Music
Nationalisms
Online media
Protectionism
Sports
Theatre





Symbols



Coat of arms
Flags
Provincial and territorial
Royal
Heraldic





Article overviews



Index
Outline
Topics





Research



Bibliography
Historiography








Book
Category
Portal











Coordinates: 46°15′N 063°00′W﻿ / ﻿46.250°N 63.000°W﻿ / 46.250; -63.000



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 137121494
LCCN: n79034411
GND: 4116107-5
SELIBR: 157006
BNF: cb11962516b (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prince_Edward_Island&oldid=818325339"					Categories: Prince Edward Island1873 establishments in CanadaAtlantic CanadaBritish North AmericaFormer British colonies and protectorates in the AmericasIslands of Prince Edward IslandThe MaritimesStates and territories established in 1873Provinces of CanadaHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesUse mdy dates from March 2012Articles containing Latin-language textArticles containing French-language textArticles needing additional references from April 2008All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2011Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008Articles with unsourced statements from June 2009Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016Articles with DMOZ linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers