





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Common military ranks in English



Navies
Armies
Air forces


Commissioned officers


Admiral of
the fleet
Field marshal or
General of the Army
Marshal of
the air force


Admiral
General
Air chief marshal


Vice admiral
Lieutenant general
Air marshal


Rear admiral
Major general
Air vice-marshal


Commodore
Brigadier or
Brigadier general
Air commodore


Captain
Colonel
Group captain


Commander
Lieutenant colonel
Wing commander


Lieutenant
commander
Major or
Commandant
Squadron leader


Lieutenant
Captain
Flight lieutenant


Sub-lieutenant
Lieutenant or
First lieutenant
Flying officer


Ensign
Second lieutenant
Pilot officer


Midshipman
Officer cadet
Officer cadet


Enlisted grades


Warrant officer or
Chief petty officer
Warrant officer or
Sergeant major
Warrant officer


Petty officer
Sergeant
Sergeant


Leading seaman
Corporal or
Bombardier
Corporal


Seaman
Private or
Gunner or
Trooper
Aircraftman


Talk·View


A private is a soldier of the lowest military rank (equivalent to NATO Rank Grades OR-1 to OR-3 depending on the force served in).
In modern military parlance, "private" is shortened to "Pte" in the United Kingdom and other (Commonwealth of Nations) countries and to "Pvt." in the United States.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Asia

2.1 Israel
2.2 Korea
2.3 Singapore
2.4 Indonesia


3 Commonwealth

3.1 Australia
3.2 Canada
3.3 India and Pakistan
3.4 United Kingdom


4 Europe and Latin America

4.1 Austria
4.2 Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Mexico and Spain
4.3 Belgium
4.4 Brazil and Portugal
4.5 Finland
4.6 France
4.7 Germany
4.8 Hungary
4.9 Ireland
4.10 Italy
4.11 Netherlands
4.12 Switzerland
4.13 Turkey


5 United States

5.1 United States Army
5.2 United States Marine Corps


6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Etymology[edit]
The term derives from the medieval term "private soldiers" (a term still used in the British Army), denoting individuals who were either hired, conscripted, or mustered into service by a feudal nobleman commanding a battle group of an army. The usage of "private" dates from the 18th century.
Asia[edit]
Israel[edit]

For information, you may refer to Israel Defense Forces ranks.

In the Israel Defense Forces, טוראי Turai ("private") refers to the lowest enlisted rank. After 7–10 months of service (7 for combatants, 8 for combat support and 10 for non-combatants) soldiers are promoted from private to corporal (rav-turai or rabat), if they performed their duties appropriately during this time. Soldiers who take a commander's course, are prisoner instructors or practical engineers become corporals earlier. An IDF private wears no uniform insignia and is sometimes described as having a "slick sleeve" for this reason.



Israel Defense Forces ranks : נגדים חוגרים hogrim - enlisted


IDF NCO
Rank
טוראי
Turai
רב טוראי
Rav turai
סמל
Samal
סמל ראשון
Samal rishon


NATO 
OR–2
OR–3
OR–4


Abbreviation
טוראי
Turai
רב"ט
Rabat
סמל
Samal
סמ"ר
Samar


Corresponding
Rank
Private
Corporal
Sergeant
Staff sergeant


Insignia






More details at Israel Defense Forces ranks & IDF 2012 - Ranks (idf.il, English)



Korea[edit]
The equivalent ranks to privates within the North and South Korean armies are il-byong(private first class) and e-byong(private second class). The symbol for this rank is 1 line ( | ) or 2 lines ( || ). Private second class is known by 1 line, while private first class is 2 lines.
Singapore[edit]
Once recruits complete their Basic Military Training (BMT) or Basic Rescue Training (BRT), they attain the rank of private (PTE). Privates (列兵) do not wear ranks on their rank holder. PTEs who performed well are promoted to the rank of Private First Class (PFC). The PFC rank insignia is a single chevron pointing downward.[1]
Indonesia[edit]




Indonesian Army privates pose with two Generals


Main article: Indonesian military ranks
In Indonesia, this rank is referred to as Tamtama (specifically Prajurit), which is the lowest rank in the Indonesian Armed Forces and special Police Force. In the Indonesian Army, "Private" has three levels, which are: Private (Prajurit Dua), Private First Class (Prajurit Satu), and Master Private (Prajurit Kepala). After this rank, it is promoted the rank: Corporal.







Private (Prajurit Dua)









Private First Class (Prajurit Satu)









Master Private (Prajurit Kepala)




Commonwealth[edit]
Australia[edit]
In the Australian Army, a soldier of private rank wears no insignia.[2] Like its British Army counterpart, the Australian Army rank of private (PTE) has other titles, depending on the corps and specification of that service member.
The following alternative ranks are available for privates in the Australian Army:

Craftsman (CFN) – Royal Australian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
Gunner (GNR) – Royal Australian Artillery
Sapper (SPR) – Royal Australian Engineers;
Musician (MUSN) – Australian Army Band Corps
Signalman (SIG) – Royal Australian Corps of Signals
Trooper (TPR) – Royal Australian Armoured Corps, Australian Army Aviation and the Australian Special Air Service Regiment

Canada[edit]
Private is the lowest rank in the Canadian Forces for members who wear army uniform. There are three levels of private: private (recruit), private (basic), and private (trained). All persons holding the rank of private are referred to as such and the qualifier shown in brackets is used on employment records only. A private is considered an "apprentice" in their trade, and there are no pay raises between the various levels of private except for time in rank raise.
For members who wear air force uniform, the rank is called aviator and is also broken into three levels: aviator (recruit), aviator (basic) and aviator (trained). The insignia for aviator (trained) is a propeller.

Private (recruit) (Pte(R)) / aviator (recruit) (Avr(R))– fresh recruit, untrained; holds this rank through recruit training.
Private (basic) (Pte(B)) / aviator (basic) (Avr(B)) – after finishing recruit training, a member becomes a private (basic). This rank is held through training and beyond.
Private (trained) (Pte(T)) / aviator (trained) (Avr(T)) – A private (basic) becomes a private (trained) a year after completion of their trades training depending on their regiment; some regiments may promote them right away. Typically in the Regular Force, this rank is awarded after two and a half years of service, not a year after completion of one's trade qualifications. A private (trained) is the only private to wear rank insignia, a single chevron. An aviator (trained) is the only aviator to wear rank insignia, a propeller. This can be awarded well beyond two years as the training is longer than the armies. It would normally be up to the squadrons.

Army privates may be known by other titles, depending on unit and personnel branch:

Craftsman – Corps of Royal Canadian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
Fusilier – Royal Canadian Infantry Corps (RCIC) members of fusilier regiments
Guardsman – RCIC members of foot guards regiments
Gunner – Royal Regiment of Canadian Artillery
Rifleman – RCIC members of rifle regiments
Sapper – Corps of Royal Canadian Engineers
Signaller – Royal Canadian Corps of Signals
Trooper – Royal Canadian Armoured Corps

For members who wear navy uniform the equivalents are:

Ordinary seaman (OS) – private (recruit/basic)
Able seaman (AB) – private (trained)

India and Pakistan[edit]
In the Indian Army and Pakistan Army the lowest enlisted rank is sepoy (/ˈsiːpɔɪ/), literally meaning "soldier" in Hindi and Urdu. A sepoy does not wear any rank insignia on his uniform.
United Kingdom[edit]
In the British Army, a private (Pte) equates to both OR-1 and OR-2 on the NATO scale, although there is no difference in rank. Privates wear no insignia. Many regiments and corps use other distinctive and descriptive names instead of private, some of these ranks have been used for centuries, others are less than 100 years old.[3] In the contemporary British Armed Forces, the army rank of private is broadly equivalent to able seaman in the Royal Navy, aircraftman, leading aircraftman and senior aircraftman in the Royal Air Force, and marine (Mne) or bandsman, as appropriate equivalent rank in the Royal Marines. Also in the Boys Brigade the rank of private is used when a boy moves from the junior section to the company section.
Notably, both Sir Fitzroy Maclean and Enoch Powell are examples of rare, rapid career progression with the British Army, both rising from the rank of private to at least brigadier during World War II.
Distinctive equivalents for private include:

Airtrooper (AirTpr) – Army Air Corps
Bugler (Bgr) – buglers in The Rifles and formerly also in other Rifle regiments
Craftsman (Cfn) – Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (women as well as men use this rank)
Drummer (Dmr) – drummers in infantry regiments
Fusilier (Fus) – Fusilier regiments
Gunner (Gnr) – Royal Artillery
Guardsman (Gdsm) – Foot Guards
Highlander (Hldr) – The Highlanders
Kingsman (Kgn) – Duke of Lancaster's Regiment
Musician (Musn) – military bands (formerly if a military band had a Bandmaster, they would be known as Bandsman (Bdsm))
Piper (Ppr) – bagpipers in Scottish and Irish regiments
Ranger (Rgr) – Royal Irish Regiment and Royal Irish Rangers
Rifleman (Rfn) – Rifle regiments
Sapper (Spr) – Royal Engineers
Signaller (Sig) – Royal Corps of Signals (formerly called signalman)
Trooper (Tpr) – Household Cavalry, Royal Armoured Corps, Special Air Service and Honourable Artillery Company
Trumpeter (Tptr) – trumpeters in the Household Cavalry (and formerly in all cavalry regiments)

Europe and Latin America[edit]
Austria[edit]
The lowest rank in the Austrian Armed Forces is the Rekrut (literally Recruit). For recruits in training to become non-commissioned or commissioned officers the rank bears an additional silver crossbar.
Up until 1998 the rank was called Wehrmann. In 2017 the silver crossbar was removed, as the system of the 'officers career' changed.
Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Mexico and Spain[edit]
The equivalent rank to private in the Spanish, Mexican, Colombian, Dominican and Argentinian army is the soldado raso meaning "rankless soldier" or simply soldado.
Belgium[edit]
On enlistment in the Belgian army one is given the rank of soldaat (Dutch) or soldat (French), whether one wishes to be a volunteer, non-commissioned officer or officer. Subsequent rank depends on the branch of the service: for example, at the Royal Military Academy (for officer training) one is soon promoted to the rank of corporaal (Dutch) or caporal (French) i.e. "corporal". The insignia is a simple black mark.
Brazil and Portugal[edit]
Soldado is the rank equivalent to private in the Brazilian and Portuguese Armed Forces. Soldado means "soldier" in Portuguese.
Finland[edit]




Military rank insignia of sotamies (private) of the Finnish Army and Air Force.


The Finnish equivalent rank is sotamies (literally "war man"), although since 1973 this has been purely a paper term as all infantry troopers were renamed as jääkäri troops, previously reserved only to mobile light infantry. As in the British army, the various branches use different names:

Infantry – jääkäri ("jaeger")
Military engineers – pioneeri ("pioneer")
Signal corps – viestimies ("message man")
Cavalry – rakuuna ("dragoon")
Artillery – tykkimies ("cannon man")
Tank corps – panssarimies ("tank man")

In the Finnish Air Force, the basic rank is lentosotamies ("flight war man"). In the Finnish Navy, the basic rank is matruusi ("seaman").
Special corps troopers may be referred by their function or unit, such as kaartinjääkäri (Guards jaeger), panssarijääkäri (panzerjäger), laskuvarjojääkäri (paratroop jaeger), rajajääkäri (border jaeger) or rannikkojääkäri (coastal jaeger).
France[edit]
In the French army soldat de seconde classe is the lowest military rank. This rank is also referred to as recrue ("recruit").
Germany[edit]
The German Bundeswehr modern-day equivalent of the private rank (NATO-standard code OR-2) is Gefreiter.
The equivalent of the lowest rank (NATO-standard code OR-1) is either Schütze (rifleman), Kanonier (gunner) or Jäger (light-infantryman otherwise ranger), and sometimes in general simply Soldat (soldier), as well as other unit-specific distinctions.[4] Up until 1918 it was Gemeine[5] (Ordinary [soldier]) as well as unit-specific distinctions such as Musketier (musketeer), Infanterist (infantryman), Kürassier (cuirassier), Jäger (light-infantryman otherwise ranger), Füsilier (fusilier) etc., until 1945 Soldat (soldier) and unit-specific distinctions such as Schütze (rifleman), Grenadier (grenadier) etc. The navy equivalent of the OR-1 rank is known as Matrose[4] (sailor or seaman), and the German Air Force equivalent is Flieger[4] (aviator or airman) which is also used by army aviators.

Bundeswehr OR-1-rank: Soldat (Heer), Flieger (German Air Force) and Matrose (German Navy)






Schütze, Kanonier, Jäger rank
shoulder epaulette
Army (Heer) uniform jacket









Schütze, Kanonier, Jäger rank
Army (Heer) combat uniform









Flieger rank
Air Force (Luftwaffe) combat uniform









Schütze, Kanonier, Jäger Unteroffizieranwärter (UA) NCO-candidate rank
Army (Heer) combat uniform









Matrose rank
Navy service uniform




Hungary[edit]
The name of the lowest rank in the Hungarian army (Magyar Honvédség) is the honvéd which means "homeland defender". The word is also used informally for a soldier in general of any rank (i.e. "our honvéds" or an officer referred as a honvédtiszt, honvéd officer). This is because Hungarian military traditions are strictly defensive, despite the Hungarian army participating in offensives on foreign soil in both world wars. The word honvéd has been in use since the Hungarian Revolution of 1848.
Ireland[edit]







2* private








3* private





Private (Pte) (saighdiúr singil in Irish), is the lowest enlisted rank in the Irish Army. Soldiers enlist as recruits then undergo a basic course of instruction. There are three grades of private in the army. After basic training the soldier is upgraded (rather than promoted) from recruit to private 2 star (Pte 2*) (saighdiúr singil, 2 réalta). After more corps-specific training (usually lasting eight weeks) the soldier is upgraded to private 3 star (Pte 3*) (saighdiúr singil, 3 réalta). All are usually just addressed as "private", although before being upgraded, recruits may be addressed as "recruit".
In corps units, the rank designation changes. In the artillery, the rank is known as gunner (Gnr), but usually only after the completion of a gunners' course, and in the cavalry it is known as trooper (Tpr). Communications and Information Services privates are known as signalman or signalwoman. Medical orderlies are sometimes referred to as medic, although this can apply to privates and corporals.
Italy[edit]
In the Italian Army soldato is the lowest military rank. This rank is also referred to as recluta (meaning recruit). Soldato is the generic term for private. But in many specialized corps this term is never used, as a more specific, corp related, term is preferred. For instance the lowest rank in Alpine troops is alpino, and the lowest rank in the artillery is artigliere. In the air force this is ranked as aviere and in the navy as marinaio.
Netherlands[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (September 2008)



In the Royal Netherlands Army, the Landmacht, the equivalent ranks are soldaat (soldier), similar to the original French, with different classes:

Soldaat der derde klasse (soldier/private 3rd class), for soldiers in Algemene Militaire Opleiding or AMO (General Military Training), with insignia.
Soldaat der tweede klasse (soldier/privat 2nd class), the basic infantry rank, an insignia single striped red band, obtained after AMO but before completion of Initiële Functie Opleiding or IFO (initial job training).
Soldaat der eerste klasse (soldier/privat 1st class), comparable to private first class, with an insignia with two neighbouring striped red bands, obtained automatically a year after completion of IFO.

Depending on where the soldaat serves, he may be deemed a kanonnier (gunner in the artillery), huzaar (hussar in the cavalry) or fuselier (rifleman in the rifles) as well as commando, jager or rijder. There is less differentiation than in other countries between different armed forces. A soldaat can be promoted to korporaal (corporal).
Switzerland[edit]
In the Swiss Armed Forces a recruit is given the rank of Soldat when he finishes basic training, mostly after 13 weeks.
Turkey[edit]
In the Turkish Land Forces, Turkish Air Force and Turkish Naval Forces; Er (Private) is the lowest rank possible. This rank does not have any insignia.
United States[edit]




U.S. Army Private E-2's insignia


United States Army[edit]
In the U.S. Army, private is used for the two lowest enlisted ranks, just below private first class. The lowest rank is "private E-1" (PV1) and sometimes referred to as recruit, but also held by some soldiers after punishment through the Uniform Code of Military Justice or prisoners after conviction until they are discharged. A PV1 wears no uniform insignia; since the advent of the Army Combat Uniform, the term "fuzzy" has come into vogue, referring to the blank velcro patch on the ACU where the rank would normally be placed. The second rank, private E-2 (PV2), wears a single chevron, known colloquially as "mosquito wings". Advancement to the PV2 is automatic after six months' time in service, but may get shortened to four months if given a waiver. A person who earned the Eagle Scout award, the Gold Award, or completed at least two years of JROTC may enlist at any time at the rank of PV2.[6] The term of address, "Private", may be properly applied to any Army soldier E-1 (PV1) to E-3 (PFC). It should also be noted that while a soldier is currently in Initial Enlistment Training, he or she will often be referred to as "Private" by the training cadre, regardless of actual rank, even if the soldier enlisted as a Specialist/E-4.
United States Marine Corps[edit]
In the U.S. Marine Corps, private (Pvt) refers only to the lowest enlisted rank, just below private first class. A Marine Corps private wears no uniform insignia and is sometimes described as having a "slick sleeve" for this reason. Most new, non-officer Marines begin their military career as a private. In the Marine Corps, privates first class are not referred to as "private"; it is more appropriate to use either "private first class" or "PFC".
See also[edit]

Comparative military ranks

References[edit]



^ Singapore Air Force. "SAF Military Ranks - Enlistees". Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015. 
^ "Australian Army Insignia". Users.chariot.net.au. Archived from the original on 1 January 2009. Retrieved 8 July 2016. 
^ "About The Royal Green Jackets – Did you know that?". Rgjmuseum.co.uk. Retrieved 2012-10-02. 
^ a b c "Official Website (Bundeswehr): Uniformen der Bundeswehr (Uniforms of the German Federal Defence Forces); shows service ranks of the Luftwaffe (page 15-17), Heer (page 09-13) and Navy (page 19-21), in German" (PDF). Bundeswehr.de. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 8 July 2016. 
^ "Duden : Gemeine : Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition". Duden.de (in German). Retrieved 2016-07-07. 
^ "Army Regulation 601-210, Chapter 2–18" (PDF). Armypubs.army.mil. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 June 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2014. 



External links[edit]

U.S. Army Enlisted Rank Insignia – Criteria, Background, and Images







v
t
e


Ratings and other ranks of the British Armed Forces







   


Service
Royal Navy
Royal Marines
Army
Royal Air Force




OR-1


Pte
AC




OR-2
AB
Mne
Pte
LAC




OR-3
Not Applicable
LCpl
LCpl
SAC / SAC(T) / LCpl (RAF Regt only)




OR-4
LH
Cpl
Cpl
Cpl




OR-5/OR-6
PO
Sgt
Sgt
Sgt




OR-7
CPO
CSgt
SSgt / CSgt
Chf Tech - Flt Sgt




OR-8

WO2
WO2




OR-9
WO1
WO1
WO1
WO / MAcr














v
t
e


United States enlisted ranks



Pay grade →
Branch of service ↓
E-1
E-2
E-3
E-4
E-5
E-6
E-7
E-8
E-9


Army

PVT

PV2

PFC

SPC – CPL

SGT

SSG

SFC

MSG – 1SG

SGM – CSM – SMA


Marine Corps

Pvt

PFC

LCpl

Cpl

Sgt

SSgt

GySgt
 
MSgt – 1stSgt
  
MGySgt – SgtMaj – SgtMajMarCor


Navy

SR

SA

SN

PO3

PO2

PO1

CPO
 
SCPO – CMDCS
   
MCPO – CMDCM – FORCM, FLTCM – MCPON


Air Force

AB

Amn

A1C

SrA

SSgt

TSgt
 
MSgt – 1st Sgt
 
SMSgt – 1st Sgt
   
CMSgt – 1st Sgt – CCM – CMSAF


Coast Guard


SR


SA


SN

PO3

PO2

PO1

CPO

SCPO
   
MCPO – CMC – Area CMC, CGRF-MC – MCPOCG







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Private_(rank)&oldid=818534068"					Categories: Military ranksMilitary ranks of AustraliaMilitary ranks of CanadaMilitary ranks of IrelandMilitary ranks of SingaporeMilitary ranks of the British ArmyMilitary ranks of the United States ArmyUnited States military enlisted ranksUnited States Marine Corps ranksMilitary ranks of the Royal MarinesHidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)Articles needing additional references from October 2012All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from January 2015Articles containing Dutch-language textArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Italian-language textArticles to be expanded from September 2008All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles containing German-language text