





It has been suggested that Professional Order be merged into this article. (Discuss) Proposed since April 2017.









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A professional association (also called a professional body, professional organization, or professional society) is usually a nonprofit organization seeking to further a particular profession, the interests of individuals engaged in that profession and the public interest.
The roles of these professional associations have been variously defined: "A group of people in a learned occupation who are entrusted with maintaining control or oversight of the legitimate practice of the occupation;"[1] also a body acting "to safeguard the public interest;"[2] organizations which "represent the interest of the professional practitioners," and so "act to maintain their own privileged and powerful position as a controlling body."[2]
Many professional bodies are involved in the development and monitoring of professional educational programs, and the updating of skills, and thus perform professional certification to indicate that a person possesses qualifications in the subject area. Sometimes membership of a professional body is synonymous with certification, though not always. Membership of a professional body, as a legal requirement, can in some professions form the primary formal basis for gaining entry to and setting up practice within the profession; see licensure.
Many professional bodies also act as learned societies for the academic disciplines underlying their professions.
As a practical matter, most professional organizations of global scope (see List of professional organizations) are located in the United States. The U.S. has often led the transformation of various occupations into professions, a process described in the academic literature as professionalization.
References[edit]



^ Harvey, L. (2004). "Professional body". Quality Research International. Analytic Quality Glossary. 
^ a b Harvey, L.; Mason, S.; Ward, R. (1995). Role of Professional Bodies in Higher Education Quality Monitoring. Birmingham: Quality in Higher Education Project. ISBN 1-85920-108-3. 



See also[edit]

Advocacy
Guild
Inter-professional association
Trade union
Trade association
Learned society
Syndicate
Working group

External links[edit]

List of Professional bodies in UK
List of Professional bodies in Australia
List of Professional bodies in Canada
Anders Kjellberg Union density and specialist/professional unions in Sweden, Lund University: Studies in Social Policy, Industrial Relations, Working Life and Mobility. Research Reports 2013:2






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Professional_association&oldid=812236200"					Categories: Standards organizationsProfessional associationsTypes of organizationTrade unionsHidden categories: Articles to be merged from April 2017All articles to be mergedArticles needing additional references from July 2015All articles needing additional references