For other uses, see Proletariat (disambiguation).
"Proletarian" redirects here. For the British communist magazine, see Proletarian (magazine).


Part of a series on


Organized labor







Labor movement


Timeline



New Unionism
Proletariat



Social Movement Unionism



Socialism
Syndicalism



Anarcho-syndicalism








Labor rights





Child labor
Eight-hour day



Five-day work week#Length
Collective bargaining
Minimum wage
Occupational safety and health








Trade unions


Trade unions by country
Trade union federations
International comparisons



ITUC
IWA
WFTU











Strike action


Chronological list of strikes



General strike
Secondary action






Sitdown strike
Work-to-rule











Labor parties



Australian
British
Dutch
Irish
Israeli
New Zealand
Norwegian



List of Labor parties








Academic disciplines


Industrial relations
Labor economics
Labor history
Labor law









v
t
e





The proletariat (/ˌproʊlɪˈtɛəriət/ from Latin proletarius) is the class of wage-earners in a capitalist society whose only possession of significant material value is their labour-power (their ability to work).[1] A member of such a class is a proletarian. In Marxist theory, a dictatorship of proletarians is for the proletariat, through the proletariat and by the proletariat. This, in Marxist theory, will lead to proletarian self abolition and, thus, communism.



Contents


1 Proletarii of the Roman Republic
2 Marxist theory
3 Prole drift
4 See also
5 Reference notes
6 Further reading
7 External links



Proletarii of the Roman Republic[edit]
Further information: Constitution of the Roman Republic
The proletarii constituted a social class of Roman citizens owning little or no property. The origin of the name is presumably linked with the census, which Roman authorities conducted every five years to produce a register of citizens and their property from which their military duties and voting privileges could be determined. For citizens with property valued 11,000 asses or less, which was below the lowest census for military service, their children—proles (from Latin prōlēs, "offspring")—were listed instead of their property; hence, the name proletarius, "the one who produces offspring". The only contribution of a proletarius to the Roman society was seen in his ability to raise children, the future Roman citizens who can colonize new territories conquered by the Roman Republic and later by the Roman Empire. The citizens who had no property of significance were called capite censi because they were "persons registered not as to their property...but simply as to their existence as living individuals, primarily as heads (caput) of a family."[2][3]




A manual laborer at work in Venezuela. Manual laborers are generally considered to be part of the proletariat.


Although included in one of the five support centuriae of the Comitia Centuriata, proletarii were largely deprived of their voting rights due to their low social status caused by their lack of "even the minimum property required for the lowest class"[4] and a class-based hierarchy of the Comitia Centuriata. The late Roman historians, such as Livy, not without some uncertainty, understood the Comitia Centuriata to be one of three forms of popular assembly of early Rome composed of centuriae, the voting units whose members represented a class of citizens according to the value of their property. This assembly, which usually met on the Campus Martius to discuss public policy issues, was also used as a means of designating military duties demanded of Roman citizens.[5] One of reconstructions of the Comitia Centuriata features 18 centuriae of cavalry, and 170 centuriae of infantry divided into five classes by wealth, plus 5 centuriae of support personnel called adsidui. The top infantry class assembled with full arms and armor; the next two classes brought arms and armor, but less and lesser; the fourth class only spears; the fifth slings. In voting, the cavalry and top infantry class were enough to decide an issue; as voting started at the top, an issue might be decided before the lower classes voted.[6] In the last centuries of the Roman Republic (509-44 B.C.), the Comitia Centuriata became impotent as a political body, which further eroded already minuscule political power the proletarii might have had in the Roman society.
Following a series of wars the Roman Republic engaged since the closing of the Second Punic War (218–201 B.C.), such as the Jugurthine War and conflicts in Macedonia and Asia, the significant reduction in the number of Roman family farmers had resulted in the shortage of people whose property qualified them to perform the citizenry's military duty to Rome.[7] As a result of the Marian reforms initiated in 107 B.C. by the Roman general Gaius Marius (157–86), the proletarii became the backbone of the Roman Army.[8]
Karl Marx, who studied Roman law at the University of Berlin,[9] used the term proletariat in his socio-political theory of Marxism to describe a working class unadulterated by private property and capable of a revolutionary action to topple capitalism in order to create classless society.
Marxist theory[edit]


Part of a series on


Marxism







Theoretical works




Economic and Philosophic
Manuscripts of 1844

Theses on Feuerbach
The German Ideology
The Communist Manifesto

The Eighteenth Brumaire of
Louis Napoleon


Grundrisse der Kritik
der Politischen Ökonomie


A Contribution to the
Critique of Political Economy

Das Kapital
Dialectics of Nature









Philosophy



Dialectical logic
Dialectical materialism
Economic determinism
Historical determinism
Historical materialism
Marx's method
Philosophy of nature









Economics



Capital (accumulation)
Asiatic mode of production
Capitalist mode of production
Crisis theory
Commodity
Exploitation
Mode of production
Law of value
Scientific socialism
Socialist mode of production
Surplus product
Surplus value
Value-form
Wage labor









Sociology



Alienation
Base and superstructure
Bourgeoisie
Class
Class consciousness
Class struggle
Commodity fetishism
Communist society
Cultural hegemony
Dictatorship of the proletariat
Exploitation
Human nature
Ideology
Immiseration
Proletariat
Private property
Relations of production
Reification
Working class









History



Anarchism and Marxism
Philosophy in the Soviet Union
Primitive capital accumulation
Proletarian revolution
Proletarian Culture
Proletarian internationalism
World revolution
Communist society
Young Marx









Aspects



Aesthetics
Archaeology
Criminology
Film theory
Geography
Historiography
Literary criticism









Schools of thought



Analytical
Austro
Autonomist
Budapest School
Classical
De Leonist
Feminist
Frankfurt School
Freudian
Humanist
Impossibilism
Instrumental
Left communist
Leninist
Libertarian
Luxemburgist
Marxist–Leninist
Neo-Marxism
Neue Marx-Lektüre
Open
Orthodox
Post-Marxism
Praxis School
Structural
Trotskyist
Western









People



Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels


August Bebel
Daniel De Leon
Georgi Plekhanov
Eduard Bernstein
James Connolly
Rosa Luxemburg
Clara Zetkin
Karl Liebknecht
Karl Kautsky
Vladimir Lenin
Leon Trotsky
Alexandra Kollontai
Nikolai Bukharin
Antonio Gramsci
Joseph Stalin
Walter Benjamin
Antonie Pannekoek
Bertolt Brecht
Wilhelm Reich
György Lukács
Ho Chi Minh
Max Horkheimer
Mao Zedong
Josip Broz Tito
Theodor W. Adorno
Herbert Marcuse
C. Wright Mills
Erich Fromm
Salvador Allende
Jean-Paul Sartre
Enver Hoxha
Simone de Beauvoir
Che Guevara
Raya Dunayevskaya
Maximilien Rubel
Kim Il-sung
Louis Althusser
Guy Debord
Eric Hobsbawm
Nelson Mandela
Howard Zinn
Thomas Sankara
Fidel Castro
Zygmunt Bauman
Slavoj Žižek









 Socialism portal
 Communism portal
 Philosophy portal







v
t
e





In Marxist theory, the proletariat is the social class that does not have ownership of the means of production and whose only means of subsistence is to sell their labor power[10] for a wage or salary. Proletarians are wage-workers, while some refer to those who receive salaries as the salariat. For Marx, however, wage labor may involve getting a salary rather than a wage per se. Marxism sees the proletariat and bourgeoisie (capitalist class) as occupying conflicting positions, since workers automatically wish their wages to be as high as possible, while owners and their proxies wish for wages (costs) to be as low as possible.




A 1911 Industrial Worker publication advocating industrial unionism based on a critique of capitalism. The proletariat "work for all" and "feed all".


In Marxist theory, the borders between the proletariat and some layers of the petite bourgeoisie, who rely primarily but not exclusively on self-employment at an income no different from an ordinary wage or below it – and the lumpenproletariat, who are not in legal employment – are not necessarily well defined. Intermediate positions are possible, where some wage-labor for an employer combines with self-employment. Marx makes a clear distinction between proletariat as salaried workers, which he sees as a progressive class, and Lumpenproletariat, "rag-proletariat", the poorest and outcasts of the society, such as beggars, tricksters, entertainers, buskers, criminals and prostitutes, which he considers a retrograde class.[11][12] Socialist parties have often struggled over the question of whether they should seek to organize and represent all the lower classes, or just the wage-earning proletariat.
According to Marxism, capitalism is a system based on the exploitation of the proletariat by the bourgeoisie. This exploitation takes place as follows: the workers, who own no means of production of their own, must use the means of production that are property of others in order to produce, and, consequently, earn their living. Instead of hiring those means of production, they themselves get hired by capitalists and work for them, producing goods or services. These goods or services become the property of the capitalist, who sells them at the market.
One part of the wealth produced is used to pay the workers' wages (variable costs), another part to renew the means of production (constant costs) while the third part, surplus value is split between the capitalist's private takings (profit), and the money used to pay rents, taxes, interests, etc. Surplus value is the difference between the wealth that the proletariat produces through its work, and the wealth it consumes to survive and to provide labor to the capitalist companies.[13] A part of the surplus value is used to renew or increase the means of production, either in quantity or quality (i.e., it is turned into capital), and is called capitalized surplus value.[14] What remains is consumed by the capitalist class.
The commodities that proletarians produce and capitalists sell are valued for the amount of labor embodied in them. The same goes for the workers' labor power itself: it is valued, not for the amount of wealth it produces, but for the amount of labor necessary to produce and reproduce it. Thus the capitalists earn wealth from the labor of their employees, not as a function of their personal contribution to the productive process, which may even be null, but as a function of the juridical relation of property to the means of production. Marxists argue that new wealth is created through labor applied to natural resources.[15]
Marx argued that it was the goal of the proletariat to displace the capitalist system with the dictatorship of the proletariat, abolishing the social relationships underpinning the class system and then developing into a communist society in which "the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all".[16]
Prole drift[edit]
Prole drift, short for proletarian drift, is the tendency in advanced industrialized societies for everything inexorably to become proletarianized, or to become commonplace and commodified. This trend is attributed to mass production, mass selling, mass communication and mass education. Examples include best-seller lists, films and music that must appeal to the masses, and shopping malls.[17] It is the opposite of the embourgeoisement that occurs in a progressive phase of Capitalism.
See also[edit]


Bogan
Blue collar
Consumtariat
Folk culture
Laborer
Lumpenproletariat
Peasantry
Precariat
Prolefeed
Proles
Proletarianization
Proletarian internationalism
Proletarian literature
Slavery
Vulgarism
Wage slavery


Reference notes[edit]



^ proletariat. Accessed: 6 June 2013.
^ Adolf Berger, Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law (Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society 1953) at 380; 657.
^ Arnold J. Toynbee, especially in his A Study of History, uses the word Proletariat in this general sense of people without property or a stake in society. Toynbee focuses particularly on the generative spiritual life of the "internal proletariat" (those living within a given civil society). He also describes the "heroic" folk legends of the "external proletariat" (poorer groups living outside the borders of a civilization). Cf., Toynbee, A Study of History (Oxford University 1934–1961), 12 volumes, in Volume V Disintegration of Civilizations, part one (1939) at 58–194 (internal proletariat), and at 194–337 (external proletariat).
^ Berger, Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law (1953) at 351; 657 (quote).
^ Titus Livius (c.59 BC-AD 17), Ab urbe condita, 1, 43; the first five books translated by Aubrey de Sélincourt as Livy, The Early History of Rome (Penguin 1960, 1971) at 81–82.
^ Andrew Lintott, The Constitution of the Roman Republic (Oxford University 1999) at 55–61, re the Comitia Centuriata.
^ Cf., Theodor Mommsen, Römisches Geschichte (1854–1856), 3 volumes; translated as History of Rome (1862–1866), 4 volumes; reprint (The Free Press 1957) at vol.III: 48–55 (Mommsen's Bk.III, ch.XI toward end).
^ H. H. Scullard, Gracchi to Nero. A History of Rome from 133 BC to AD 68 (London: Methuen 1959, 4th ed. 1976) at 51–52.
^ Cf., Sidney Hook, Marx and the Marxists (Princeton: Van Nostrand 1955) at 13.
^ Marx, Karl (1887). "Chapter Six: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power". In Frederick Engels. Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Ökonomie [Capital: Critique of Political Economy]. Moscow: Progress Publishers. Retrieved 10 February 2013. 
^ Lumpen proletariat – Britannica Online Encyclopedia
^ Marx, Karl (February 1848). "Bourgeois and Proletarians". Manifesto of the Communist Party. Progress Publishers. Retrieved 10 February 2013. 
^ Marx, Karl. The Capital, volume 1, chapter 6. http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm
^ Luxemburg, Rosa. The Accumulation of Capital. Chapter 6, Enlarged Reproduction, http://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1913/accumulation-capital/ch06.htm
^ Marx, Karl. Critique of the Gotha Programme, I. http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/ch01.htm
^ Marx, Karl. The Communist Manifesto, part II, Proletarians and Communists http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/ch02.htm
^ Fussell, Paul (October 1992). Class, A Guide Through the American Status System. New York: Ballantine. ISBN 0-345-31816-1. 



Further reading[edit]

Blackledge, Paul (2011). "Why workers can change the world". Socialist Review 364. London. 
Hal Draper, Karl Marx's Theory of Revolution, Vol. 2; The Politics of Social Classes. (New York: Monthly Review Press 1978).

External links[edit]



Look up proletariat in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.








v
t
e


Marxist phraseology and terminology



Philosophy and politics
(Marxist)



Barracks communism
Base and superstructure
Bourgeoisie
Bourgeois democracy
Bourgeois nationalism
Bourgeois socialism
Capitalist mode of production
Class struggle
Commodification
Dialectics
Dictatorship of the proletariat
Historical materialism
Imperialism
Liquidationism
Lumpenproletariat
Means of labor
Metabolic rift
Petite bourgeoisie
Primitive accumulation of capital
Proletarian internationalism
Proletarian revolution
Pure communism
Revolutionary spontaneity
Revolutionary wave
Scientific socialism
Socialist mode of production
Super-imperialism
Theoretician
Two stage theory
Wage slavery
Workers' council
Workers' control
World revolution





Economics and sociology
(Marxian)



Accumulation of capital
Capital
Capitalist mode of production
Crisis of capitalism
Commanding heights of the economy
Commodity
Commodity production
Dominant ideology
Exchange value
Free association
Law of value
Materialism
Means of production
Mode of production
Productive forces
Production for use
Relations of production
Ruling class
Simple commodity production
Socialist mode of production
Socially necessary labour time
Socialization
Subject of labor
Surplus value
Use value
Value
Worker cooperative





Marxist–Leninist



Cadre
Central Committee
Democratic centralism
Dual power
Enemy of the people
Foco
General line of the party
National liberation
New class
People's democracy
Politburo
Political rehabilitation
Popular front
Real socialism
Revisionism
Revolutionary terror
Socialist accumulation
Socialism in one country
Social fascism
Social imperialism
Soviet democracy
United front
Vanguardism





Trotskyist



Bureaucratic collectivism
Deformed workers' state
Degenerated workers' state
New class
Permanent revolution
Social revolution





Maoist



Antagonistic contradiction
Capitalist roader
Four Olds
Marxism–Leninism–Maoism
Mass line
New Democracy
One Divides Into Two
People's war
Revolutionary base area
Struggle session












v
t
e





Social class
Status










Theories



Gilbert model
Marxian
Mudsill theory
New class
Spoon class theory
Weberian (three-component)





Related
topics



Caste
Chattering classes
Class conflict
Class discrimination
Classicide
Classless society
Euthenics
Nouveau riche / Parvenu
Poverty
Ranked society
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social mobility
Social position
Social stigma
Subaltern














By demographic








By status



Administrative detainee
Alien

illegal immigrant
refugee


Citizen

dual or multiple
native-born
naturalized
second-class


Convicted
Migrant worker
Political prisoner
Stateless





By "collar"



Blue
Gold
Green
Grey
Pink
White





By type




Creative



Bohemians
Robber baron
Russian oligarch
Business magnate
Overclass
Superclass





Middle



Lower middle class
Upper middle class
Bourgeoisie
Petite bourgeoisie





Working



Working poor
Proletariat
Lumpenproletariat





Warrior



Harii
Kshatriya
Yadav
Nair
Cossacks
Hashashin
Knight
Vanniyar
Samurai
Cuāuh
Ocēlōtl
Spartiate





Under



Commoner
Outcast
Outlaw
Peasant / Serf
Slave
Untouchable





Upper



Bourgeoisie
Elite
Gentry
Global elite
Nobility
Old money





Ruling



Aristocracy
Hanseaten
Patrician
Royal family





Intellectual



Clergy
Knowledge worker




















By country or region








United States







Affluence
American Dream
Conflict
Social class in American history





Classes



Lower
Middle (Mexican-American, Black)
Upper
Under





Income



Household
Inequality
Personal
Poverty





Standard of living



Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home ownership
Wealth








Other countries
or regions



Africa
Cambodia
China
Colombia
Ecuador
France
Haiti
India
Iran
Italy
New Zealand
Romania
Sri Lanka
Tibet
United Kingdom





Historic



Ancient Greece
Ancient Rome
Aztec
Ottoman Empire
Soviet Union
Pre-industrial East Asia
Pre-industrial Europe














 Category











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proletariat&oldid=817245818"					Categories: Working classSocialismMarxismMarxist theoryMeasurements and definitions of povertyHidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text