"PIE" redirects here. For other uses, see PIE (disambiguation).


Part of a series on


Indo-European topics







Languages



List of Indo-European languages



Historical


Albanian
Armenian
Balto-Slavic

Baltic
Slavic


Celtic
Germanic
Hellenic

Greek


Indo-Iranian

Indo-Aryan
Iranian


Italic

Romance




Extinct


Anatolian
Tocharian
Paleo-Balkan
Dacian
Illyrian
Liburnian
Messapian
Mysian
Paeonian
Phrygian
Thracian



Reconstructed


Proto-Indo-European language

Phonology: Sound laws, Accent, Ablaut





Hypothetical


Daco-Thracian
Graeco-Armenian
Graeco-Aryan
Graeco-Phrygian
Indo-Hittite
Italo-Celtic
Thraco-Illyrian



Grammar


Vocabulary
Root
Verbs
Nouns
Pronouns
Numerals
Particles



Other


Proto-Anatolian
Proto-Armenian
Proto-Germanic (Proto-Norse)
Proto-Celtic
Proto-Italic
Proto-Greek
Proto-Balto-Slavic (Proto-Slavic)
Proto-Indo-Iranian (Proto-Iranian)








Philology


Hittite texts
Hieroglyphic Luwian
Linear B
Rigveda
Avesta
Homer
Behistun
Gaulish epigraphy
Latin epigraphy
Runic epigraphy
Ogam
Gothic Bible
Armenian Bible
Slanting Brahmi
Old Irish glosses








Origins


Homeland
Proto-Indo-Europeans
Society
Religion



Mainstream


Kurgan hypothesis
Indo-European migrations
Eurasian nomads



Alternative and fringe


Anatolian hypothesis
Armenian hypothesis
Indigenous Aryans
Baltic homeland
Paleolithic Continuity Theory








Archaeology


Chalcolithic (Copper Age)

Pontic Steppe

Domestication of the horse
Kurgan
Kurgan culture
Steppe cultures

Bug-Dniester
Sredny Stog
Dnieper-Donets
Samara
Khvalynsk
Yamna

Mikhaylovka culture





Caucasus

Maykop

East-Asia

Afanasevo

Eastern Europe

Usatovo
Cernavodă
Cucuteni

Northern Europe

Corded ware

Baden
Middle Dnieper





Bronze Age

Pontic Steppe

Chariot
Yamna
Catacomb
Multi-cordoned ware
Poltavka
Srubna

Northern/Eastern Steppe

Abashevo culture
Andronovo
Sintashta

Europe

Globular Amphora
Corded ware
Beaker
Unetice
Trzciniec
Nordic Bronze Age
Terramare
Tumulus
Urnfield
Lusatian

South-Asia

BMAC
Yaz
Gandhara grave



Iron Age

Steppe

Chernoles

Europe

Thraco-Cimmerian
Hallstatt
Jastorf

Caucasus

Colchian

India

Painted Grey Ware
Northern Black Polished Ware








Peoples and societies


Bronze Age


Anatolians
Armenians
Mycenaean Greeks
Indo-Iranians


Iron Age

Indo-Aryans

Indo-Aryans

Iranians

Iranians

Scythians
Persians
Medes



Europe

Celts

Gauls
Celtiberians
Insular Celts


Hellenic peoples
Italic peoples
Germanic peoples
Paleo-Balkans/Anatolia:

Thracians
Dacians
Illyrians
Phrygians




Middle Ages

East-Asia

Tocharians

Europe

Balts
Slavs
Albanians
Medieval Europe

Indo-Aryan

Medieval India

Iranian

Greater Persia








Religion and mythology


Reconstructed


Proto-Indo-European religion
Proto-Indo-Iranian religion



Historical


Hittite

Indian

Vedic

Hinduism


Buddhism
Jainism

Iranian

Persian

Zoroastrianism


Kurdish

Yazidism
Yarsanism


Scythian

Ossetian



Other

Armenian

Europe

Paleo-Balkans
Greek
Roman
Celtic

Irish
Scottish
Breton
Welsh
Cornish


Germanic

Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse


Baltic

Latvian
Lithuanian


Slavic
Albanian


Practices


Fire-sacrifice
Horse sacrifice
Sati
Winter solstice/Yule








Indo-European studies


Scholars


Marija Gimbutas
J.P. Mallory


Institutes


Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European


Publications


Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture
The Horse, the Wheel and Language
Journal of Indo-European Studies
Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch
Indo-European Etymological Dictionary









v
t
e








This article contains characters used to write reconstructed Proto-Indo-European words. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode combining characters and Latin characters.


Proto-Indo-European (PIE)[1] is the linguistic reconstruction of the hypothetical common ancestor of the Indo-European languages, the most widely spoken language family in the world. Far more work has gone into reconstructing PIE than any other proto-language, and it is by far the best understood of all proto-languages of its age. The vast majority of linguistic work during the 19th century was devoted to the reconstruction of PIE or its daughter proto-languages (e.g. Proto-Germanic), and most of the modern techniques of linguistic reconstruction such as the comparative method were developed as a result. These methods supply all of the knowledge concerning PIE since there is no written record of the language.
PIE is estimated to have been spoken as a single language from 4,500 B.C.E. to 2,500 B.C.E.[2] during the Neolithic Age, though estimates vary by more than a thousand years. According to the prevailing Kurgan hypothesis, the original homeland of the Proto-Indo-Europeans may have been in the Pontic–Caspian steppe of Eastern Europe. The linguistic reconstruction of PIE has also provided insight into the culture and religion of its speakers.[3] As Proto-Indo-Europeans became isolated from each other through the Indo-European migrations, the dialects of PIE spoken by the various groups diverged by undergoing certain sound laws and shifts in morphology to transform into the known ancient and modern Indo-European languages.
PIE had an elaborate system of morphology that included inflectional suffixes as well as ablaut (vowel alterations, for example, as preserved in English sing, sang, sung) and accent. PIE nominals and pronouns had a complex system of declension, and verbs similarly had a complex system of conjugation. The PIE phonology, particles, numerals, and copula are also well-reconstructed. Today, the most widely-spoken daughter languages of PIE are Spanish, English, Hindustani (Hindi and Urdu), Portuguese, Bengali, Russian, Punjabi, German, Persian, French, Italian and Marathi.
An asterisk is used to mark reconstructed words, such as *wódr̥ 'water', *ḱwṓ 'dog' (English hound), or *tréyes 'three (masculine)'.



Contents


1 Development of the theory
2 Historical and geographical setting
3 Subfamilies (clades)

3.1 Subfamily clades
3.2 Marginally attested languages


4 Phonology
5 Morphology

5.1 Root
5.2 Ablaut
5.3 Noun
5.4 Pronoun
5.5 Verb
5.6 Numbers
5.7 Particle


6 Syntax
7 Relationships to other language families
8 In popular culture
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Development of the theory[edit]
No direct evidence of PIE remains – scholars have reconstructed PIE from its present-day descendants using the comparative method.[4]
The comparative method follows the Neogrammarian rule: the Indo-European sound laws apply without exception. The method compares languages and uses the sound laws to find a common ancestor. For example, compare the pairs of words in Italian and English: piede and foot, padre and father, pesce and fish. Since there is a consistent correspondence of the initial consonants that emerges far too frequently to be coincidental, one can assume that these languages stem from a common parent-language.[5]
Many consider William Jones, an Anglo-Welsh philologist and puisne judge in Bengal, to have begun Indo-European studies when he postulated the common ancestry of Sanskrit, Latin, and Greek.[6] Although his name is closely associated with this observation, he was not the first to make it. In the 1500s, European visitors to the Indian subcontinent became aware of similarities between Indo-Iranian languages and European languages,[7] and as early as 1653 Marcus Zuerius van Boxhorn had published a proposal for a proto-language ("Scythian") for the following language families: Germanic, Romance, Greek, Baltic, Slavic, Celtic, and Iranian.[8] In a memoir sent to the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres in 1767 Gaston-Laurent Coeurdoux, a French Jesuit who spent all his life in India, had specifically demonstrated the analogy between Sanskrit and European languages.[9]
In many ways, Jones' work was less accurate than his predecessors', as he erroneously included Egyptian, Japanese and Chinese in the Indo-European languages, while omitting Hindi.
In 1818 Rasmus Christian Rask elaborated the set of correspondences to include other Indo-European languages, such as Sanskrit and Greek, and the full range of consonants involved. In 1816 Franz Bopp published On the System of Conjugation in Sanskrit in which he investigated a common origin of Sanskrit, Persian, Greek, Latin, and German. In 1833 he began publishing the Comparative Grammar of Sanskrit, Zend, Greek, Latin, Lithuanian, Old Slavic, Gothic, and German.[10]
In 1822 Jacob Grimm formulated what became known as Grimm's law as a general rule in his Deutsche Grammatik. Grimm showed correlations between the Germanic and other Indo-European languages and demonstrated that sound change affects an entire language systematically, and not just some words.[11] From the 1870s the Neogrammarians proposed that sound laws have no exceptions, as shown in Verner's law, published in 1876, which resolved apparent exceptions to Grimm's law by exploring the role that accent (stress) had played in language change.[12]
August Schleicher's A Compendium of the Comparative Grammar of the Indo-European, Sanskrit, Greek and Latin Languages (1874–77) represented an early attempt to reconstruct the proto-Indo-European language.[13]
By the early 1900s Indo-Europeanists had developed well-defined descriptions of PIE which scholars still accept today. Major developments since then include the discovery of the Anatolian and Tocharian languages and the acceptance of the laryngeal theory. This theory aims to produce greater regularity in the linguistic reconstruction of Proto-Indo-European phonology than in the reconstruction generated by the comparative method.
Julius Pokorny's Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch ("Indo-European Etymological Dictionary", 1959) gave a detailed, though conservative, overview of the lexical knowledge accumulated up until that time. Kuryłowicz's 1956 Apophonie gave a better understanding of Indo-European ablaut. From the 1960s, knowledge of Anatolian became robust enough to establish its relationship to PIE.





Classification of Indo-European languages. Red: Extinct languages. White: categories or unattested proto-languages. Left half: centum languages; right half: satem languages



Historical and geographical setting[edit]
Multiple hypotheses have been suggested about when, where, and by whom PIE was spoken with the Kurgan hypothesis, first put forward by Marija Gimbutas, being the most popular of these.[14][15] It proposes that Kurgans from the Pontic–Caspian steppe north of the Black Sea were the original speakers of PIE.[16][17]
According to the theory, PIE became widespread because its speakers, the Kurgans, were able to migrate into a vast area of Europe and Asia, thanks to technologies such as the domestication of the horse, herding, and the use of wheeled vehicles.[17]
The people of these cultures were nomadic pastoralists, who, according to the model, by the early 3rd millennium BC had expanded throughout the Pontic-Caspian steppe and into Eastern Europe.[18]
Other theories include the Anatolian hypothesis,[19] the Armenia hypothesis, the Paleolithic Continuity Theory, and the indigenous Aryans theory.[citation needed]
Due to early language contact, there are some lexical similarities between the Kartvelian and Proto-Indo-European languages.[20]
Subfamilies (clades)[edit]
The following are listed by their theoretical glottochronological development:[19][21][22]



Subfamily clades[edit]

Description
Modern descendants


Proto-Anatolian
All now extinct, the best attested being the Hittite language.
None


Proto-Tocharian
An extinct branch known from manuscripts dating from the 6th to the 8th century AD, which were found in north-west China.
None


Proto-Italic
This included many languages, but only descendants of Latin survive.
Portuguese and Galician, Spanish, Catalan, French, Italian, Romanian, Aromanian, Rhaeto-Romance, Gallo-Italic


Proto-Celtic
The ancestor language of all known Celtic languages. These languages were once spoken across Europe, but modern Celtic languages are mostly confined to the north-western edge of Europe.
Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh, Breton, Cornish, Manx


Proto-Germanic
The reconstructed proto-language of the Germanic languages. It developed into three branches: West Germanic, East Germanic (now extinct), and North Germanic.
English, German, Afrikaans, Dutch, Norwegian, Danish, Swedish, Frisian, Icelandic, Faroese


Proto-Balto-Slavic
Branched into the Baltic languages and the Slavic languages.
Baltic Latvian and Lithuanian; Slavic Russian, Ukrainian, Belarussian, Polish, Czech, Slovak, Serbo-Croatian, Bulgarian, Slovenian, Macedonian


Proto-Indo-Iranian
Branched into the Indo-Aryan, Iranian and Nuristani languages.
Nuristani; Indic Hindustani, Bengali, Punjabi, Dardic; Iranic Persian, Pashto, Balochi, Kurdish, Zaza


Proto-Armenian

Eastern Armenian, Western Armenian


Proto-Greek

Modern Greek, Romeyka, Tsakonian


Proto-Albanian
Albanian is the only modern representative of a distinct branch of the Indo-European language family.[23]
Albanian


Other possible groupings include Italo-Celtic, Graeco-Aryan, Graeco-Armenian, Graeco-Phrygian, Daco-Thracian, and Thraco-Illyrian.
Marginally attested languages[edit]
The Lusitanian language is a marginally attested language found in the area of modern Portugal.
The Paleo-Balkan languages, which occur in or near the Balkan peninsula, do not appear to be members of any of the subfamilies of PIE but are so poorly attested that proper classification of them is not possible.
Phonology[edit]
Main article: Proto-Indo-European phonology
Proto-Indo-European phonology has been reconstructed in some detail. Notable features of the most widely accepted (but not uncontroversial) reconstruction include:

three series of stop consonants reconstructed as voiceless, voiced, and breathy voiced;
sonorant consonants that could be used syllablically;
three so-called laryngeal consonants, whose exact pronunciation is not well-established but which are believed to have existed in part based on their visible effects on adjacent sounds;
the fricative /s/; and
a five-vowel system of which /e/ and /o/ were the most frequently occurring vowels.

The Proto-Indo-European accent is reconstructed today as having had variable lexical stress, which could appear on any syllable and whose position often varied among different members of a paradigm (e.g. between singular and plural of a verbal paradigm). Stressed syllables received a higher pitch; therefore it is often said that PIE had pitch accent. The location of the stress is associated with ablaut variations, especially between normal-grade vowels (/e/ and /o/) and zero-grade (i.e. lack of a vowel), but not entirely predictable from it.
The accent is best preserved in Vedic Sanskrit and (in the case of nouns) Ancient Greek, and indirectly attested in a number of phenomena in other IE languages. To account for mismatches between the accent of Vedic Sanskrit and Ancient Greek, as well as a few other phenomena, a few historical linguists prefer to reconstruct PIE as a tone language where each morpheme had an inherent tone; the sequence of tones in a word then evolved, according to that hypothesis, into the placement of lexical stress in different ways in different IE branches.[citation needed]
Morphology[edit]
Root[edit]
Proto-Indo-European roots were affix-lacking morphemes which carried the core lexical meaning of a word and were used to derive related words (e.g., "-friend-" in the English words "befriend", "friends", and "friend" by itself). Proto-Indo-European was a fusional language, in which inflectional morphemes signalled the grammatical relationships between words. This dependence on inflectional morphemes means that roots in PIE, unlike those found in English, were rarely found by themselves. A root plus a suffix formed a word stem, and a word stem plus a desinence (usually an ending) formed a word.[24]
Ablaut[edit]
Many morphemes in Proto-Indo-European had short e as their inherent vowel; the Indo-European ablaut is the change of this short e to short o, long e (ē), long o (ō), or no vowel. This variation in vowels occurred both within inflectional morphology (e.g., different grammatical forms of a noun or verb may have different vowels) and derivational morphology (e.g., a verb and an associated abstract verbal noun may have different vowels).[25]
Categories that PIE distinguished through ablaut were often also identifiable by contrasting endings, but the loss of these endings in some later Indo-European languages has led them to use ablaut alone to identify grammatical categories, as in the Modern English words sing, sang, sung.
Noun[edit]
Proto-Indo-European nouns are declined for eight or nine cases:[26]

nominative: marks the subject of a verb, such as They in They ate. Words that follow a linking verb and rename the subject of that verb also use the nominative case. Thus, both They and linguists are in the nominative case in They are linguists. The nominative is the dictionary form of the noun.
accusative: used for the direct object of a transitive verb.
genitive: marks a noun as modifying another noun.
dative: used to indicate the indirect object of a transitive verb, such as Jacob in Maria gave Jacob a drink.
instrumental: marks the instrument or means by, or with which, the subject achieves or accomplishes an action. It may be either a physical object or an abstract concept.
ablative: used to express motion away from something.
locative: corresponds vaguely to the English prepositions in, on, at, and by.
vocative: used for a word that identifies an addressee. A vocative expression is one of direct address where the identity of the party spoken to is set forth expressly within a sentence. For example, in the sentence, "I don't know, John", John is a vocative expression that indicates the party being addressed.
allative: used as a type of locative case that expresses movement towards something. Only the Anatolian languages maintain this case, and it may not have existed in Proto-Indo-European at all.[27]

There were three grammatical genders:

masculine
feminine
neuter

Pronoun[edit]
Proto-Indo-European pronouns are difficult to reconstruct, owing to their variety in later languages. PIE had personal pronouns in the first and second grammatical person, but not the third person, where demonstrative pronouns were used instead. The personal pronouns had their own unique forms and endings, and some had two distinct stems; this is most obvious in the first person singular where the two stems are still preserved in English I and me. There were also two varieties for the accusative, genitive and dative cases, a stressed and an enclitic form.[28]

Personal pronouns[28]


First person
Second person


Singular
Plural
Singular
Plural


Nominative
*h₁eǵ(oH/Hom)
*wei
*tuH
*yuH


Accusative
*h₁mé, *h₁me
*nsmé, *nōs
*twé
*usmé, *wōs


Genitive
*h₁méne, *h₁moi
*ns(er)o-, *nos
*tewe, *toi
*yus(er)o-, *wos


Dative
*h₁méǵʰio, *h₁moi
*nsmei, *ns
*tébʰio, *toi
*usmei


Instrumental
*h₁moí
*nsmoí
*toí
*usmoí


Ablative
*h₁med
*nsmed
*tued
*usmed


Locative
*h₁moí
*nsmi
*toí
*usmi


Verb[edit]
Proto-Indo-European verbs, like the nouns, exhibited a system of ablaut. The most basic categorization for the Indo-European verb was grammatical aspect. Verbs were classed as:

stative: verbs that depict a state of being
imperfective: verbs depicting ongoing, habitual or repeated action
perfective: verbs depicting a completed action or actions viewed as an entire process.

Verbs have at least four grammatical moods:

indicative: indicates that something is a statement of fact; in other words, to express what the speaker considers to be a known state of affairs, as in declarative sentences.
imperative: forms commands or requests, including the giving of prohibition or permission, or any other kind of advice or exhortation.
subjunctive: used to express various states of unreality such as wish, emotion, possibility, judgment, opinion, obligation, or action that has not yet occurred
optative: indicates a wish or hope. It is similar to the cohortative mood and is closely related to the subjunctive mood.

Verbs had two grammatical voices:

active: used in a clause whose subject expresses the main verb's agent.
mediopassive: for the middle voice and the passive voice.

Verbs had three grammatical persons: (first, second and third)
Verbs had three grammatical numbers:

singular
dual: referring to precisely two of the entities (objects or persons) identified by the noun or pronoun.
plural: a number other than singular or dual.

Verbs were also marked by a highly developed system of participles, one for each combination of tense and voice, and an assorted array of verbal nouns and adjectival formations.
The following table shows a possible reconstruction of the PIE verb endings from Sihler, which largely represents the current consensus among Indo-Europeanists.



Sihler (1995)[29]


Athematic
Thematic


Singular
1st
*-mi
*-oh₂


2nd
*-si
*-esi


3rd
*-ti
*-eti


Dual
1st
*-wos
*-owos


2nd
*-th₁es
*-eth₁es


3rd
*-tes
*-etes


Plural
1st
*-mos
*-omos


2nd
*-te
*-ete


3rd
*-nti
*-onti


Numbers[edit]
Proto-Indo-European numerals are generally reconstructed as follows:



Sihler[29]


one
*Hoi-no-/*Hoi-wo-/*Hoi-k(ʷ)o-; *sem-


two
*d(u)wo-


three
*trei- (full grade), *tri- (zero grade)


four
*kʷetwor- (o-grade), *kʷetur- (zero grade)
(see also the kʷetwóres rule)


five
*penkʷe


six
*s(w)eḱs; originally perhaps *weḱs


seven
*septm̥


eight
*oḱtō, *oḱtou or *h₃eḱtō, *h₃eḱtou


nine
*(h₁)newn̥


ten
*deḱm̥(t)


Rather than specifically 100, *ḱm̥tóm may originally have meant "a large number".[30]
Particle[edit]
Proto-Indo-European particles could be used both as adverbs and postpositions, like *upo "under, below". The postpositions became prepositions in most daughter languages. Other reconstructible particles include negators (*ne, *mē), conjunctions (*kʷe "and", *wē "or" and others) and an interjection (*wai!, an expression of woe or agony).
Syntax[edit]
The syntax of the older Indo-European languages has been studied in earnest since at least the late nineteenth century, by such scholars as Hermann Hirt and Berthold Delbrück. In the second half of the twentieth century, interest in the topic increased and led to reconstructions of Proto-Indo-European syntax.[31]
Since all the early attested IE languages were inflectional, PIE is thought to have relied primarily on morphological markers, rather than word order, to signal syntactic relationships within sentences.[32] Still, a default (unmarked) word order is thought to have existed in PIE. This was reconstructed by Jacob Wackernagel as being subject–verb–object (SVO), based on evidence in Vedic Sanskrit, and the SVO hypothesis still has some adherents, but as of 2015[update] the "broad consensus" among PIE scholars is that PIE would have been a subject–object–verb (SOV) language.[33]
The SOV default word order with other orders used to express emphasis (e.g., verb–subject–object to emphasise the verb) is attested in Old Indic, Old Iranian, Old Latin and Hittite, while traces of it can be found in the enclitic personal pronouns of the Tocharian languages.[32] A shift from OV to VO order is posited to have occurred in late PIE since many of the descendant languages have this order: modern Greek, Romance and Albanian prefer SVO, Insular Celtic has VSO as the default order, and even the Anatolian languages show some signs of this word order shift.[34] The inconsistent order preference in Baltic, Slavic and Germanic can be attributed to contact with outside OV languages.[34]
Relationships to other language families[edit]
Many hypothesised higher-level relationships between Proto-Indo-European and other language families have been proposed, but these are highly controversial. Among them:

An Indo-Uralic family, encompassing PIE and Uralic languages.[35]
Eurasiatic languages, which proposes a link of Indo-European and Uralic with Altaic languages and the other language families of northern Eurasia.
A Proto-Human language family linking all the languages together.
The Pontic languages which proposes an association of Indo-European with the North-west Caucasian languages.

In popular culture[edit]
The Ridley Scott film Prometheus features an android named "David" (played by Michael Fassbender) who learns Proto-Indo-European to communicate with the "Engineer", an extraterrestrial whose race may have created humans. David practices PIE by reciting Schleicher's fable[36] and goes on to attempt communication with the Engineer through PIE. Linguist Dr Anil Biltoo created the film's reconstructed dialogue and had an onscreen role teaching David Schleicher's fable.[37]
See also[edit]

List of Indo-European languages
Proto-Indo-European religion
Yamna culture

References[edit]



^ https://indo-european.info/indo-european-lexicon.pdf
^ POWELL, ERIC A. "Telling Tales in Proto-Indo-European - Archaeology Magazine". www.archaeology.org. Retrieved 2017-07-30. 
^ Fortson, Benjamin W. (2004). Indo-European language and culture: an introduction. Malden, MA: Blackwell. p. 16. ISBN 1405103159. OCLC 54529041. 
^ "linguistics – The comparative method | science". Retrieved 27 July 2016. 
^ "Comparative linguistics". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 27 August 2016. 
^ "Sir William Jones | British orientalist and jurist". Retrieved 3 September 2016. 
^ Auroux, Sylvain (2000). History of the Language Sciences. Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter. p. 1156. ISBN 3-11-016735-2. 
^ Roger Blench, Archaeology and Language: methods and issues. In: A Companion To Archaeology. J. Bintliff ed. 52–74. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 2004.
^ Wheeler, Kip. "The Sanskrit Connection: Keeping Up With the Joneses". Dr.Wheeler's Website. Retrieved 16 April 2013. 
^ "Franz Bopp | German philologist". Retrieved 26 August 2016. 
^ "Grimm's law | linguistics". Retrieved 26 August 2016. 
^ "Neogrammarian | German scholar". Retrieved 26 August 2016. 
^ "August Schleicher | German linguist". Retrieved 26 August 2016. 
^ Anthony, David W.; Ringe, Done (2015). "The Indo-European Homeland from Linguistic and Archaeological Perspectives". Annual Review of Linguistics. 1: 199–219. doi:10.1146/annurev-linguist-030514-124812. 
^ Mallory, J. P. (1991). In Search of the Indo-Europeans. Thames & Hudson. p. 185. ISBN 978-0500276167. 
^ Anthony, David W. (2007). The horse, the wheel, and language: how bronze-age riders from the Eurasian steppes shaped the modern world (8th reprint. ed.). Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-05887-3. 
^ a b Balter, Michael (13 February 2015). "Mysterious Indo-European homeland may have been in the steppes of Ukraine and Russia". Science. doi:10.1126/science.aaa7858. Retrieved 17 February 2015. 
^ Gimbutas, Marija (1985). "Primary and Secondary Homeland of the Indo-Europeans: comments on Gamkrelidze-Ivanov articles". Journal of Indo-European Studies. 13 (1–2): 185–202. 
^ a b Bouckaert, Remco; Lemey, P.; Dunn, M.; Greenhill, S. J.; Alekseyenko, A. V.; Drummond, A. J.; Gray, R. D.; Suchard, M. A.; et al. (24 August 2012), "Mapping the Origins and Expansion of the Indo-European Language Family", Science, 337 (6097): 957–960, Bibcode:2012Sci...337..957B, doi:10.1126/science.1219669, PMC 4112997 , PMID 22923579 
^ Gamkrelidze, Th. & Ivanov, V. (1995). Indo-European and the Indo-Europeans: A Reconstruction and Historical Analysis of a Proto-Language and a Proto-Culture. 2 Vols. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
^ Blažek, Václav. "On the internal classification of Indo-European languages: survey" (PDF). Retrieved 30 July 2016. 
^ Gray, Russell D; Atkinson, Quentin D (27 November 2003), "Language-tree divergence times support the Anatolian theory of Indo-European origin" (PDF), Nature, NZ: Auckland, 426 (6965): 435–39, Bibcode:2003Natur.426..435G, doi:10.1038/nature02029, PMID 14647380 
^ "Perfect Phylogenetic Networks: A New Methodology for Reconstructing the Evolutionary History of Natural Languages, pg. 396" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2010. Retrieved 22 September 2010. 
^ Fortson (2004), p. 16.
^ Fortson (2004), pp. 73–74.
^ Fortson (2004), p. 102.
^ Fortson (2004), pp. 102, 105.
^ a b Beekes, Robert; Gabriner, Paul (1995). Comparative Indo-European linguistics: an introduction. Amsterdam: J. Benjamins Publishing Company. pp. 147, 212–217, 233, 243. ISBN 978-1556195044. 
^ a b Sihler, Andrew L. (1995). New comparative grammar of Greek and Latin. New York u.a.: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0-19-508345-8. 
^ Lehmann, Winfried P (1993), Theoretical Bases of Indo-European Linguistics, London: Routledge, pp. 252–55, ISBN 0-415-08201-3 
^ Kulikov, Leonid; Lavidas, Nikolaos, eds. (2015). "Preface". Proto-Indo-European Syntax and its Development. John Benjamins. 
^ a b Mallory, J. P.; Adams, Douglas Q., eds. (1997). "Proto-Indo-European". Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture. Taylor & Francis. p. 463. 
^ Hock, Hans Henrich (2015). "Proto-Indo-European verb-finality: Reconstruction, typology, validation". In Kulikov, Leonid; Lavidas, Nikolaos. Proto-Indo-European Syntax and its Development. John Benjamins. 
^ a b Lehmann, Winfred P. (1974). Proto-Indo-European Syntax. University of Texas Press. p. 250. 
^ http://media.leidenuniv.nl/legacy/book-of-abstracts.pdf
^ Roush, George (20 June 2012). "'Prometheus' Secret Revealed: What Did David Say to the Engineer". Screen Crush. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ O'Brien, Lucy (14 October 2012). "Designing Prometheus". IGN. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 



Further reading[edit]


Mallory, JP; Adams, DQ (2006), The Oxford Introduction to Proto-Indo-European and the Proto-Indo-European World, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 9780199296682 
Meier-Brügger, Michael (2003), Indo-European Linguistics, New York: de Gruyter, ISBN 3-11-017433-2 
Szemerényi, Oswald (1996), Introduction to Indo-European Linguistics, Oxford 


External links[edit]



Look up Appendix:List of Proto-Indo-European roots in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



At the University of Texas Linguistic Research Center: List of online books, Indo-European Lexicon
Proto-Indo-European Lexicon at the University of Helsinki, Department of Modern Languages, Department of World Cultures, Indo-European Studies
Indo-European Grammar, Syntax & Etymology Dictionary
Academia Prisca: 'Promoting North-West Indo-European as a modern language since 2005, with continuous reference to the parent Late Proto-Indo-European language'.







v
t
e


Proto-Indo-European language



Phonology



Accent
Centum and satem
Glottalic theory
Laryngeal theory
s-mobile
Sound laws

boukólos rule
kʷetwóres rule
Glossary of sound laws
Bartholomae's
Grassmann's
Osthoff's
Pinault's
Siebs'
Sievers' (Edgerton's converse)
Stang's
Szemerényi's







Morphology



Ablaut
Caland system
h₂e-conjugation
Narten present
Nasal infix
Root
Thematic vowel
Vṛddhi-derivation





Parts of speech



Nominals (nouns and adjectives)
Numerals
Particles
Pronouns
Verbs

copula


Vocabulary





Main sources



Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch (IEW)
Lexikon der indogermanischen Verben (LIV)
Lexikon der indogermanischen Partikeln und Pronominalstämme (LIPP)
Nomina im Indogermanischen Lexikon (NIL)
Indo-European Etymological Dictionary (IEED)





Origins



Indo-European migrations & Proto-Indo-European Urheimat hypotheses
Salmon problem





Artificial compositions



Schleicher's fable
The king and the god





See also



Proto-Indo-European religion
Proto-Indo-European society
Indo-European studies
Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture (EIE)









Authority control



GND: 4120204-1
SUDOC: 028035224
BNF: cb11995173d (data)
BNE: XX545099











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proto-Indo-European_language&oldid=818182399"					Categories: Bronze AgeProto-Indo-European languageHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersUse dmy dates from July 2017