For other uses, see Province (disambiguation).
A province is almost always an administrative division, within a country or state. The term derives from the ancient Roman provincia, which was the major territorial and administrative unit of the Roman Empire's territorial possessions outside Italy. The term province has since been adopted by many countries, and in those with no actual provinces, it has come to mean "outside the capital city". While some provinces were produced artificially by colonial powers, others were formed around local groups with their own ethnic identities. Many have their own powers independent of federal authority, especially in Canada. In other countries, like China, provinces are the creation of central government, with very little autonomy.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History and culture
3 Legal aspects
4 Current provinces

4.1 Modern provinces
4.2 Canada
4.3 Russia
4.4 Polities Translated


5 Historic provinces

5.1 Ancient, medieval and feudal
5.2 Colonial and Early Modern


6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Etymology[edit]
The English word "province" is attested since about 1330 and derives from the 13th-century Old French "province", which itself comes from the Latin word "provincia", which referred to the sphere of authority of a magistrate; in particular, to a foreign territory.
A popular etymology is from Latin"pro-" ("on behalf of") and "vincere" ("to triumph" or "to take control of"). Thus a "province" would be a territory or function that a Roman magistrate held control of on behalf of his government. In fact, the word Province is an ancient term from public law, which means: "office belonging to a magistrate". This agrees with the Latin term's earlier usage as a generic term for a jurisdiction under Roman law.
History and culture[edit]
In France, the expression "en province" still tends to mean "outside the Paris region." Equivalent expressions are used in Peru ("en provincias", "outside the city of Lima"), Mexico ("la provincia", "lands outside Mexico City"), Romania ("în provincie", "outside the Bucharest region"), Poland ("prowincjonalny", "provincial"), Bulgaria ("в провинцията", "v provintsiyata", "in the provinces"; "провинциален", "provintsialen", "provincial") and the Philippines (taga-probinsiya, "from outside Metro Manila", sa probinsiya, "in the provinces"). Similarly, in Australia "provincial" refers to parts of a state outside of the state capital.
Before the French Revolution, France comprised a variety of jurisdictions (e.g., Île-de-France, built around the early Capetian royal demesne), some being considered "provinces", though the term was also used colloquially for territories as small as a manor (châtellenie). Most commonly referred to as "provinces", however, were the Grands Gouvernements, generally former medieval feudal principalities, or agglomerations of such. Today the expression "province" is sometimes replaced by "en région", "région" now being the term officially used for the secondary level of government.
In Italy, "in provincia" generally means "outside the biggest regional capitals" (like Rome, Milan, Naples, etc.).
The historic European provinces—built up of many small regions, called "pays" by the French and "cantons" by the Swiss, each with a local cultural identity and focused upon a market town—have been depicted by Fernand Braudel as the optimum-size political unit in pre-industrial Early Modern Europe. He asks, "Was the province not its inhabitants' true 'fatherland'?"[1] Even centrally-organized France, an early nation-state, could collapse into autonomous provincial worlds under pressure, as during the sustained crisis of the French Wars of Religion (1562—98).
The British colonies in North America were often named provinces. Most (but not all) of the thirteen colonies that eventually formed the USA were called provinces.[2] All declared themselves "states" when they became independent. The Connecticut Colony, the Delaware Colony, Rhode Island and the Colony of Virginia never used the title "province". The British colonies further north, which remained loyal to Britain and later confederated to form the original Canada, retained the title of "province" and are still known as such to the present day. At the time of confederation, only the United Province of Canada was called a province, although the provinces of Lower Canada and Upper Canada had previously existed. Other colonies only started to use the name "province" on becoming constituent provinces of the Canadian confederation.
To 19th- and 20th-century historians, in Europe, centralized government was a sign of modernity and political maturity. In the late 20th century, as the European Union drew nation-states closer together, centripetal forces seemed simultaneously to move countries toward more flexible systems of more localized, provincial governing entities under the overall European Union umbrella. Spain after Francisco Franco has been a "State of Autonomies", formally unitary but in fact functioning as a federation of Autonomous Communities, each exercising different powers. (See Politics of Spain.)
While Serbia, the rump of former Yugoslavia, fought the separatists in the province of Kosovo, the United Kingdom, under the political principle of "devolution", produced (1998) local parliaments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Strong local nationalisms have surfaced or developed in Britain's Cornwall, France's Brittany, Languedoc and Corsica, Spain's Catalonia and the Basque Country, Italy's Lombardy, Belgium's Flanders; and, east of Europe, in Abkhazia, Chechnya and Kurdistan. In ancient India, unlike the Mauryas, the Gupta Empire gave local areas a great deal of independence and divided the empire into 26 large provinces, styled as Bhukti, Pradesha and Bhoga.
Legal aspects[edit]
In many federations and confederations, the province or state is not clearly subordinate to the national or central government. Rather, it is considered to be sovereign in regard to its particular set of constitutional functions. The central- and provincial-government functions, or areas of jurisdiction, are identified in a constitution. Those that are not specifically identified are called "residual powers." In a decentralized federal system (such as the United States and Australia) these residual powers lie at the provincial or state level, whereas in a centralized federal system (such as Canada) they are retained at the federal level.
Some of the enumerated powers can be quite important. For example, Canadian provinces are sovereign in regard to such important matters as property, civil rights, education, social welfare and medical services. The growth of the modern welfare state has resulted in these functions, assigned to the provinces, becoming more important compared to those assigned to the federal government and thus provincial governments have become more important than the Fathers of Confederation originally intended.
Canada's status as a federation of provinces under the Dominion of the British Empire rather than an independent country also had certain legal implications. Provinces could appeal court rulings over the heads of the Supreme Court of Canada to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London. As well, provinces could bypass the Supreme Court and go directly to London from any Provincial Court. The Canadian Supreme Court tended to support the view that the Canadian Constitution was intended to create a powerful central government, but the Privy Council in London held a distinctly opposite view that the Constitution provided for stronger provincial powers. This provided an opportunity for forum shopping for provinces who opposed federal laws. Until appeals from Canada to the Privy Council were abolished in 1949, in legal disputes the provincial governments tended to win powers at the expense of the federal government.
In addition, while the Canadian federal government has unlimited taxing power while province governments are restricted to imposing direct taxes, the Canadian government introduced an income tax during World War I, and since it is a direct tax it also became a major revenue generator for provinces. In most provinces, the federal government now collects income tax for both levels of government and transfers to the provincial governments whatever surcharge they ask for. The sales tax also become a major revenue generator for provinces, so in 1991 the Canadian government introduced a Goods and Services Tax (GST) to share the revenues, which proved unpopular both with provincial governments and taxpayers. The Canadian government has tried to harmonize the two levels of sales taxes, but three provinces continue to impose a separate sales tax (British Columbia after harmonizing it, and shortly thereafter de-harmonizing it after it was struck down by a referendum), while the province of Alberta still does not impose a provincial sales tax.
The evolution of federations has created an inevitable tug-of-war between concepts of federal supremacy versus states' & provinces' rights. The historic division of responsibility in federal constitutions is inevitably subject to multiple overlaps. For example, when central governments, responsible for foreign policy, enter into international agreements in areas where the state or province is sovereign, such as the environment or health standards, agreements made at the national level can create jurisdictional overlap and conflicting laws. This overlap creates the potential for internal disputes that lead to constitutional amendments and judicial decisions that alter the balance of powers.
Though foreign affairs do not usually fall under a province’s or a federal state’s competency, some states allow them to legally conduct international relations on their own in matters of their constitutional prerogative and essential interest. Sub-national authorities have a growing interest in paradiplomacy, be it performed under a legal framework or as a trend informally admitted as legitimate by the central authorities.
In unitary states such as France and China, provinces are subordinate to the national, central government. In theory, the central government can create or abolish provinces within its jurisdiction. On the other hand, although Canada is now considered a federal state[3] and not a confederation, in practice it is among the world's more decentralized federations.[4] Canadian Confederation and the Constitution Act, 1867 conferred considerable power on the provincial governments which they often use to pursue their own goals independently of the federal government.
In Canada, local governments have been called "creatures of the province" because the authority of a local government derives solely from the provincial government. Provinces can create, merge, and dissolve local governments without the consent of the federal government or the people in the affected locality.[5] Alberta in particular dissolved and merged hundreds of local governments during the 1940s and 1950s as a consequence of the Great Depression. Other provinces have arbitrarily merged and annexed independent suburbs to major Canadian cities such as Toronto or Montreal without the approval of local voters.
Current provinces[edit]
See also: Administrative divisions
Not all first-level political entities are termed "provinces." In Arab countries, the first administrative level of government — called a muhafazah — is usually translated as a "governorate." In Poland, the equivalent of "province" is "województwo," sometimes rendered in English as "voivodeship."[6] In the United States, its equivalent is a "state".
Historically, New Zealand was divided into provinces, each with its own Superintendent and Provincial Council, and with considerable responsibilities conferred on them. However, the colony (as it then was) never developed into a federation; instead, the provinces were abolished in 1876. The old provincial boundaries continue to be used to determine the application of certain public holidays. Over the years, when the central Government has created special-purpose agencies at a sub-national level, these have often tended to follow or approximate the old provincial boundaries. Current examples include the 16 Regions into which New Zealand is divided, and also the 21 District Health Boards. Sometimes the term the provinces is used to refer collectively to rural and regional parts of New Zealand, that is, those parts of the country lying outside some or all of the "main centres"—Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Hamilton and Dunedin.
Modern provinces[edit]
In many countries, a province is a relatively small non-constituent level of sub-national government, such as a county in the United Kingdom. In China, a province is a sub-national region within a unitary state; this means that a province can be created or abolished by the central government.
In some nations, a province (or its equivalent) is a first-level administrative unit of sub-national government—as in the Netherlands—and a large constituent autonomous area, as in Argentina, Canada, South Africa, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It can also be a constituent element of a federation, confederation, or republic. For example, in the United States, no state may secede from the federal Union without the permission of the federal government.
In other nations—such as Belgium, Chile, Italy, Peru, the Philippines, and Spain—a province is a second-level administrative sub-division of a region (which is the first-order administrative sub-division of the nation). Italian provinces are mainly named after their principal town and comprise several administrative sub-divisions called comuni (communes). In Chile, they are referred to as comunas. Chile has 15 regions, subdivided into 53 provinces, of which each is run by a governor appointed by the president. Italy has 20 regions, subdivided into 14 metropolitan cities and 96 provinces. Peru has 25 regions, subdivided into 194 provinces. Spain has 17 autonomous communities and 2 autonomous cities, subdivided into 50 provinces.
The island of Ireland is divided into four historic provinces (see Provinces of Ireland), each of which is sub-divided into counties. These provinces are Connacht (in the west), Leinster (in the east), Munster (in the south) and, Ulster (in the north). Nowadays these provinces have little or no administrative function, though they do have sporting significance.
From the 19th century, the Portuguese colonies were considered overseas provinces of Portugal.
Similarly, some overseas parts of the British Empire bore the colonial title of "province" (in a more Roman sense), such as the Province of Canada and the Province of South Australia (the latter, to distinguish it from the penal "colonies" elsewhere in Australia). Likewise, prior to the American Revolution, most of the original Thirteen Colonies in British America were provinces as well, such as the Province of Georgia and the Province of New Hampshire.
Canada[edit]
The constituent entities of Canada are known as provinces. At the time of confederation, only the United Province of Canada, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia were called provinces, although the provinces of Lower Canada and Upper Canada had previously existed. Other colonies and territories only started to use the title "province" on becoming constituent entities of the Canadian confederation.
Because Canada is the second largest country in the world by area, most Canadian provinces are very large – six of its ten provinces are larger than any country in Europe except Russia, and its largest province Quebec – 1,542,056 km2 (595,391 sq mi) – is almost two and a half times as large as France – 640,679 km2 (247,368 sq mi). Five of the older Canadian provinces – Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island – have "counties" as administrative sub-divisions. The actual local government form can vary widely. Since the Canadian Constitution assigns local government to provincial jurisdiction, the various provinces can create, dissolve, and reorganize local governments freely and they have been described as "creatures of the province". The Western provinces have more varied types of administrative sub-divisions than the Eastern provinces and invent new types at will. The province of British Columbia has "regional districts" which function as equivalents of counties. Manitoba and Saskatchewan have "urban municipalities", rural municipalities, and "special municipalities" or "northern municipalities". Most of Alberta's rural municipalities brand themselves "counties", although in Alberta the word has no legal significance and does not describe the government type.
The province of Alberta has some unusually creative solutions formed in response to local conditions. For instance, Sherwood Park is an unincorporated "urban service area" of 65,465 within Strathcona County, which has most of the oil refining capacity in Western Canada; Fort McMurray was once a city but dissolved itself and became an "urban service area" of 70,964 people within the Regional Municipality (R.M.) of Wood Buffalo, which has several multibillion-dollar oil sands plants; and Lloydminster, a city of 31,483 which sits directly astride the provincial border between Alberta and Saskatchewan. Unlike most such cases, Lloydminster is not a pair of twin cities on opposite sides of a border, but is actually incorporated by both provinces as a single city with a single municipal administration. The residents objected to the federal government splitting the city in two when it created the two provinces, so the two provinces reunified it by declaring it to be a single city in two provinces, thereby bypassing the limitations of federal boundaries.
Russia[edit]
The term "province" is sometimes used to refer to the historic governorates (guberniyas) of Russia. This terms also refers to the provinces (провинции), which were introduced as the subdivisions of the governorates in 1719 and existed until 1775. In modern parlance, the term is commonly used to refer to the oblasts and krais of Russia.
Polities Translated[edit]


Country
Local name(s)
Language
Number of entities


Provinces of Afghanistan
wilayat
Pashto, Dari
34


Provinces of Algeria
wilaya
Arabic
48


Provinces of Angola
província
Portuguese
18


Provinces of Argentina
provincia
Spanish
23


Provinces of Armenia
marz
Armenian
11


Provinces of Belarus
voblast
Belarusian
7


Provinces of Belgium (Flemish Region)
provincie
Dutch
5


Provinces of Belgium (Walloon Region)
province
French
5


Provinces of Bolivia
provincia
Spanish
100


Provinces of Bulgaria
oblast
Bulgarian
28


Provinces of Burkina Faso
province
French
45


Provinces of Burundi
province
French
17


Provinces of Cambodia
khaet (ខេត្ត)
Khmer
24 + 1[7]


Provinces of Canada
province
English, French
10


Provinces of Chile
provincia
Spanish
54


Provinces of China
shěng (省)
Standard Chinese
22 + 1[8]


Provinces of Costa Rica
provincia
Spanish
7


Provinces of Colombia
provincia
Spanish



Provinces of Cuba
provincia
Spanish
15


Provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
province
French
26


Provinces of the Dominican Republic
provincia
Spanish
33


Provinces of Ecuador
provincia
Spanish
24


Provinces of Equatorial Guinea
provincia
Spanish
7


Provinces of Fiji
yasana
Fijian
14


Provinces of Finland
läänit or län
Finnish, Swedish
6


Provinces of Gabon
province
French
9


Provinces of Georgia
mkhare (მხარე)
Georgian, Abkhazian
12


Provinces of Greece
επαρχία (eparchia)
Greek
73


Provinces of Indonesia
provinsi or propinsi
Indonesian
34


Provinces of Iran
ostan
Persian
31


Provinces of Ireland
cúige
Irish
4


Provinces of Italy
provincia
Italian
110


Provinces of Kazakhstan
oblasy
Kazakh
14


Provinces of Kenya
province
English
8


Provinces of Kyrgyzstan
oblasty
Kyrgyzian
7


Provinces of Laos
khoueng (ແຂວງ)
Lao
16


Provinces of Madagascar
faritany
Malagasy
6


Provinces of Mongolia
aimag or aymag (Аймаг)
Mongolian
21


Provinces of Mozambique
província
Portuguese
10


Provinces of the Netherlands
provincie
Dutch
12


Provinces of North Korea
do or to (도)
Korean
10


Provinces of Oman
wilaya
Arabic
62


Provinces of Pakistan
sûba(صوبہ); plural: sûbé (صوبے)
Urdu
5


Provinces of Panama
provincia
Spanish
9


Provinces of Papua New Guinea
province
English
19


Provinces of Peru
provincia
Spanish
195


Provinces of the Philippines
lalawigan or probinsya, provincia, province
Tagalog, Spanish, English
81


Provinces of Rwanda
intara
French
5


Provinces of São Tomé and Príncipe
província
Portuguese
2


Provinces of Saudi Arabia
mintaqah
Arabic
13


Provinces of Sierra Leone
province
English
3


Provinces of the Solomon Islands


9


Provinces of South Africa
province
English
9


Provinces of South Korea
do or to (도/道)
Korean
10


Provinces of Spain
provincia
Spanish
50


Provinces of Sri Lanka
පළාත/palaatha,மாகாணம்/maahaanam & province
Sinhala, Tamil, English
9


Provinces of Tajikistan
veloyati, from Arabic wilaya
Tajik
3


Provinces of Thailand
changwat (จังหวัด)
Thai
76 + 1[9]


Provinces of Turkey
il
Turkish
81


Provinces of Turkmenistan
welayat (plural: welayatlar) from wilaya
Turkmen
5


Provinces of Ukraine
oblast
Ukrainian
24 + 3[10]


Provinces of Uzbekistan
viloyat (plural: viloyatlar)
from Arabic wilaya
12


Provinces of Vanuatu


6


Provinces of Vietnam
tỉnh
Vietnamese
58


Provinces of Zambia
province
English
9


Provinces of Zimbabwe
province
English
8


Historic provinces[edit]
Ancient, medieval and feudal[edit]

The Roman Empire was divided into provinces (provinciae); this is where the term originated
Caliphate and subsequent sultanates: see Emirate
Khanate can also mean a province as well as an independent state, as either can be headed by a Khan
Byzantine Empire: see exarchate, thema
Pharaonic Egypt: see nome (Egypt)
Frankish (Carolingian) 're-founded' Holy Roman Empire: see gau and county
In the Habsburg territories, the traditional provinces are partly expressed in the Länder of 19th-century Austria-Hungary.
Mughal Empire: subah
The provinces of the Ottoman Empire had various types of governors (generally a pasha), but mostly styled vali, hence the predominant term vilayet, generally subdivided (often in beyliks or sanjaks), sometimes grouped under a governor-general (styled beylerbey).
Achaemenid Persia (and probably before in Media, again after conquest and further extension by Alexander the Great, and in the larger Hellenistic successor states: see satrapy
In the Tartar Khanate of Kazan: the five daruğa ('direction')

Colonial and Early Modern[edit]

Spanish empire, at several echelons:

viceroyalty above
intendencia


The former Republic of the Seven United Provinces (The Netherlands)
British colonies:

American Southern Colonies

Province of Virginia (1607–1776)
Province of Carolina (1629–1712)
Province of North Carolina (1712-1776)
Province of South Carolina (1712-1776)
Province of Maryland (1632–1776)
Province of Georgia (1732–1777)


American Middle Colonies

Province of New Jersey (1664–1776)
Province of New York (1664–1783)
Province of Pennsylvania (1681–1783)


American New England Colonies

Province of New Hampshire (1680–1686, 1692–1783)
Province of Massachusetts Bay (1692–1776)
Province of Maine (various dates)


Canada (New France)

Province of Quebec (1763–1791)
Province of Lower Canada (1791–1841)
Province of Upper Canada (1791–1841)
United Province of Canada (1841-1867)


Provinces of India
Provinces of the Philippines
Provinces of New Zealand (1841-1876)
Provinces of Nigeria
Province of South Australia (now an Australian state)


The former provinces of Brazil
The former provinces of France
The former provinces of Ireland
The former provinces of Japan
The provinces of Prussia, a former German kingdom/republic
The provinces of the Republic of New Granada
The former provinces of Sweden
The former United Provinces of Central America
The former United Provinces of the Río de la Plata

See also[edit]

Governor
Region
Provincialism
Regionalism (politics)
Rise: The Vieneo Province

References[edit]



^ The Perspective of the World, 1984, p. 284.
^ "A chorographical map of the Province of New-York in North America, divided into counties, manors, patents and townships; exhibiting likewise all the private grants of land made and located in that Province". Library of Congress. Retrieved December 4, 2017. 
^ "How Canadians Govern Themselves,. 7th ed". .parl.gc.ca. Retrieved May 8, 2012. 
^ "Collaborative Federalism in an era of globalization". Pco-bcp.gc.ca. April 22, 1999. Retrieved May 8, 2012. 
^ ["http://ww2.publicpolicy.utoronto.ca/ppgr/PPGGlossary/M1/MunicipalitiesasCreaturesofProvinces/Pages/default.aspx" ""Municipalities as "creatures of the provinces""] Check |url= value (help). 
^ Also spelled "voivodship," "voievodship," "voievodeship".
^ 76 provinces + 1 special governed district (Phnom Penh). However, Cambodian usually presume Phnom Penh as another province for convenience.
^ The People's Republic of China (PRC) claims it has 23 provinces, one of them being Taiwan, which the PRC does not have control. The Republic of China (frequently referred to as Taiwan or ROC) controls all of Taiwan Province and several small islands of Fujian and Hainan Province.
^ 76 provinces + 1 special governed district (Bangkok). However, Thai people usually presume Bangkok as another province for convenience.
^ 24 oblasts, one autonomous republic, and two "cities with special status".



External links[edit]

Etymology Online
World Statesmen







v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Province&oldid=818211644"					Categories: ProvincesTypes of country subdivisionsHidden categories: Pages with URL errorsArticles containing Russian-language text