See also: List of topics characterized as pseudoscience
For a broader coverage related to this topic, see Pseudo-scholarship.


Part of a series on


Science





Formal




Formal logic
Mathematics



Mathematical statistics
Theoretical computer science



Game theory
Decision theory




Information theory
Systems theory
Control theory










Physical




Physics





Classical
Modern
Applied




Theoretical
Experimental
Computational




Mechanics


(classical
analytical
continuum
fluid
solid)







Electromagnetism
Thermodynamics




Molecular
Atomic
Nuclear
Particle




Condensed matter
Plasma



Quantum mechanics (introduction)
Quantum field theory



Special relativity
General relativity



String theory




Chemistry





Inorganic
Organic
Analytical
Physical




Acid-base
Supramolecular
Solid-state
Nuclear
Environmental
Sustainable ("green")



Theoretical



Astrochemistry
Biochemistry
Crystallography
Food chemistry
Geochemistry
Materials science
Photochemistry
Radiochemistry
Stereochemistry
Surface science





Earth science





Climatology
Ecology
Edaphology
Environmental science
Geodesy
Geography (physical)
Geology
Geomorphology
Geophysics
Glaciology
Hydrology
Limnology
Meteorology
Oceanography
Paleoclimatology
Paleoecology
Palynology
Pedology
Volcanology





Astronomy





Astrophysics
Cosmology
Galactic astronomy
Planetary geology
Planetary science
Stellar astronomy













Life




Biology





Anatomy
Astrobiology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biological engineering
Biophysics
Behavioral neuroscience
Biotechnology
Botany
Cell biology
Conservation biology
Cryobiology
Developmental biology
Ecology
Ethnobiology
Ethology
Evolutionary biology (introduction)
Genetics (introduction)
Gerontology
Immunology
Limnology
Marine biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Neuroscience
Paleontology
Parasitology
Physiology
Radiobiology
Soil biology
Sociobiology
Systematics
Toxicology
Zoology













Social




Anthropology
Archaeology
Criminology
Demography
Economics
Geography (human)
History
International relations
Jurisprudence
Linguistics
Pedagogy
Political science
Psychology
Science education
Sociology










Applied




Engineering





Aerospace
Agricultural
Biological
Biomedical
Chemical
Civil
Computer science / engineering




Electrical
Fire protection
Genetic
Industrial
Mechanical
Military
Mining
Nuclear
Operations research
Robotics
Software
Web





Healthcare





Medicine
Veterinary
Dentistry
Midwifery
Epidemiology
Pharmacy
Nursing













Interdisciplinary




Applied physics
Artificial intelligence
Bioethics
Bioinformatics
Biomedical engineering
Biostatistics
Cognitive science
Complex systems
Computational linguistics
Cultural studies
Cybernetics
Environmental science
Environmental social science
Environmental studies
Ethnic studies
Evolutionary psychology




Forensics
Forestry
Library science



Mathematical / theoretical biology



Mathematical physics
Military science
Network science
Neural engineering
Neuroscience
Science studies
Scientific modelling
Semiotics
Sociobiology
Statistics
Systems science
Urban planning
Web science













Philosophy
History







Basic research
Citizen science
Fringe science
Protoscience
Pseudoscience
Freedom
Policy
Funding
Method
Sociology
Technoscience









Outline
Portal
Category







v
t
e







Part of a series of articles on the paranormal


Main articles




Afterlife
Angel
Astral projection
Aura
Bilocation
Clairvoyance
Close encounter
Cold spot
Conjuration
Deity
Demon
Demonic possession
Demonology
Devil
Ectoplasm
Electronic voice phenomenon
Exorcism
Extrasensory perception
Fairy
Fear of ghosts
Forteana
Ghost
Ghost hunting
Ghost story
God
Haunted house
Hypnosis
Indigo children
Magic
Mediumship
Miracle
Occult
Orb
Ouija
Paranormal
Paranormal fiction
Paranormal television
Poltergeist
Precognition
Psychic
Psychic reading
Psychokinesis
Psychometry
Reincarnation
Remote viewing
Residual haunting
Retrocognition
Shadow people
Soul
Spirit photography
Spirit possession
Spirit world
Spiritualism
Stone Tape
Supernatural
Telepathy
UFO
UFO sightings
Ufology
Will-o'-the-wisp


Haunted locations
United Kingdom
United States
World




Articles on skepticism




Cold reading
Committee for Skeptical Inquiry
Debunking
Hoax
James Randi Educational Foundation
Magical thinking
Prizes for evidence of the paranormal
Pseudoskepticism
Scientific skepticism




Related articles on science, psychology, and logic




Agnosticism
Anomalistics
Argument from ignorance
Argumentum ad populum
Bandwagon effect
Begging the question
Cognitive dissonance
Communal reinforcement
Fallacy
Falsifiability
Fringe science
Groupthink
Junk science
Protoscience
Pseudoscience
Scientific evidence
Scientific method
Superstition
Uncertainty
Urban legend




Related articles on Social change and Parapsychology




Countermovement
Death and culture
Parapsychology
Scientific literacy
Social movement







v
t
e





Pseudoscience consists of statements, beliefs, or practices that are claimed to be scientific and factual, in the absence of evidence gathered and constrained by appropriate scientific methods.[1][Note 1] Pseudoscience is often characterized by contradictory, exaggerated or unfalsifiable claims; reliance on confirmation bias rather than rigorous attempts at refutation; lack of openness to evaluation by other experts; and absence of systematic practices when developing theories. The term pseudoscience is often considered pejorative[4] because it suggests something is being presented as science inaccurately or even deceptively. Those described as practicing or advocating pseudoscience often dispute the characterization.[2]
The demarcation between science and pseudoscience has philosophical and scientific implications.[5] Differentiating science from pseudoscience has practical implications in the case of health care, expert testimony, environmental policies, and science education.[6] Distinguishing scientific facts and theories from pseudoscientific beliefs, such as those found in astrology, alchemy, medical quackery, occult beliefs, and creation science, is part of science education and scientific literacy.[6][7]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Overview

2.1 Scientific method
2.2 Falsifiability
2.3 Mertonian norms
2.4 Refusal to acknowledge problems
2.5 Criticism of the term
2.6 Alternative definition of the term


3 History
4 Identifying

4.1 Concepts
4.2 Use of vague, exaggerated or untestable claims
4.3 Over-reliance on confirmation rather than refutation
4.4 Lack of openness to testing by other experts
4.5 Absence of progress
4.6 Personalization of issues
4.7 Use of misleading language


5 Prevalence of pseudoscientific beliefs in the United States
6 Explanations

6.1 Psychology


7 Boundaries with science
8 Politics, health, and education

8.1 Political implications
8.2 Health and education implications


9 See also

9.1 Related concepts
9.2 Similar terms


10 Notes
11 References

11.1 Bibliography


12 Further reading
13 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word "pseudoscience" is derived from the Greek root pseudo meaning false[8][9] and the English word science, from the Latin word "scientia", meaning "knowledge". Although the term has been in use since at least the late 18th century (e.g., in 1796 by James Pettit Andrews in reference to alchemy[10][11]) the concept of pseudoscience as distinct from real or proper science seems to have become more widespread during the mid-19th century. Among the earliest uses of "pseudo-science" was in an 1844 article in the Northern Journal of Medicine, issue 387:

"That opposite kind of innovation which pronounces what has been recognized as a branch of science, to have been a pseudo-science, composed merely of so-called facts, connected together by misapprehensions under the disguise of principles"

An earlier use of the term was in 1843 by the French physiologist François Magendie.[12] During the 20th century, the word was used pejoratively to describe explanations of phenomena which were claimed to be scientific, but which were not in fact supported by reliable experimental evidence. From time-to-time, though, the usage of the word occurred in a more formal, technical manner around a perceived threat to individual and institutional security in a social and cultural setting.[13]
Overview[edit]
Scientific method[edit]
Main article: Scientific method




A typical 19th century phrenology chart: During the 1820s, phrenologists claimed the mind was located in areas of the brain, and were attacked for doubting that mind came from the nonmaterial soul. Their idea of reading "bumps" in the skull to predict personality traits was later discredited.[14] Phrenology was first termed a pseudoscience in 1843 and continues to be considered so.[12]


A number of basic principles are accepted by scientists as standards for determining whether a body of knowledge, method, or practice is scientific. Experimental results should be reproducible and verified by other researchers.[15] These principles are intended to ensure experiments can be reproduced measurably given the same conditions, allowing further investigation to determine whether a hypothesis or theory related to given phenomena is both valid and reliable. Standards require the scientific method to be applied throughout, and bias to be controlled for or eliminated through randomization, fair sampling procedures, blinding of studies, and other methods. All gathered data, including the experimental or environmental conditions, are expected to be documented for scrutiny and made available for peer review, allowing further experiments or studies to be conducted to confirm or falsify results. Statistical quantification of significance, confidence, and error[16] are also important tools for the scientific method.
Falsifiability[edit]
Main article: Falsifiability
During the mid-20th century, Karl Popper emphasized the criterion of falsifiability to distinguish science from nonscience.[17] Statements, hypotheses, or theories have falsifiability or refutability if there is the inherent possibility that they can be proven false. That is, if it is possible to conceive of an observation or an argument which negates them. Popper used astrology and psychoanalysis as examples of pseudoscience and Einstein's theory of relativity as an example of science. He subdivided nonscience into philosophical, mathematical, mythological, religious and metaphysical formulations on one hand, and pseudoscientific formulations on the other, though he did not provide clear criteria for the differences.[18]
Another example which shows the distinct need for a claim to be falsifiable was stated in Carl Sagan's publication The Demon-Haunted World when he discusses an invisible dragon that he has in his garage. The point is made that there is no physical test to refute the claim of the presence of this dragon. No matter what test you think you can devise, there is then a reason why this does not apply to the invisible dragon, so one can never prove that the initial claim is wrong. Sagan concludes; "Now, what's the difference between an invisible, incorporeal, floating dragon who spits heatless fire and no dragon at all?". He states that "your inability to invalidate my hypothesis is not at all the same thing as proving it true",[19] once again explaining that even if such a claim were true, it would be outside the realm of scientific inquiry.
Mertonian norms[edit]
Main article: Mertonian norms
During 1942, Robert K. Merton identified a set of five "norms" which he characterized as what makes a real science. If any of the norms were violated, Merton considered the enterprise to be nonscience. These are not broadly accepted by the scientific community. His norms were:

Originality: The tests and research done must present something new to the scientific community.
Detachment: The scientists' reasons for practicing this science must be simply for the expansion of their knowledge. The scientists should not have personal reasons to expect certain results.
Universality: No person should be able to more easily obtain the information of a test than another person. Social class, religion, ethnicity, or any other personal factors should not be factors in someone's ability to receive or perform a type of science.
Skepticism: Scientific facts must not be based on faith. One should always question every case and argument and constantly check for errors or invalid claims.
Public accessibility: Any scientific knowledge one obtains should be made available to everyone. The results of any research should be published and shared with the scientific community.[20]





The astrological signs of the zodiac.


Refusal to acknowledge problems[edit]
During 1978, Paul Thagard proposed that pseudoscience is primarily distinguishable from science when it is less progressive than alternative theories over a long period of time, and its proponents fail to acknowledge or address problems with the theory.[21] During 1983, Mario Bunge has suggested the categories of "belief fields" and "research fields" to help distinguish between pseudoscience and science, where the former is primarily personal and subjective and the latter involves a certain systematic method.[22]
Criticism of the term[edit]
Philosophers of science such as Paul Feyerabend argued that a distinction between science and nonscience is neither possible nor desirable.[23][Note 2] Among the issues which can make the distinction difficult is variable rates of evolution among the theories and methods of science in response to new data.[Note 3]
Larry Laudan has suggested pseudoscience has no scientific meaning and is mostly used to describe our emotions: "If we would stand up and be counted on the side of reason, we ought to drop terms like 'pseudo-science' and 'unscientific' from our vocabulary; they are just hollow phrases which do only emotive work for us".[26] Likewise, Richard McNally states, "The term 'pseudoscience' has become little more than an inflammatory buzzword for quickly dismissing one's opponents in media sound-bites" and "When therapeutic entrepreneurs make claims on behalf of their interventions, we should not waste our time trying to determine whether their interventions qualify as pseudoscientific. Rather, we should ask them: How do you know that your intervention works? What is your evidence?"[27]
Alternative definition of the term[edit]
For philosophers Silvio Funtowicz and Jerome R. Ravetz "... pseudo-science may be defined as one where the uncertainty of its inputs must be suppressed, lest they render its outputs totally indeterminate". The definition, in the book Uncertainty and quality in science for policy (p. 54),[28] alludes to the loss of craft skills in handling quantitative information, and to the bad practice of achieving precision in prediction (inference) only at the expenses of ignoring uncertainty in the input which was used to formulate the prediction. This use of the term is common among practitioners of post-normal science. Understood in this way, pseudoscience can be fought using good practices to assesses uncertainty in quantitative information, such as NUSAP and - in the case of mathematical modelling - sensitivity auditing.
History[edit]
Main article: History of pseudoscience
The history of pseudoscience is the study of pseudoscientific theories over time. A pseudoscience is a set of ideas that presents itself as science, while it does not meet the criteria to be properly called such.[29][30]
Distinguishing between proper science and pseudoscience is sometimes difficult. One proposal for demarcation between the two is the falsification criterion, attributed most notably to the philosopher Karl Popper. In the history of science and "history of pseudoscience" it can be especially difficult to separate the two, because some sciences developed from pseudosciences. An example of this is the science chemistry, which traces its origins to pseudoscientific alchemy.
The vast diversity in pseudosciences further complicates the history of science. Some modern pseudosciences, such as astrology and acupuncture, originated before the scientific era. Others developed as part of an ideology, such as Lysenkoism, or as a response to perceived threats to an ideology. Examples are creation science and intelligent design, which were developed in response to the scientific theory of evolution.[citation needed]
Identifying[edit]




Homeopathic preparation Rhus toxicodendron, derived from poison ivy.


A topic, practice, or body of knowledge might reasonably be termed pseudoscientific when it is presented as consistent with the norms of scientific research, but it demonstrably fails to meet these norms.[1]
Karl Popper stated it is insufficient to distinguish science from pseudoscience, or from metaphysics, by the criterion of rigorous adherence to the empirical method, which is essentially inductive, based on observation or experimentation.[31] He proposed a method to distinguish between genuine empirical, nonempirical or even pseudoempirical methods. The latter case was exemplified by astrology, which appeals to observation and experimentation. While it had astonishing empirical evidence based on observation, on horoscopes and biographies, it crucially failed to use acceptable scientific standards.[31] Popper proposed falsifiability as an important criterion in distinguishing science from pseudoscience.
To demonstrate this point, Popper[31] gave two cases of human behavior and typical explanations from Sigmund Freud and Alfred Adler's theories: "that of a man who pushes a child into the water with the intention of drowning it; and that of a man who sacrifices his life in an attempt to save the child."[31] From Freud's perspective, the first man would have suffered from psychological repression, probably originating from an Oedipus complex, whereas the second had attained sublimation. From Adler's perspective, the first and second man suffered from feelings of inferiority and had to prove himself which drove him to commit the crime or, in the second case, rescue the child. Popper was not able to find any counterexamples of human behavior in which the behavior could not be explained in the terms of Adler's or Freud's theory. Popper argued[31] it was that the observation always fitted or confirmed the theory which, rather than being its strength, was actually its weakness.
In contrast, Popper[31] gave the example of Einstein's gravitational theory, which predicted "light must be attracted by heavy bodies (such as the Sun), precisely as material bodies were attracted."[31] Following from this, stars closer to the Sun would appear to have moved a small distance away from the Sun, and away from each other. This prediction was particularly striking to Popper because it involved considerable risk. The brightness of the Sun prevented this effect from being observed under normal circumstances, so photographs had to be taken during an eclipse and compared to photographs taken at night. Popper states, "If observation shows that the predicted effect is definitely absent, then the theory is simply refuted."[31] Popper summed up his criterion for the scientific status of a theory as depending on its falsifiability, refutability, or testability.
Paul R. Thagard used astrology as a case study to distinguish science from pseudoscience and proposed principles and criteria to delineate them.[32] First, astrology has not progressed in that it has not been updated nor added any explanatory power since Ptolemy. Second, it has ignored outstanding problems such as the precession of equinoxes in astronomy. Third, alternative theories of personality and behavior have grown progressively to encompass explanations of phenomena which astrology statically attributes to heavenly forces. Fourth, astrologers have remained uninterested in furthering the theory to deal with outstanding problems or in critically evaluating the theory in relation to other theories. Thagard intended this criterion to be extended to areas other than astrology. He believed it would delineate as pseudoscientific such practices as witchcraft and pyramidology, while leaving physics, chemistry and biology in the realm of science. Biorhythms, which like astrology relied uncritically on birth dates, did not meet the criterion of pseudoscience at the time because there were no alternative explanations for the same observations. The use of this criterion has the consequence that a theory can be scientific at one time and pseudoscientific at a later time.[32]
Science is also distinguishable from revelation, theology, or spirituality in that it offers insight into the physical world obtained by empirical research and testing.[33][34] The most notable disputes concern the evolution of living organisms, the idea of common descent, the geologic history of the Earth, the formation of the solar system, and the origin of the universe.[35] Systems of belief that derive from divine or inspired knowledge are not considered pseudoscience if they do not claim either to be scientific or to overturn well-established science. Moreover, some specific religious claims, such as the power of intercessory prayer to heal the sick, although they may be based on untestable beliefs, can be tested by the scientific method.
Some statements and common beliefs of popular science may not meet the criteria of science. "Pop" science may blur the divide between science and pseudoscience among the general public, and may also involve science fiction.[36] Indeed, pop science is disseminated to, and can also easily emanate from, persons not accountable to scientific methodology and expert peer review.
If the claims of a given field can be tested experimentally and standards are upheld, it is not "pseudoscience", however odd, astonishing, or counterintuitive. If claims made are inconsistent with existing experimental results or established theory, but the method is sound, caution should be used; science consists of testing hypotheses which may turn out to be false. In such a case, the work may be better described as ideas that are "not yet generally accepted". Protoscience is a term sometimes used to describe a hypothesis that has not yet been tested adequately by the scientific method, but which is otherwise consistent with existing science or which, where inconsistent, offers reasonable account of the inconsistency. It may also describe the transition from a body of practical knowledge into a scientific field.[17]
Concepts[edit]
See also: List of topics characterized as pseudoscience
Examples of pseudoscience concepts include:

acupuncture
alchemy
ancient astronauts
applied kinesiology
astrology
Ayurvedic medicine
biorhythms
brain types
cellular memory
chiropractic
cold fusion[37]
craniometry
creation science
dowsing
engram theory proposed by Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard
enneagrams
esoteric healing
eugenics[38][39][40]
extrasensory perception (ESP)
facilitated communication
flat earth
geocentrism
graphology
homeopathy
intelligent design
iridology
kundalini
Lysenkoism
metoposcopy
Myers–Briggs Type Indicator
N-rays
naturopathy
neuro-linguistic programming (NLP)
orgone energy
paranormal plant perception
phrenology
physiognomy
polygraph
qi
rebirthing therapy, and other New Age psychotherapies
reflexology
remote viewing
reiki
Revised history of the solar system proposed by Immanuel Velikovsky.
Rolfing
therapeutic touch
Vastu shastra

During 2006, the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) issued an executive summary of a paper on science and engineering which briefly discussed the prevalence of pseudoscience in modern times. It said, "belief in pseudoscience is widespread" and, referencing a Gallup Poll,[41] stated that belief in the 10 commonly believed examples of paranormal phenomena listed in the poll were "pseudoscientific beliefs". [42] The items were "extrasensory perception (ESP), that houses can be haunted, ghosts, telepathy, clairvoyance, astrology, that people can communicate mentally with someone who has died, witches, reincarnation, and channelling".[42] Such beliefs in pseudoscience represent a lack of knowledge of how science works. The scientific community may attempt to communicate information about science out of concern for the public's susceptibility to unproven claims.[42]






This section contains embedded lists that may be poorly defined, unverified or indiscriminate. Please help to clean it up to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Where appropriate, incorporate items into the main body of the article. (December 2016)



The following are some of the indicators of the possible presence of pseudoscience.
Use of vague, exaggerated or untestable claims[edit]

Assertion of scientific claims that are vague rather than precise, and that lack specific measurements[43]
Assertion of a claim with little or no explanatory power.[31]
Failure to make use of operational definitions (i.e. publicly accessible definitions of the variables, terms, or objects of interest so that persons other than the definer can measure or test them independently)[Note 4] (See also: Reproducibility).
Failure to make reasonable use of the principle of parsimony, i.e. failing to seek an explanation that requires the fewest possible additional assumptions when multiple viable explanations are possible (see: Occam's razor).[45]
Use of obscurantist language, and use of apparently technical jargon in an effort to give claims the superficial trappings of science.
Lack of boundary conditions: Most well-supported scientific theories possess well-articulated limitations under which the predicted phenomena do and do not apply.[46]
Lack of effective controls, such as placebo and double-blind, in experimental design.
Lack of understanding of basic and established principles of physics and engineering[47]

Over-reliance on confirmation rather than refutation[edit]

Assertions that do not allow the logical possibility that they can be shown to be false by observation or physical experiment (see also: Falsifiability).[17][48]
Assertion of claims that a theory predicts something that it has not been shown to predict.[49] Scientific claims that do not confer any predictive power are considered at best "conjectures", or at worst "pseudoscience" (e.g. Ignoratio elenchi)[50]
Assertion that claims which have not been proven false must therefore be true, and vice versa (see: Argument from ignorance).[51]
Over-reliance on testimonial, anecdotal evidence, or personal experience: This evidence may be useful for the context of discovery (i.e. hypothesis generation), but should not be used in the context of justification (e.g. Statistical hypothesis testing).[52]
Presentation of data that seems to support claims while suppressing or refusing to consider data that conflict with those claims.[25] This is an example of selection bias, a distortion of evidence or data that arises from the way that the data are collected. It is sometimes referred to as the selection effect.
Promulgating to the status of facts excessive or untested claims that have been previously published elsewhere; an accumulation of such uncritical secondary reports, which do not otherwise contribute their own empirical investigation, is called the Woozle effect.[53]
Reversed burden of proof: science places the burden of proof on those making a claim, not on the critic. "Pseudoscientific" arguments may neglect this principle and demand that skeptics demonstrate beyond a reasonable doubt that a claim (e.g. an assertion regarding the efficacy of a novel therapeutic technique) is false. It is essentially impossible to prove a universal negative, so this tactic incorrectly places the burden of proof on the skeptic rather than on the claimant.[54]
Appeals to holism as opposed to reductionism: proponents of pseudoscientific claims, especially in organic medicine, alternative medicine, naturopathy and mental health, often resort to the "mantra of holism" to dismiss negative findings.[55]

Lack of openness to testing by other experts[edit]

Evasion of peer review before publicizing results (termed "science by press conference"):[54][56][Note 5] Some proponents of ideas that contradict accepted scientific theories avoid subjecting their ideas to peer review, sometimes on the grounds that peer review is biased towards established paradigms, and sometimes on the grounds that assertions cannot be evaluated adequately using standard scientific methods. By remaining insulated from the peer review process, these proponents forgo the opportunity of corrective feedback from informed colleagues.[55]
Some agencies, institutions, and publications that fund scientific research require authors to share data so others can evaluate a paper independently. Failure to provide adequate information for other researchers to reproduce the claims contributes to a lack of openness.[57]
Appealing to the need for secrecy or proprietary knowledge when an independent review of data or methodology is requested[57]
Substantive debate on the evidence by knowledgeable proponents of all view points is not encouraged.[58]

Absence of progress[edit]

Failure to progress towards additional evidence of its claims.[48][Note 6] Terence Hines has identified astrology as a subject that has changed very little in the past two millennia.[46][59] (see also: scientific progress)
Lack of self-correction: scientific research programmes make mistakes, but they tend to reduce these errors over time.[60] By contrast, ideas may be regarded as pseudoscientific because they have remained unaltered despite contradictory evidence. The work Scientists Confront Velikovsky (1976) Cornell University, also delves into these features in some detail, as does the work of Thomas Kuhn, e.g. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) which also discusses some of the items on the list of characteristics of pseudoscience.
Statistical significance of supporting experimental results does not improve over time and are usually close to the cutoff for statistical significance. Normally, experimental techniques improve or the experiments are repeated, and this gives ever stronger evidence. If statistical significance does not improve, this typically shows the experiments have just been repeated until a success occurs due to chance variations.

Personalization of issues[edit]

Tight social groups and authoritarian personality, suppression of dissent, and groupthink can enhance the adoption of beliefs that have no rational basis. In attempting to confirm their beliefs, the group tends to identify their critics as enemies.[61]
Assertion of claims of a conspiracy on the part of the scientific community to suppress the results[Note 7]
Attacking the motives or character of anyone who questions the claims (see Ad hominem fallacy)[61][Note 8]

Use of misleading language[edit]

Creating scientific-sounding terms to persuade nonexperts to believe statements that may be false or meaningless: For example, a long-standing hoax refers to water by the rarely used formal name "dihydrogen monoxide" and describes it as the main constituent in most poisonous solutions to show how easily the general public can be misled.
Using established terms in idiosyncratic ways, thereby demonstrating unfamiliarity with mainstream work in the discipline

Prevalence of pseudoscientific beliefs in the United States[edit]
In his book The Demon-Haunted World Carl Sagan discusses the government of China and the Chinese Communist Party's concern about Western pseudoscience developments and certain ancient Chinese practices in China. He sees pseudoscience occurring in the United States as part of a worldwide trend and suggests its causes, dangers, diagnosis and treatment may be universal.[62]
The National Science Foundation stated that pseudoscientific beliefs in the U.S. became more widespread during the 1990s, peaked about 2001, and then decreased slightly since with pseudoscientific beliefs remaining common. According to the NSF report, there is a lack of knowledge of pseudoscientific issues in society and pseudoscientific practices are commonly followed.[63] Surveys indicate about a third of all adult Americans consider astrology to be scientific.[64][65][66]
A large percentage of the United States population lacks scientific literacy, not adequately understanding scientific principles and method.[Note 9][Note 10][69][Note 11] In the Journal of College Science Teaching, Art Hobson writes, "Pseudoscientific beliefs are surprisingly widespread in our culture even among public school science teachers and newspaper editors, and are closely related to scientific illiteracy."[71] However, a 10,000 student study in the same journal concluded there was no strong correlation between science knowledge and belief in pseudoscience.[72]
Explanations[edit]
In a report Singer and Benassi (1981) wrote that pseudoscientific beliefs have their origin from at least four sources.[73]

Common cognitive errors from personal experience.
Erroneous sensationalistic mass media coverage.
Sociocultural factors.
Poor or erroneous science education.

Another American study (Eve and Dunn, 1990) supported the findings of Singer and Benassi and found pseudoscientific belief being promoted by high school life science and biology teachers.[74]
Psychology[edit]
The psychology of pseudoscience attempts to explore and analyze pseudoscientific thinking by means of thorough clarification on making the distinction of what is considered scientific vs. pseudoscientific. The human proclivity for seeking confirmation rather than refutation (confirmation bias),[75] the tendency to hold comforting beliefs, and the tendency to overgeneralize have been proposed as reasons for pseudoscientific thinking. According to Beyerstein (1991), humans are prone to associations based on resemblances only, and often prone to misattribution in cause-effect thinking.[76]
Michael Shermer's theory of belief-dependent realism is driven by the belief that the brain is essentially a "belief engine," which scans data perceived by the senses and looks for patterns and meaning. There is also the tendency for the brain to create cognitive biases, as a result of inferences and assumptions made without logic and based on instinct — usually resulting in patterns in cognition. These tendencies of patternicity and agenticity are also driven "by a meta-bias called the bias blind spot, or the tendency to recognize the power of cognitive biases in other people but to be blind to their influence on our own beliefs."[77] Lindeman states that social motives (i.e., "to comprehend self and the world, to have a sense of control over outcomes, to belong, to find the world benevolent and to maintain one's self-esteem") are often "more easily" fulfilled by pseudoscience than by scientific information. Furthermore, pseudoscientific explanations are generally not analyzed rationally, but instead experientially. Operating within a different set of rules compared to rational thinking, experiential thinking regards an explanation as valid if the explanation is "personally functional, satisfying and sufficient", offering a description of the world that may be more personal than can be provided by science and reducing the amount of potential work involved in understanding complex events and outcomes.[78]
There is a trend to believe in pseudoscience more than scientific evidence.[79] Some people believe the prevalence of pseudoscientific beliefs is due to widespread "scientific illiteracy".[80] Individuals lacking scientific literacy are more susceptible to wishful thinking, since they are likely to turn to immediate gratification powered by System 1, our default operating system which requires little to no effort. This system encourages one to accept the conclusions they believe, and reject the ones they don't. Further analysis of complex pseudoscientific phenomena require System 2, which follows rules, compares objects along multiple dimensions, and weighs options. These two systems have several other differences which are further discussed in the dual-process theory.[citation needed] The scientific and secular systems of morality and meaning are generally unsatisfying to most people. Humans are, by nature, a forward-minded species pursuing greater avenues of happiness and satisfaction, but we are all too frequently willing to grasp at unrealistic promises of a better life.[81]
Psychology has much to discuss about pseudoscience thinking, as it is the illusory perceptions of causality and effectiveness of numerous individuals that needs to be illuminated. Research suggests that illusionary thinking happens in most people when exposed to certain circumstances such as reading a book, an advertisement or the testimony of others are the basis of pseudoscience beliefs. It is assumed that illusions are not unusual, and given the right conditions, illusions are able to occur systematically even in normal emotional situations. One of the things pseudoscience believers quibble most about is that academic science usually treats them as fools. Minimizing these illusions in the real world is not simple.[82] To this aim, designing evidence-based educational programs can be effective to help people identify and reduce their own illusions.[82]
Boundaries with science[edit]
Main article: Demarcation problem
In the philosophy and history of science, Imre Lakatos stresses the social and political importance of the demarcation problem, the normative methodological problem of distinguishing between science and pseudoscience. His distinctive historical analysis of scientific methodology based on research programmes suggests: "scientists regard the successful theoretical prediction of stunning novel facts – such as the return of Halley's comet or the gravitational bending of light rays – as what demarcates good scientific theories from pseudo-scientific and degenerate theories, and in spite of all scientific theories being forever confronted by 'an ocean of counterexamples'".[5] Lakatos offers a "novel fallibilist analysis of the development of Newton's celestial dynamics, [his] favourite historical example of his methodology" and argues in light of this historical turn, that his account answers for certain inadequacies in those of Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn.[5] "Nonetheless, Lakatos did recognize the force of Kuhn's historical criticism of Popper – all important theories have been surrounded by an 'ocean of anomalies', which on a falsificationist view would require the rejection of the theory outright... Lakatos sought to reconcile the rationalism of Popperian falsificationism with what seemed to be its own refutation by history".[83]

Many philosophers have tried to solve the problem of demarcation in the following terms: a statement constitutes knowledge if sufficiently many people believe it sufficiently strongly. But the history of thought shows us that many people were totally committed to absurd beliefs. If the strengths of beliefs were a hallmark of knowledge, we should have to rank some tales about demons, angels, devils, and of heaven and hell as knowledge. Scientists, on the other hand, are very sceptical even of their best theories. Newton's is the most powerful theory science has yet produced, but Newton himself never believed that bodies attract each other at a distance. So no degree of commitment to beliefs makes them knowledge. Indeed, the hallmark of scientific behaviour is a certain scepticism even towards one's most cherished theories. Blind commitment to a theory is not an intellectual virtue: it is an intellectual crime.

Thus a statement may be pseudoscientific even if it is eminently 'plausible' and everybody believes in it, and it may be scientifically valuable even if it is unbelievable and nobody believes in it. A theory may even be of supreme scientific value even if no one understands it, let alone believes in it.[5]
— Imre Lakatos, Science and Pseudoscience

The boundary between science and pseudoscience is disputed and difficult to determine analytically, even after more than a century of study by philosophers of science and scientists, and despite some basic agreements on the fundaments of scientific method.[1][84][85] The concept of pseudoscience rests on an understanding that the scientific method has been misrepresented or misapplied with respect to a given theory, but many philosophers of science maintain that different kinds of methods are held as appropriate across different fields and different eras of human history. According to Lakatos, the typical descriptive unit of great scientific achievements is not an isolated hypothesis but "a powerful problem-solving machinery, which, with the help of sophisticated mathematical techniques, digests anomalies and even turns them into positive evidence."[5]

To Popper, pseudoscience uses induction to generate theories, and only performs experiments to seek to verify them. To Popper, falsifiability is what determines the scientific status of a theory. Taking a historical approach, Kuhn observed that scientists did not follow Popper's rule, and might ignore falsifying data, unless overwhelming. To Kuhn, puzzle-solving within a paradigm is science. Lakatos attempted to resolve this debate, by suggesting history shows that science occurs in research programmes, competing according to how progressive they are. The leading idea of a programme could evolve, driven by its heuristic to make predictions that can be supported by evidence. Feyerabend claimed that Lakatos was selective in his examples, and the whole history of science shows there is no universal rule of scientific method, and imposing one on the scientific community impedes progress.[86]
— David Newbold and Julia Roberts, "An analysis of the demarcation problem in science and its application to therapeutic touch theory" in International Journal of Nursing Practice, Vol. 13

Laudan maintained that the demarcation between science and non-science was a pseudo-problem, preferring to focus on the more general distinction between reliable and unreliable knowledge.[87]

[Feyerabend] regards Lakatos's view as being closet anarchism disguised as methodological rationalism. It should be noted that Feyerabend's claim was not that standard methodological rules should never be obeyed, but rather that sometimes progress is made by abandoning them. In the absence of a generally accepted rule, there is a need for alternative methods of persuasion. According to Feyerabend, Galileo employed stylistic and rhetorical techniques to convince his reader, while he also wrote in Italian rather than Latin and directed his arguments to those already temperamentally inclined to accept them.[83]
— Alexander Bird, "The Historical Turn in the Philosophy of Science" in Routledge Companion to the Philosophy of Science

Politics, health, and education[edit]
Political implications[edit]
The demarcation problem between science and pseudoscience brings up debate in the realms of science, philosophy and politics. Imre Lakatos, for instance, points out that the Communist Party of the Soviet Union at one point declared that Mendelian genetics was pseudoscientific and had its advocates, including well-established scientists such as Nikolai Vavilov, sent to a Gulag and that the "liberal Establishment of the West" denies freedom of speech to topics it regards as pseudoscience, particularly where they run up against social mores.[5]
It becomes pseudoscientific when science cannot be separated from ideology, scientists misrepresent scientific findings to promote or draw attention for publicity, when politicians, journalists and a nation's intellectual elite distort the facts of science for short-term political gain, or when powerful individuals of the public conflate causation and cofactors by clever wordplay. These ideas reduce the authority, value, integrity and independence of science in society.[88]
Health and education implications[edit]
Distinguishing science from pseudoscience has practical implications in the case of health care, expert testimony, environmental policies, and science education. Treatments with a patina of scientific authority which have not actually been subjected to actual scientific testing may be ineffective, expensive, and dangerous to patients, and confuse health providers, insurers, government decision makers, and the public as to what treatments are appropriate. Claims advanced by pseudoscience may result in government officials and educators making bad decisions in selecting curricula.[Note 12]
The extent to which students acquire a range of social and cognitive thinking skills related to the proper usage of science and technology determines whether they are scientifically literate. Education in the sciences encounters new dimensions with the changing landscape of science and technology, a fast-changing culture, and a knowledge-driven era. A reinvention of the school science curriculum is one that shapes students to contend with its changing influence on human welfare. Scientific literacy, which allows a person to distinguish science from pseudosciences such as astrology, is among the attributes that enable students to adapt to the changing world. Its characteristics are embedded in a curriculum where students are engaged in resolving problems, conducting investigations, or developing projects.[7]
Friedman mentions why most scientists avoid educating about pseudoscience, including that paying undue attention to pseudoscience could dignify it.[89] On the other hand, Park emphasizes how pseudoscience can be a threat to society and considers that scientists have a responsibility to teach how to distinguish science from pseudoscience.[90]
Pseudosciences such as homeopathy, even if generally benign, are used by charlatans. This poses a serious issue because it enables incompetent practitioners to administer health care. True-believing zealots may pose a more serious threat than typical con men because of their affection to homeopathy's ideology. Irrational health care is not harmless, and it is careless to create patient confidence in pseudomedicine.[91]
On December 8, 2016, Michael V. LeVine, writing in Business Insider, pointed out the dangers posed by the Natural News website: "Snake-oil salesmen have pushed false cures since the dawn of medicine, and now websites like Natural News flood social media with dangerous anti-pharmaceutical, anti-vaccination and anti-GMO pseudoscience that puts millions at risk of contracting preventable illnesses."[92]
See also[edit]
Related concepts[edit]

Antiscience
Credulity
List of topics characterized as pseudoscience
Not even wrong

Similar terms[edit]

Normative science
Pseudomathematics

Notes[edit]


^ Definition:

"A pretended or spurious science; a collection of related beliefs about the world mistakenly regarded as being based on scientific method or as having the status that scientific truths now have," Oxford English Dictionary, second edition 1989.
"Many writers on pseudoscience have emphasized that pseudoscience is non-science posing as science. The foremost modern classic on the subject (Gardner 1957) bears the title Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science. According to Brian Baigrie (1988, 438), '[w]hat is objectionable about these beliefs is that they masquerade as genuinely scientific ones.' These and many other authors assume that to be pseudoscientific, an activity or a teaching has to satisfy the following two criteria (Hansson 1996): (1) it is not scientific, and (2) its major proponents try to create the impression that it is scientific."[2]
'"claims presented so that they appear [to be] scientific even though they lack supporting evidence and plausibility"(p. 33). In contrast, science is "a set of methods designed to describe and interpret observed and inferred phenomena, past or present, and aimed at building a testable body of knowledge open to rejection or confirmation"(p. 17)'[3] (this was the definition adopted by the National Science Foundation).


^ 'A particularly radical reinterpretation of science comes from Paul Feyerabend, "the worst enemy of science"... Like Lakatos, Feyerabend was also a student under Popper. In an interview with Feyerabend in Science, [he says] "Equal weight... should be given to competing avenues of knowledge such as astrology, acupunture, and witchcraft..."'[24]
^ "We can now propose the following principle of demarcation: A theory or discipline which purports to be scientific is pseudoscientific if and only if: it has been less progressive than alternative theories over a long period of time, and faces many unsolved problems; but the community of practitioners makes little attempt to develop the theory towards solutions of the problems, shows no concern for attempts to evaluate the theory in relation to others, and is selective in considering confirmations and non confirmations."[25]
^ 'Most terms in theoretical physics, for example, do not enjoy at least some distinct connections with observables, but not of the simple sort that would permit operational definitions in terms of these observables. [..] If a restriction in favor of operational definitions were to be followed, therefore, most of theoretical physics would have to be dismissed as meaningless pseudoscience!'[44]
^ For an opposing perspective, e.g. Chapter 5 of Suppression Stories by Brian Martin (Wollongong: Fund for Intellectual Dissent, 1997), pp. 69–83.
^ Thagard (1978) writes: "We can now propose the following principle of demarcation: A theory or discipline which purports to be scientific is pseudoscientific if and only if: it has been less progressive than alternative theories over a long period of time, and faces many unsolved problems; but the community of practitioners makes little attempt to develop the theory towards solutions of the problems, shows no concern for attempts to evaluate the theory in relation to others, and is selective in considering confirmations and disconfirmations."
^ e.g. archivefreedom.org, which claims that "The list of suppressed scientists even includes Nobel Laureates!"
^ e.g. Philosophy 103: Introduction to Logic Argumentum Ad Hominem.
^ "Surveys conducted in the United States and Europe reveal that many citizens do not have a firm grasp of basic scientific facts and concepts, nor do they have an understanding of the scientific process. In addition, belief in pseudoscience (an indicator of scientific illiteracy) seems to be widespread among Americans and Europeans."[67]
^ "A new national survey commissioned by the California Academy of Sciences and conducted by Harris Interactive® reveals that the U.S. public is unable to pass even a basic scientific literacy test."[68]
^ "In a survey released earlier this year, Miller and colleagues found that about 28 percent of American adults qualified as scientifically literate, which is an increase of about 10 percent from the late 1980s and early 1990s."[70]
^ "From a practical point of view, the distinction is important for decision guidance in both private and public life. Since science is our most reliable source of knowledge in a wide variety of areas, we need to distinguish scientific knowledge from its look-alikes. Due to the high status of science in present-day society, attempts to exaggerate the scientific status of various claims, teachings, and products are common enough to make the demarcation issue serious. For example, creation science may replace evolution in studies of biology."[6]


References[edit]



^ a b c Cover, JA; Curd, M, eds. (1998), Philosophy of Science: The Central Issues, pp. 1–82 
^ a b Hansson, Sven Ove (2008), "Science and Pseudoscience", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Section 2: The "science" of pseudoscience 
^ Shermer (1997)
^ Frietsch, Ute (7 April 2015). "The boundaries of science / pseudoscience". European History Online (EGO). Retrieved 15 April 2017. 
^ a b c d e f Lakatos, Imre (1973), Science and Pseudoscience, The London School of Economics and Political Science, Dept of Philosophy, Logic and Scientific Method, (archive of transcript), archived from the original (mp3) on 25 July 2011 
^ a b c Hansson (2008), Section 1: The purpose of demarcations
^ a b Hurd, PD (June 1998). "Scientific literacy: New minds for a changing world". Science Education. 82 (3): 407–416. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1098-237X(199806)82:3<407::AID-SCE6>3.0.CO;2-G. (subscription required)
^ "pseudo", The Free Dictionary, Farlex, Inc., 2015 
^ "pseudo", Online Etymology Dictionary, Douglas Harper, 2015 
^ "pseudoscience". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ Andrews & Henry (1796), p. 87
^ a b Magendie, F (1843). An Elementary Treatise on Human Physiology. John Revere (5th ed.). New York: Harper. p. 150.  Magendie refers to phrenology as "a pseudo-science of the present day" (note the hyphen).
^ Still, A; Dryden, W (2004). "The Social Psychology of "Pseudoscience": A Brief History". J Theory Soc Behav. 34 (3): 265–90. doi:10.1111/j.0021-8308.2004.00248.x. 
^ Bowler, Peter J. (2003). Evolution: The History of an Idea (3rd ed.). University of California Press. p. 128. ISBN 0-520-23693-9. 
^ e.g. Gauch (2003), pp. 3–5 ff
^ Gauch (2003), pp. 191 ff, especially Chapter 6, "Probability", and Chapter 7, "inductive Logic and Statistics"
^ a b c Popper, Karl (1959). The Logic of Scientific Discovery. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-27844-9.  The German version is currently in print by Mohr Siebeck (ISBN 3-16-148410-X).
^ Popper (1963), pp. 43–86
^ Sagan (1994), p. 171
^ Casti, John L. (1990). Paradigms lost : tackling the unanswered mysteries of modern science (1st ed.). New York: Avon Books. pp. 51–52. ISBN 0-380-71165-6. 
^ Thagard (1978), pp. 223 ff
^ Bunge (1983)
^ Feyerabend, P. (1975). "Table of contents and final chapter". Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge. ISBN 0-86091-646-4. 
^ Gauch (2003), p. 88
^ a b Thagard (1978), pp. 227–228
^ Laudan, L. (1996). "The demise of the demarcation problem". In Ruse, Michael. But Is It Science?: The Philosophical Question in the Creation/Evolution Controversy. pp. 337–350. 
^ McNally, RJ (2003). "Is the pseudoscience concept useful for clinical psychology?". The Scientific Review of Mental Health Practice. 2 (2). 
^ Funtowicz, S. and Ravetz, J., 1990. Uncertainty and quality in science for policy. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
^ "Pseudoscientific". Oxford American Dictionary. Oxford English Dictionary. Pseudoscientific – pretending to be scientific, falsely represented as being scientific 
^ "Pseudoscience". The Skeptic's Dictionary. 
^ a b c d e f g h i Popper, Karl (1963). Conjectures and Refutations (PDF). 
^ a b Thagard (1978)
^ Gould, Stephen Jay (March 1997). "Nonoverlapping magisteria". Natural History. No. 106. pp. 16–22. Archived from the original on January 4, 2017. 
^ Sager (2008), p. 10
^ "Royal Society statement on evolution, creationism and intelligent design" (Press release). London, UK: Royal Society. 11 April 2006. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. 
^ Pendle, George. "Popular Science Feature – When Science Fiction is Science Fact". 
^ Voss, David (May 1999). "'New Physics' Finds a Haven at the Patent Office". Science. 284 (5418): 1252–1254. doi:10.1126/science.284.5418.1252. 
^ Black, Edwin (2004). War Against the Weak. Thunder's Mouth Press. p. 370. ISBN 978-1-56858-321-1. 
^ Worrall, Simon (24 July 2016). "The Gene: Science's Most Dangerous Idea". National Geographic. 
^ White, Susan (June 28, 2017). "LibGuides: The Sociology of Science and Technology: Pseudoscience". Library of University of Princeton. Retrieved 12 September 2017. 
^ Gallup Poll: Belief in paranormal phenomena: 1990, 2001, and 2005. Gallup Polls, Gallup's original report.
^ a b c National Science Board (2006), "Chapter 7: Science and Technology Public Attitudes and Understanding: Public Knowledge About S&T", Science and Engineering Indicators 2006, Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation, archived from the original on 18 August 2015  Two volumes Section: Belief in Pseudoscience (see Footnote 29).
^ e.g. Gauch (2003), pp. 211 ff (Probability, "Common Blunders")
^ Churchland, Paul Montgomery (1999). Matter and Consciousness: A Contemporary Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind. MIT Press. p. 90. ISBN 9780262530743. 
^ Gauch (2003), pp. 269 ff, "Parsimony and Efficiency"
^ a b Hines, Terence (1988). Pseudoscience and the Paranormal: A Critical Examination of the Evidence. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-419-2. 
^ Donald E. Simanek, What is science? What is pseudoscience?
^ a b Lakatos, I (1970). "Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes". In Lakatos, I; Musgrave, A. Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge. pp. 91–195. 
^ e.g. Gauch (2003), pp. 178 ff (Deductive Logic, "Fallacies"), and at 211 ff (Probability, "Common Blunders")
^ Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy Vol 3, "Fallacies" 174 ff, esp. section on "Ignoratio elenchi"
^ Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy Vol 3, "Fallacies" 174 ff esp. 177–178
^ Bunge (1983), p. 381
^ Eileen Gambrill (1 May 2012). Critical Thinking in Clinical Practice: Improving the Quality of Judgments and Decisions (3rd ed.). John Wiley & Sons. p. 109. ISBN 978-0-470-90438-1. 
^ a b Lilienfeld SO (2004) Science and Pseudoscience in Clinical Psychology Guildford Press (2004) ISBN 1-59385-070-0
^ a b Ruscio (2001)
^ Gitanjali, B (2001). "Peer review – process, perspectives and the path ahead" (PDF). Journal of postgraduate medicine. 47 (3): 210–4. PMID 11832629. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-06-23. 
^ a b Gauch (2003), pp. 124 ff
^ Sagan (1994), p. 210
^ Thagard (1978), pp. 223 ff
^ Ruscio (2001), p. 120
^ a b Devilly (2005)
^ Sagan (1994), pp. 1–22
^ National Science Board (2006), Volume 1, NSB-06-01, NSB 06-01A
^ National Science Board (2006), Volume 2, pp. A7-17 archived from the original Archived 2009-05-12 at the Wayback Machine. 11 February 2016.
^ FOX News (June 18, 2004). "Poll: More Believe In God Than Heaven". Fox News Channel. Retrieved Apr 26, 2009. 
^ Taylor, Humphrey (February 26, 2003). "Harris Poll: The Religious and Other Beliefs of Americans 2003". Retrieved Apr 26, 2009. 
^ National Science Board (2004), "Chapter 7 Science and Technology: Public Attitudes and Understanding: Public Knowledge About S&T", Science and Engineering Indicators 2004, National Science Foundation, archived from the original on 18 August 2015, retrieved August 28, 2013 
^ Stone, Stephanie; Ng, Andrew. "American adults flunk basic science: National survey shows only one-in-five adults can answer three science questions correctly" (Press release). California Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on October 18, 2013. 
^ Raloff, Janet (21 February 2010). "Science literacy: U.S. college courses really count". Science News. Society for Science & the Public. Retrieved 13 October 2017. 
^ Oswald, Tom (15 November 2007). "MSU prof: Lack of science knowledge hurting democratic process". MSUToday. Michigan State University. Retrieved August 28, 2013. 
^ Hobson, Art (2011). "Teaching relevant science for scientific literacy" (PDF). Journal of College Science Teaching. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-08-24. 
^ Impey, C; Buxner, S; et al. (2011). "A twenty-year survey of science literacy among college undergraduates" (PDF). Journal of College Science Teaching. 40 (1): 31–37. 
^ Singer, Barry; Benassi, Victor A. (January–February 1981). "Occult beliefs: Media distortions, social uncertainty, and deficiencies of human reasoning seem to be at the basis of occult beliefs". American Scientist. Vol. 69 no. 1. pp. 49–55. JSTOR 27850247. 
^ Eve, Raymond A.; Dunn, Dana (January 1990). "Psychic powers, astrology & creationism in the classroom? Evidence of pseudoscientific beliefs among high school biology & life science teachers" (PDF). The American Biology Teacher. Vol. 52 no. 1. pp. 10–21. doi:10.2307/4449018. 
^ Devilly (2005), p. 439
^ Beyerstein, B; Hadaway, P (1991). "On avoiding folly". Journal of Drug Issues. 20 (4): 689–700. doi:10.1177/002204269002000418. 
^ Shermer, Michael (July 2011). "Understanding the believing brain: Why science is the only way out of belief-dependent realism". Scientific American. Retrieved 14 August 2016. 
^ Lindeman M (December 1998). "Motivation, cognition and pseudoscience". Scandinavian Journal of Psychology. 39 (4): 257–65. doi:10.1111/1467-9450.00085. PMID 9883101. 
^ Matute, Helena; Blanco, Fernando; et al. (2015). "Illusions of causality: How they bias our everyday thinking and how they could be reduced". Frontiers in Psychology. 6: 888. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00888. ISSN 1664-1078. PMC 4488611 . PMID 26191014. 
^ Lack, Caleb (10 October 2013). "What does Scientific Literacy look like in the 21st Century?". Great Plains Skeptic. Skeptic Ink Network. Retrieved 9 April 2014. 
^ Shermer, Michael; Gould, Steven J. (2002). Why People Believe Weird Things: Pseudoscience, Superstition, and Other Confusions of Our Time. New York: Holt Paperbacks. ISBN 0-8050-7089-3. 
^ a b Matute, H; Yarritu, I; Vadillo, MA (2011). "Illusions of causality at the heart of pseudoscience". Br J Psychol. 102 (3): 392–405. doi:10.1348/000712610X532210. PMID 21751996. 
^ a b Bird, Alexander (2008). "The Historical Turn in the Philosophy of Science". In Psillos, Stathis; Curd, Martin. Routledge Companion to the Philosophy of Science (pdf). Abingdon: Routledge. pp. 9, 14. 
^ Gauch (2003), pp. 3–7
^ Gordin, Michael D. (2015). "That a clear line of demarcation has separated science from pseudoscience". In Numbers, Ronald L.; Kampourakis, Kostas. Newton's Apple and Other Myths about Science. Harvard University Press. pp. 219–225. ISBN 9780674915473. 
^ Newbold, D; Roberts, J (2007). "An analysis of the demarcation problem in science and its application to therapeutic touch theory". Int J Nurs Pract. 13 (6): 324–30. doi:10.1111/j.1440-172X.2007.00646.x. PMID 18021160. 
^ Laudan, Larry (1983). "The Demise of the Demarcation Problem". In Cohen, R.S.; Laudan, L. Physics, Philosophy and Psychoanalysis: Essays in Honor of Adolf Grünbaum. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. 76. Dordrecht: D. Reidel. pp. 111–127. ISBN 90-277-1533-5. 
^ Makgoba MW (May 2002). "Politics, the media and science in HIV/AIDS: the peril of pseudoscience". Vaccine. 20 (15): 1899–904. doi:10.1016/S0264-410X(02)00063-4. PMID 11983241. 
^ Efthimiou (2006), p. 4 — Efthimiou quoting Friedman: "We could dignify pseudoscience by mentioning it at all".
^ Efthimiou (2006), p. 4 — Efthimiou quoting Park: "The more serious threat is to the public, which is not often in a position to judge which claims are real and which are voodoo. ... Those who are fortunate enough to have chosen science as a career have an obligation to inform the public about voodoo science".
^ The National Council Against Health Fraud (1994). "NCAHF Position Paper on Homeopathy". 
^ LeVine, Michael (December 8, 2016), What scientists can teach us about fake news and disinformation, Business Insider, retrieved December 15, 2016 



Bibliography[edit]


Andrews, James Pettit; Henry, Robert (1796). History of Great Britain, from the death of Henry VIII to the accession of James VI of Scotland to the Crown of England. II. London: T. Cadell and W. Davies. 
Bunge, Mario (1983). "Demarcating science from pseudoscience". Fundamenta Scientiae. 3: 369–388. 
Devilly, G. J. (2005). "Power therapies and possible threats to the science of psychology and psychiatry". Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry. 39 (6): 437–445. doi:10.1080/j.1440-1614.2005.01601.x. 
Gauch, Hugh G. (2003). Scientific Method in Practice. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521017084. LCCN 2002022271. 
C.J. Efthimiou; R. Llewellyn (2006). "Is Pseudoscience the Solution to Science Literacy?". arXiv:physics/0608061  [physics.ed-ph]. 
Ruscio, J. (2001). Clear Thinking with Psychology: Separating Sense from Nonsense. Pacific Grove, CA: Wadsworth. 
Sager, Carrie, ed. (2008). "Voices for Evolution" (PDF). National Center for Science Education. Retrieved 2010-05-21. 
Sagan, Carl (1994). The Demon-Haunted World. New York, NY: Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-40946-9. 
Shermer, Michael (1997). Why People Believe Weird Things: Pseudoscience, Superstition, and Other Confusions of Our Time. New York: W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-3090-1. 
Thagard, Paul R. (1978). Why astrology is a pseudoscience. PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association. 1978. pp. 223–234. JSTOR 192639. 


Further reading[edit]


Pigliucci, Massimo; Boudry, Maarten (2013). Philosophy of Pseudoscience: Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226051963. 
Shermer, Michael (September 2011). "What Is Pseudoscience?: Distinguishing between science and pseudoscience is problematic". Scientific American: 92. 
Hansson, S. O. (September 3, 2008). "Science and Pseudo-Science". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Schadewald Robert J. (2008). Worlds of Their Own – A Brief History of Misguided Ideas: Creationism, Flat-Earthism, Energy Scams, and the Velikovsky Affair. Xlibris. ISBN 978-1-4363-0435-1. [self-published source]
Shermer, Michael; Gould, Steven J. (2002). Why People Believe Weird Things: Pseudoscience, Superstition, and Other Confusions of Our Time. New York: Holt Paperbacks. ISBN 0-8050-7089-3. 
Derksen A. A. (2001). "The seven strategies of the sophisticated pseudo-scientist: a look into Freud's rhetorical toolbox". J Gen Phil Sci. 32 (2): 329–350. doi:10.1023/A:1013100717113. 
Wilson F. (2000). The Logic and Methodology of Science and Pseudoscience. Canadian Scholars Press. ISBN 1-55130-175-X. 
Bauer Henry H. (2000). Science or Pseudoscience: Magnetic Healing, Psychic Phenomena, and Other Heterodoxies. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02601-0. 
Charpak, Georges; Broch, Henri; Translated from the French by Bart K. Holland (2004). Debunked: Esp, telekinesis, other pseudoscience. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-7867-5  Originally published 2002 by Odile Jacob as Devenez sorciers, devenez savants 
Cioffi, Frank (1998). Freud and the Question of Pseudoscience. Chicaco and La Salle, Illinois: Open Court, division of Carus. p. 314. ISBN 0-8126-9385-X. 
Hansson, Sven Ove (1996). "Defining pseudoscience". Philosophia naturalis. 33: 169–176. 
Pratkanis, Anthony R (July–August 1995). "How to Sell a Pseudoscience". Skeptical Inquirer. 19 (4): 19–25. Archived from the original on 2006-12-11. 
Wolpert, Lewis (1994). The Unnatural Nature of Science. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-92980-2  Paperback ISBN 0-6749-2981-0  First published 1992 by Faber & Faber, London.
Martin M (1994). "Pseudoscience, the paranormal, and science education". Science & Education. 3 (4): 1573–901. Bibcode:1994Sc&Ed...3..357M. doi:10.1007/BF00488452. 
Derksen AA (1993). "The seven sins of pseudo-science". J Gen Phil Sci. 24: 17–42. doi:10.1007/BF00769513. 
Gardner M (1990). Science – Good, Bad and Bogus. Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-573-3. 

Little, John (October 29, 1981). "Review and useful overview of Gardner's book". New Scientist. 92 (1277): 320. 


Gardner, Martin (1957). Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science (2nd, revised & expanded ed.). Mineola, New York: Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-20394-8.  Originally published 1952 by G.P. Putnam's Sons, under the title In the Name of Science.
Gardner, Martin (2000). Did Adam and Eve Have Navels?: Debunking Pseudoscience. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 9780393322385. 


External links[edit]



Look up pseudoscience in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Library resources about
Pseudoscience





Resources in your library





Skeptic Dictionary: Pseudoscience – Robert Todd Carroll, PhD
Distinguishing Science from Pseudoscience – Rory Coker, PhD
Pseudoscience. What is it? How can I recognize it? – Stephen Lower
Science and Pseudoscience – transcript and broadcast of talk by Imre Lakatos
Science, Pseudoscience, and Irrationalism – Steven Dutch
Skeptic Dictionary: Pseudoscientific topics and discussion – Robert Todd Carroll
Why Is Pseudoscience Dangerous? – Edward Kruglyakov
Baloney Detection Kit on YouTube (10 questions we should ask when encountering a pseudoscience claim)







v
t
e


Pseudoscience



Terminology



Cargo cult science
Charlatan
Crank
Fringe theory

Fringe science
Pseudoarchaeology
Pseudohistory


Junk science
Paranormal
Pathological science
Quackery
Snake oil
Superseded scientific theories
True-believer syndrome
Voodoo science





Examples



2012 phenomenon
Acupuncture
Alchemy
Alternative medicine
Ancient astronauts
Anthroposophic medicine
Applied kinesiology
Aquatic ape hypothesis
Astrology
Bates method
Biodynamic agriculture
Bloodletting
Body memory
Catastrophism
Chiropractic
Chromotherapy
Conspiracy theory

9/11 conspiracy theories
Chemtrail conspiracy theory
Climate change denial
Moon landing conspiracy theories


Conversion therapy
Creation science
Crystal healing
Cryptozoology
Detoxification

Colon cleansing


Dianetics
Doktor Koster's Antigaspills
Dowsing
Ear candling
Electromagnetic hypersensitivity
Electronic Voice Phenomenon
Feng shui
Flat Earth Theory
Germ theory denialism
Graphology
HIV/AIDS denialism
Hollow Earth theory
Homeopathy
Humorism
Indigo children
Intelligent design
Japhetic theory
Levitation
Lunar effect
Lysenkoism
Magnet therapy
Mediumship
Melanin theory
Naturopathy
Nazi archaeology
Nibiru cataclysm
Numerology
Perpetual motion
Orgone
Phrenology
Polygraph
Primal therapy
Pseudoarchaeology
Pseudohistory

Genocide denial
Historical negationism
Holocaust denial


Pseudoscientific metrology
Psychohistory
Quantum mysticism
Recovered-memory therapy
Reiki
Scientific racism

Aryan race
Melanin theory


Trepanning
Ufology
Voice stress analysis





Related topics



Bourgeois pseudoscience
Suppressed research in the Soviet Union





Resources



Committee for Skeptical Inquiry
Cults of Unreason
Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience
Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science
Quackwatch
JREF
The Psychology of the Occult
The Ragged Edge of Science
The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience
Skeptical Inquirer
The Skeptic's Dictionary






List of topics characterized as pseudoscience










v
t
e


Philosophy of science







Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science





Metatheory
of science



Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
Deductive-nomological model
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism
Epistemological anarchism
Evolutionism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Instrumentalism
Pragmatism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism / reductionism / determinism
Rationalism / empiricism
Received view / semantic view of theories
Scientific realism / anti-realism
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism





Philosophy of



Physics

thermal and statistical
Motion


Chemistry
Biology
Environment
Geography
Social science
Technology

Engineering
Artificial intelligence
Computer science


Information
Mind
Psychiatry
Psychology
Perception
Space and time





Related topics



Alchemy
Criticism of science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
History and philosophy of science
History of science
History of evolutionary thought
Logic
Metaphysics
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Sociology of scientific ignorance













Philosophers of science by era







Ancient



Plato
Aristotle
Stoicism
Epicureans





Medieval



Averroes
Avicenna
Roger Bacon
William of Ockham
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Robert Kilwardby





Early modern



Francis Bacon
Thomas Hobbes
René Descartes
Galileo Galilei
Pierre Gassendi
Isaac Newton
David Hume





Classical modern



Immanuel Kant
Friedrich Schelling
William Whewell
Auguste Comte
John Stuart Mill
Herbert Spencer
Wilhelm Wundt
Charles Sanders Peirce
Wilhelm Windelband
Henri Poincaré
Pierre Duhem
Rudolf Steiner
Karl Pearson





Late modern



Alfred North Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Albert Einstein
Otto Neurath
C. D. Broad
Michael Polanyi
Hans Reichenbach
Rudolf Carnap
Karl Popper
Carl Gustav Hempel
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Kuhn
Imre Lakatos
Paul Feyerabend
Jürgen Habermas
Ian Hacking
Bas van Fraassen
Larry Laudan
Daniel Dennett














Portal
Category












v
t
e


Positivism







Perspectives



Antihumanism
Empiricism
Rationalism
Scientism





Declinations



Legal positivism
Logical positivism / analytic philosophy
Positivist school
Postpositivism
Sociological positivism
Machian positivism (empiriocriticism)
Rankean historical positivism
Polish positivism
Russian positivism (empiriomonism)





Principal concepts



Consilience
Demarcation
Evidence
Induction
Justificationism
Pseudoscience
Critique of metaphysics
Unity of science
Verificationism





Antitheses



Antipositivism
Confirmation holism
Critical theory
Falsifiability
Geisteswissenschaft
Hermeneutics
Historicism
Historism
Human science
Humanities
Problem of induction
Reflectivism





Related paradigm shifts
in the history of science



Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s)
Heisenberg uncertainty principle (1927)





Related topics



Behavioralism
Critical rationalism
Criticism of science
Epistemological idealism
Epistemology
Holism in anthropology
Instrumentalism
Modernism
Naturalism in literature
Nomothetic–idiographic distinction
Objectivity in science
Operationalism
Phenomenalism
Philosophy of science

Deductive-nomological model
Ramsey sentence
Sense-data theory


Qualitative research
Relationship between religion and science
Sociology
Social science (Philosophy)
Structural functionalism
Structuralism
Structuration theory













Positivist-related debate







Method



1890s Methodenstreit (economics)
1909–1959 Werturteilsstreit
1960s Positivismusstreit
1980s Fourth Great Debate in international relations
1990s Science Wars





Contributions



1830 The Course in Positive Philosophy
1848 A General View of Positivism
1869 Critical History of Philosophy
1879 Idealism and Positivism
1886 The Analysis of Sensations
1927 The Logic of Modern Physics
1936 Language, Truth, and Logic
1959 The Two Cultures
2001 The Universe in a Nutshell





Proponents



Richard Avenarius
A. J. Ayer
Auguste Comte
Eugen Dühring
Émile Durkheim
Ernst Laas
Ernst Mach
Berlin Circle
Vienna Circle





Criticism



1909 Materialism and Empiriocriticism
1923 History and Class Consciousness
1934 The Logic of Scientific Discovery
1936 The Poverty of Historicism
1942 World Hypotheses
1951 Two Dogmas of Empiricism
1960 Truth and Method
1962 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
1963 Conjectures and Refutations
1964 One-Dimensional Man
1968 Knowledge and Human Interests
1978 The Poverty of Theory
1980 The Scientific Image
1986 The Rhetoric of Economics





Critics



Theodor W. Adorno
Gaston Bachelard
Mario Bunge
Wilhelm Dilthey
Paul Feyerabend
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Thomas Kuhn
György Lukács
Karl Popper
Willard Van Orman Quine
Max Weber





Concepts in contention



Knowledge
Phronesis
Truth
Verstehen












Category










v
t
e


Science and technology studies



Economics



Economics of science
Economics of scientific knowledge





History



History and philosophy of science
History of science

and technology


History of technology





Philosophy



Antipositivism
Empiricism
Fuzzy logic
Philosophy of science
Philosophy of social science
Philosophy of technology
Positivism
Postpositivism
Social constructivism
Social epistemology





Sociology



Actor–network theory
Social

construction of technology
shaping of technology


Sociology of knowledge

scientific


Sociology of scientific ignorance
Sociology of the history of science
Sociotechnology
Strong programme





Science
studies



Antiscience
Bibliometrics
Boundary-work
Consilience
Demarcation problem
Double hermeneutic
Mapping controversies
Paradigm shift
Pseudoscience
Science

citizen
communication
education
normal
post-normal
rhetoric
wars


Scientific

method
consensus
controversy
enterprise
misconduct


Scientometrics
Team science
Traditional knowledge

ecological


Unity of science
Women in science

STEM







Technology
studies



Coproduction
Cyborg anthropology
Digital anthropology
Dematerialization
Early adopter
Hype cycle
Innovation

diffusion
disruptive
linear model
system
user


Leapfrogging
Normalization process theory
Reverse salient
Skunkworks project
Sociotechnical system
Technical change
Technoscience

feminist


Technological

change
convergence
determinism
revolution
transitions


Technology

and society
critique of
dynamics
theories of
transfer


Engineering studies
Women in engineering





Policy



Digital divide
Evidence-based policy
Factor 10
Science policy

history of
science of


Politicization of science
Regulation of science
Research ethics
Socio-scientific issues
Technology assessment
Technology policy
Transition management








 Portals

Science
History of science
Technology
Sociology


 Category

Associations
Journals
Scholars











Authority control



GND: 4278343-4
NDL: 001132738











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pseudoscience&oldid=817709974"					Categories: PseudoscienceFringe theoryPejorativesTypes of scientific fallacyHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles needing cleanup from December 2016All pages needing cleanupWikipedia list cleanup from December 2016Articles with unsourced statements from April 2014Accuracy disputes from December 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers