



Newspaper headlines from around the world about polio vaccine tests (13 April 1955)


Public health is "the science and art of preventing disease, prolonging life and promoting human health through organized efforts and informed choices of society, organizations, public and private, communities and individuals."[1] Analyzing the health of a population and the threats is the basis for public health.[2] The "public" in question can be as small as a handful of people, an entire village or it can be as large as several continents, in the case of a pandemic. "Health" takes into account physical, mental and social well-being. It is not merely the absence of disease or infirmity, according to the World Health Organization.[3] Public health is interdisciplinary. For example, epidemiology, biostatistics and health services are all relevant. Environmental health, community health, behavioral health, health economics, public policy, mental health and occupational safety are other important subfields.
Public health aims to improve the quality of life through prevention and treatment of disease, including mental health. This is done through surveillance of cases and health indicators, and through promotion of healthy behaviors. Common public health initiatives include promoting handwashing and breastfeeding, delivery of vaccinations, suicide prevention and distribution of condoms to control the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
Modern public health practice requires multidisciplinary teams of public health workers and professionals. Teams might includeepidemiologists, biostatisticians, medical assistants, public health nurses, midwives or medical microbiologists. Depending on the need environmental health officers or public health inspectors, bioethicists; and even veterinarians might be called on.[4]
Access to health care and public health initiatives are difficult challenges in developing nations. Public health infrastructures are still forming.



Contents


1 Background
2 Current practice

2.1 Public health programs
2.2 Applications in health care
2.3 Implementing effective improvement strategies
2.4 Public Health 2.0


3 Developing countries

3.1 Sustainable Development Goals


4 Education and training

4.1 Schools of public health: a US perspective
4.2 Degrees in public health


5 History

5.1 Early history
5.2 Modern public health

5.2.1 Public health legislation
5.2.2 Epidemiology
5.2.3 Disease control


5.3 Country examples

5.3.1 France
5.3.2 United States
5.3.3 Mexico
5.3.4 Cuba
5.3.5 Colombia and Bolivia




6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Background[edit]
The focus of a public health intervention is to prevent and manage diseases, injuries and other health conditions through surveillance of cases and the promotion of healthy behaviors, communities and environments. Many diseases are preventable through simple, nonmedical methods. For example, research has shown that the simple act of handwashing with soap can prevent the spread of many contagious diseases.[5] In other cases, treating a disease or controlling a pathogen can be vital to preventing its spread to others, either during an outbreak of infectious disease or through contamination of food or water supplies. Public health communications programs, vaccination programs and distribution of condoms are examples of common preventive public health measures. Measures such as these have contributed greatly to the health of populations and increases in life expectancy.
Public health plays an important role in disease prevention efforts in both the developing world and in developed countries, through local health systems and non-governmental organizations. The World Health Organization (WHO) is the international agency that coordinates and acts on global public health issues. Most countries have their own government public health agencies, sometimes known as ministries of health, to respond to domestic health issues. For example, in the United States, the front line of public health initiatives are state and local health departments. The United States Public Health Service (PHS), led by the Surgeon General of the United States, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, headquartered in Atlanta, are involved with several international health activities, in addition to their national duties. In Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada is the national agency responsible for public health, emergency preparedness and response, and infectious and chronic disease control and prevention. The Public health system in India is managed by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare of the government of India with state-owned health care facilities.
Current practice[edit]
Public health programs[edit]



There's a push and pull, as you know, between cheap alternatives for industry and public health concerns...We're always looking at retrospectively what the data shows...Unfortunately, for example, take tobacco: It took 50, 60 years of research before policy catches up with what the science is showing— Laura Anderko, professor at Georgetown University and director of the Mid-Atlantic Center for Children's Health and the Environment commenting on public health practices in response to proposal to ban chlorpyrifos pesticide.[6]



Most governments recognize the importance of public health programs in reducing the incidence of disease, disability, and the effects of aging and other physical and mental health conditions, although public health generally receives significantly less government funding compared with medicine.[7] Public health programs providing vaccinations have made strides in promoting health, including the eradication of smallpox, a disease that plagued humanity for thousands of years.




Three former directors of the Global Smallpox Eradication Programme read the news that smallpox had been globally eradicated, 1980


The World Health Organization (WHO) identifies core functions of public health programs including:[8]

providing leadership on matters critical to health and engaging in partnerships where joint action is needed;
shaping a research agenda and stimulating the generation, translation and dissemination of valuable knowledge;
setting norms and standards and promoting and monitoring their implementation;
articulating ethical and evidence-based policy options;
monitoring the health situation and assessing health trends.

In particular, public health surveillance programs can:[9]

serve as an early warning system for impending public health emergencies;
document the impact of an intervention, or track progress towards specified goals; and
monitor and clarify the epidemiology of health problems, allow priorities to be set, and inform health policy and strategies.
diagnose, investigate, and monitor health problems and health hazards of the community

Public health surveillance has led to the identification and prioritization of many public health issues facing the world today, including HIV/AIDS, diabetes, waterborne diseases, zoonotic diseases, and antibiotic resistance leading to the reemergence of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis. Antibiotic resistance, also known as drug resistance, was the theme of World Health Day 2011. Although the prioritization of pressing public health issues is important, Laurie Garrett argues that there are following consequences.[10] When foreign aid is funnelled into disease-specific programs, the importance of public health in general is disregarded. This public health problem of stovepiping is thought to create a lack of funds to combat other existing diseases in a given country.
For example, the WHO reports that at least 220 million people worldwide suffer from diabetes. Its incidence is increasing rapidly, and it is projected that the number of diabetes deaths will double by the year 2030.[11] In a June 2010 editorial in the medical journal The Lancet, the authors opined that "The fact that type 2 diabetes, a largely preventable disorder, has reached epidemic proportion is a public health humiliation."[12] The risk of type 2 diabetes is closely linked with the growing problem of obesity. The WHO’s latest estimates as of June 2016 highlighted that globally approximately 1.9 billion adults were overweight in 2014, and 41 million children under the age of five were overweight in 2014.[13] The United States is the leading country with 30.6% of its population being obese. Mexico follows behind with 24.2% and the United Kingdom with 23%. Once considered a problem in high-income countries, it is now on the rise in low-income countries, especially in urban settings. Many public health programs are increasingly dedicating attention and resources to the issue of obesity, with objectives to address the underlying causes including healthy diet and physical exercise.
Some programs and policies associated with public health promotion and prevention can be controversial. One such example is programs focusing on the prevention of HIV transmission through safe sex campaigns and needle-exchange programmes. Another is the control of tobacco smoking. Changing smoking behavior requires long-term strategies, unlike the fight against communicable diseases, which usually takes a shorter period for effects to be observed. Many nations have implemented major initiatives to cut smoking, such as increased taxation and bans on smoking in some or all public places. Proponents[who?] argue by presenting evidence that smoking is one of the major killers, and that therefore governments have a duty to reduce the death rate, both through limiting passive (second-hand) smoking and by providing fewer opportunities for people to smoke. Opponents[who?] say that this undermines individual freedom and personal responsibility, and worry that the state may be emboldened to remove more and more choice in the name of better population health overall.
Simultaneously, while communicable diseases have historically ranged uppermost as a global health priority, non-communicable diseases and the underlying behavior-related risk factors have been at the bottom. This is changing however, as illustrated by the United Nations hosting its first General Assembly Special Summit on the issue of non-communicable diseases in September 2011.[14]
Many health problems are due to maladaptive personal behaviors. From an evolutionary psychology perspective, over consumption of novel substances that are harmful is due to the activation of an evolved reward system for substances such as drugs, tobacco, alcohol, refined salt, fat, and carbohydrates. New technologies such as modern transportation also cause reduced physical activity. Research has found that behavior is more effectively changed by taking evolutionary motivations into consideration instead of only presenting information about health effects. Thus, the increased use of soap and hand-washing to prevent diarrhea is much more effectively promoted if its lack of use is associated with the emotion of disgust. Disgust is an evolved system for avoiding contact with substances that spread infectious diseases. Examples might include films that show how fecal matter contaminates food. The marketing industry has long known the importance of associating products with high status and attractiveness to others. Conversely, it has been argued that emphasizing the harmful and undesirable effects of tobacco smoking on other persons and imposing smoking bans in public places have been particularly effective in reducing tobacco smoking.[15]
Applications in health care[edit]
As well as seeking to improve population health through the implementation of specific population-level interventions, public health contributes to medical care by identifying and assessing population needs for health care services, including:[16][17][18][19]

Assessing current services and evaluating whether they are meeting the objectives of the health care system
Ascertaining requirements as expressed by health professionals, the public and other stakeholders
Identifying the most appropriate interventions
Considering the effect on resources for proposed interventions and assessing their cost-effectiveness
Supporting decision making in health care and planning health services including any necessary changes.
Informing, educating, and empowering people about health issues

Implementing effective improvement strategies[edit]
To improve public health, one important strategy is to promote modern medicine and scientific neutrality to drive the public health policy and campaign, which is recommended by Armanda Solorzana, through a case study of the Rockefeller Foundation's hookworm campaign in Mexico in the 1920s. Soloranza argues that public health policy can't concern only politics or economics. Political concerns can lead government officials to hide the real numbers of people affected by disease in their regions, such as upcoming elections. Therefore, scientific neutrality in making public health policy is critical; it can ensure treatment needs are met regardless of political and economic conditions.[20]
The history of public health care clearly shows the global effort to improve health care for all.[citation needed] However, in modern-day medicine, real, measurable change has not been clearly seen, and critics argue that this lack of improvement is due to ineffective methods that are being implemented. As argued by Paul E. Farmer, structural interventions could possibly have a large impact, and yet there are numerous problems as to why this strategy has yet to be incorporated into the health system. One of the main reasons that he suggests could be the fact that physicians are not properly trained to carry out structural interventions, meaning that the ground level health care professionals cannot implement these improvements. While structural interventions can not be the only area for improvement, the lack of coordination between socioeconomic factors and health care for the poor could be counterproductive, and end up causing greater inequity between the health care services received by the rich and by the poor. Unless health care is no longer treated as a commodity, global public health can ultimately not be achieved.[citation needed] This being the case, without changing the way in which health care is delivered to those who have less access to it, the universal goal of public health care cannot be achieved.[21]
Public Health 2.0[edit]
Public Health 2.0 is a movement within public health that aims to make the field more accessible to the general public and more user-driven. The term is used in three senses. In the first sense, "Public Health 2.0" is similar to "Health 2.0" and describes the ways in which traditional public health practitioners and institutions are reaching out (or could reach out) to the public through social media and health blogs.[22][23]
In the second sense, "Public Health 2.0" describes public health research that uses data gathered from social networking sites, search engine queries, cell phones, or other technologies.[24] A recent example is the proposal of statistical framework that utilizes online user-generated content (from social media or search engine queries) to estimate the impact of an influenza vaccination campaign in the UK.[25]
In the third sense, "Public Health 2.0" is used to describe public health activities that are completely user-driven.[26] An example is the collection and sharing of information about environmental radiation levels after the March 2011 tsunami in Japan.[27] In all cases, Public Health 2.0 draws on ideas from Web 2.0, such as crowdsourcing, information sharing, and user-centred design.[28] While many individual healthcare providers have started making their own personal contributions to "Public Health 2.0" through personal blogs, social profiles, and websites, other larger organizations, such as the American Heart Association (AHA) and United Medical Education (UME), have a larger team of employees centered around online driven health education, research, and training. These private organizations recognize the need for free and easy to access health materials often building libraries of educational articles.[citation needed]
Developing countries[edit]




Emergency Response Team in Burma after Cyclone Nargis in 2008


There is a great disparity in access to health care and public health initiatives between developed nations and developing nations. In the developing world, public health infrastructures are still forming. There may not be enough trained health workers or monetary resources to provide even a basic level of medical care and disease prevention.[29] As a result, a large majority of disease and mortality in the developing world results from and contributes to extreme poverty. For example, many African governments spend less than US$10 per person per year on health care, while, in the United States, the federal government spent approximately US$4,500 per capita in 2000. However, expenditures on health care should not be confused with spending on public health. Public health measures may not generally be considered "health care" in the strictest sense. For example, mandating the use of seat belts in cars can save countless lives and contribute to the health of a population, but typically money spent enforcing this rule would not count as money spent on health care.
Large parts of the developing world remained plagued by largely preventable or treatable infectious diseases and poor maternal and child health, exacerbated by malnutrition and poverty. The WHO reports that a lack of exclusive breastfeeding during the first six months of life contributes to over a million avoidable child deaths each year.[30] Intermittent preventive therapy aimed at treating and preventing malaria episodes among pregnant women and young children is one public health measure in endemic countries.
Each day brings new front-page headlines about public health: emerging infectious diseases such as SARS, rapidly making its way from China (see Public health in China) to Canada, the United States and other geographically distant countries; reducing inequities in health care access through publicly funded health insurance programs; the HIV/AIDS pandemic and its spread from certain high-risk groups to the general population in many countries, such as in South Africa; the increase of childhood obesity and the concomitant increase in type II diabetes among children; the social, economic and health effects of adolescent pregnancy; and the public health challenges related to natural disasters such as the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, 2005's Hurricane Katrina in the United States and the 2010 Haiti earthquake.
Since the 1980s, the growing field of population health has broadened the focus of public health from individual behaviors and risk factors to population-level issues such as inequality, poverty, and education. Modern public health is often concerned with addressing determinants of health across a population. There is a recognition that our health is affected by many factors including where we live, genetics, our income, our educational status and our social relationships; these are known as "social determinants of health." A social gradient in health runs through society. The poorest generally suffer the worst health, but even the middle classes will generally have worse health outcomes than those of a higher social stratum.[31] The new public health advocates for population-based policies that improve health in an equitable manner.
Sustainable Development Goals[edit]
Further information: Sustainable Development Goals
To address current and future challenges in addressing health issues in the world, the United Nations have developed the Sustainable Development Goals 2015 building off of the Millennium Development Goals of 2000 to be completed by 2030.[32] These goals in their entirety encompass the entire spectrum of development across nations, however Goals 1-6 directly address health disparities, primarily in developing countries.[33] These six goals address key issues in global public health: Poverty, Hunger and food security, Health, Education, Gender equality and women's empowerment, and water and sanitation.[33] Public health officials can use these goals to set their own agenda and plan for smaller scale initiatives for their organizations. These goals hope to lessen the burden of disease and inequality faced by developing countries and lead to a healthier future.
The links between the various sustainable development goals and public health are numerous and well established:

Living below the poverty line is attributed to poorer health outcomes and can be even worse for persons living in developing countries where extreme poverty is more common.[34] A child born into poverty is twice as likely to die before the age of five compared to a child from a wealthier family.[35]
The detrimental effects of hunger and malnutrition that can arise from systemic challenges with food security are enormous. The World Health Organization estimates that 12.9 percent of the population in developing countries is undernourished.[36]
Health challenges in the developing world are enormous, with "only half of the women in developing nations receiving the recommended amount of healthcare they need.[35]
Educational equity has yet to be reached in the world. Public health efforts are impeded by this, as a lack of education can lead to poorer health outcomes. This is shown by children of mothers who have no education having a lower survival rate compared to children born to mothers with primary or greater levels of education.[35] Cultural differences in the role of women vary by country, many gender inequalities are found in developing nations. Combating these inequalities has shown to also lead to better public health outcome.
In studies done by the World Bank on populations in developing countries, it was found that when women had more control over household resources, the children benefit through better access to food, healthcare, and education.[37]
Basic sanitation resources and access to clean sources of water are a basic human right. However, 1.8 billion people globally use a source of drinking water that is fecally contaminated, and 2.4 billion people lack access to basic sanitation facilities like toilets or pit latrines.[38] A lack of these resources is what causes approximately 1000 children a day to die from diarrhoel diseases that could have been prevented from better water and sanitation infrastructure.[38]

Education and training[edit]
Education and training of public health professionals is available throughout the world in Schools of Public Health, Medical Schools, Veterinary Schools, Schools of Nursing, and Schools of Public Affairs. The training typically requires a university degree with a focus on core disciplines of biostatistics, epidemiology, health services administration, health policy, health education, behavioral science and environmental health.[39][40] In the global context, the field of public health education has evolved enormously in recent decades, supported by institutions such as the World Health Organization and the World Bank, among others. Operational structures are formulated by strategic principles, with educational and career pathways guided by competency frameworks, all requiring modulation according to local, national and global realities. It is critically important for the health of populations that nations assess their public health human resource needs and develop their ability to deliver this capacity, and not depend on other countries to supply it.[41]
Schools of public health: a US perspective[edit]
In the United States, the Welch-Rose Report of 1915[42] has been viewed as the basis for the critical movement in the history of the institutional schism between public health and medicine because it led to the establishment of schools of public health supported by the Rockefeller Foundation.[43] The report was authored by William Welch, founding dean of the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, and Wickliffe Rose of the Rockefeller Foundation. The report focused more on research than practical education.[43][44] Some have blamed the Rockefeller Foundation's 1916 decision to support the establishment of schools of public health for creating the schism between public health and medicine and legitimizing the rift between medicine's laboratory investigation of the mechanisms of disease and public health's nonclinical concern with environmental and social influences on health and wellness.[43][45]
Even though schools of public health had already been established in Canada, Europe and North Africa, the United States had still maintained the traditional system of housing faculties of public health within their medical institutions. A $25,000 donation from businessman Samuel Zemurray instituted the School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine at Tulane University in 1912 conferring its first doctor of public health degree in 1914.[46][47] The Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health became an independent, degree-granting institution for research and training in public health, and the largest public health training facility in the United States,[48][49][50][51] when it was founded in 1916. By 1922, schools of public health were established at Columbia, Harvard and Yale on the Hopkins model. By 1999 there were twenty nine schools of public health in the US, enrolling around fifteen thousand students.[39][43]
Over the years, the types of students and training provided have also changed. In the beginning, students who enrolled in public health schools typically had already obtained a medical degree; public health school training was largely a second degree for medical professionals. However, in 1978, 69% of American students enrolled in public health schools had only a bachelor's degree.[39]
Degrees in public health[edit]
Main article: Professional degrees of public health
Schools of public health offer a variety of degrees which generally fall into two categories: professional or academic.[52] The two major postgraduate degrees are the Master of Public Health (MPH) or the Master of Science in Public Health (MSPH). Doctoral studies in this field include Doctor of Public Health (DrPH) and Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) in a subspeciality of greater Public Health disciplines. DrPH is regarded as a professional degree and PhD as more of an academic degree.
Professional degrees are oriented towards practice in public health settings. The Master of Public Health, Doctor of Public Health, Doctor of Health Science (DHSc) and the Master of Health Care Administration are examples of degrees which are geared towards people who want careers as practitioners of public health in health departments, managed care and community-based organizations, hospitals and consulting firms among others. Master of Public Health degrees broadly fall into two categories, those that put more emphasis on an understanding of epidemiology and statistics as the scientific basis of public health practice and those that include a more eclectic range of methodologies. A Master of Science of Public Health is similar to an MPH but is considered an academic degree (as opposed to a professional degree) and places more emphasis on scientific methods and research. The same distinction can be made between the DrPH and the DHSc. The DrPH is considered a professional degree and the DHSc is an academic degree.[citation needed]
Academic degrees are more oriented towards those with interests in the scientific basis of public health and preventive medicine who wish to pursue careers in research, university teaching in graduate programs, policy analysis and development, and other high-level public health positions. Examples of academic degrees are the Master of Science, Doctor of Philosophy, Doctor of Science (ScD), and Doctor of Health Science (DHSc). The doctoral programs are distinct from the MPH and other professional programs by the addition of advanced coursework and the nature and scope of a dissertation research project.
In the United States, the Association of Schools of Public Health[53] represents Council on Education for Public Health (CEPH) accredited schools of public health.[54] Delta Omega is the honor society for graduate studies in public health. The society was founded in 1924 at the Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health. Currently, there are approximately 68 chapters throughout the United States and Puerto Rico.[55]
History[edit]
Early history[edit]




The primitive nature of medieval medicine rendered Europe helpless to the onslaught of the Black Death in the 14th century. Fragment of a miniature from "The Chronicles of Gilles Li Muisis" (1272-1352). Bibliothèque royale de Belgique, MS 13076-77, f. 24v.


Public health has early roots in antiquity. From the beginnings of human civilization, it was recognized that polluted water and lack of proper waste disposal spread communicable diseases (theory of miasma). Early religions attempted to regulate behavior that specifically related to health, from types of food eaten, to regulating certain indulgent behaviors, such as drinking alcohol or sexual relations. Leaders were responsible for the health of their subjects to ensure social stability, prosperity, and maintain order.
By Roman times, it was well understood that proper diversion of human waste was a necessary tenet of public health in urban areas. The ancient Chinese medical doctors developed the practice of variolation following a smallpox epidemic around 1000 BC. An individual without the disease could gain some measure of immunity against it by inhaling the dried crusts that formed around lesions of infected individuals. Also, children were protected by inoculating a scratch on their forearms with the pus from a lesion.
In 1485 the Republic of Venice established a Permanent Court of supervisors of health with special attention to the prevention of the spread of epidemics in the territory from abroad. The three supervisors were initially appointed by the Venetian Senate. In 1537 it was assumed by the Grand Council, and in 1556 added two judges, with the task of control, on behalf of the Republic, the efforts of the supervisors.[56]
However, according to Michel Foucault, the plague model of governmentality was later controverted by the cholera model. A Cholera pandemic devastated Europe between 1829 and 1851, and was first fought by the use of what Foucault called "social medicine", which focused on flux, circulation of air, location of cemeteries, etc. All those concerns, born of the miasma theory of disease, were mixed with urbanistic concerns for the management of populations, which Foucault designated as the concept of "biopower". The German conceptualized this in the Polizeiwissenschaft ("Police science").
Modern public health[edit]
The 18th century saw rapid growth in voluntary hospitals in England.[57] The latter part of the century brought the establishment of the basic pattern of improvements in public health over the next two centuries: a social evil was identified, private philanthropists brought attention to it, and changing public opinion led to government action.[58]




1802 caricature of Edward Jenner vaccinating patients who feared it would make them sprout cowlike appendages.


The practice of vaccination became prevalent in the 1800s, following the pioneering work of Edward Jenner in treating smallpox. James Lind's discovery of the causes of scurvy amongst sailors and its mitigation via the introduction of fruit on lengthy voyages was published in 1754 and led to the adoption of this idea by the Royal Navy.[59] Efforts were also made to promulgate health matters to the broader public; in 1752 the British physician Sir John Pringle published Observations on the Diseases of the Army in Camp and Garrison, in which he advocated for the importance of adequate ventilation in the military barracks and the provision of latrines for the soldiers.[60]
With the onset of the Industrial Revolution, living standards amongst the working population began to worsen, with cramped and unsanitary urban conditions. In the first four decades of the 19th century alone, London's population doubled and even greater growth rates were recorded in the new industrial towns, such as Leeds and Manchester. This rapid urbanisation exacerbated the spread of disease in the large conurbations that built up around the workhouses and factories. These settlements were cramped and primitive with no organized sanitation. Disease was inevitable and its incubation in these areas was encouraged by the poor lifestyle of the inhabitants. Unavailable housing led to the rapid growth of slums and the per capita death rate began to rise alarmingly, almost doubling in Birmingham and Liverpool. Thomas Malthus warned of the dangers of overpopulation in 1798. His ideas, as well as those of Jeremy Bentham, became very influential in government circles in the early years of the 19th century.[58]
Public health legislation[edit]




Sir Edwin Chadwick was a pivotal influence on the early public health campaign.


The first attempts at sanitary reform and the establishment of public health institutions were made in the 1840s. Thomas Southwood Smith, physician at the London Fever Hospital, began to write papers on the importance of public health, and was one of the first physicians brought in to give evidence before the Poor Law Commission in the 1830s, along with Neil Arnott and James Phillips Kay.[61] Smith advised the government on the importance of quarantine and sanitary improvement for limiting the spread of infectious diseases such as cholera and yellow fever.[62][63]
The Poor Law Commission reported in 1838 that "the expenditures necessary to the adoption and maintenance of measures of prevention would ultimately amount to less than the cost of the disease now constantly engendered". It recommended the implementation of large scale government engineering projects to alleviate the conditions that allowed for the propagation of disease.[58] The Health of Towns Association was formed in Exeter on 11 December 1844, and vigorously campaigned for the development of public health in the United Kingdom.[64] Its formation followed the 1843 establishment of the Health of Towns Commission, chaired by Sir Edwin Chadwick, which produced a series of reports on poor and insanitary conditions in British cities.[64]
These national and local movements led to the Public Health Act, finally passed in 1848. It aimed to improve the sanitary condition of towns and populous places in England and Wales by placing the supply of water, sewerage, drainage, cleansing and paving under a single local body with the General Board of Health as a central authority. The Act was passed by the Liberal government of Lord John Russell, in response to the urging of Edwin Chadwick. Chadwick's seminal report on The Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population was published in 1842[65] and was followed up with a supplementary report a year later.[66]
Vaccination for various diseases was made compulsory in the United Kingdom in 1851, and by 1871 legislation required a comprehensive system of registration run by appointed vaccination officers.[67]
Further interventions were made by a series of subsequent Public Health Acts, notably the 1875 Act. Reforms included latrinization, the building of sewers, the regular collection of garbage followed by incineration or disposal in a landfill, the provision of clean water and the draining of standing water to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes.
The Infectious Disease (Notification) Act 1889 mandated the reporting of infectious diseases to the local sanitary authority, which could then pursue measures such as the removal of the patient to hospital and the disinfection of homes and properties.[68]
In the United States, the first public health organization based on a state health department and local boards of health was founded in New York City in 1866.[69]
Epidemiology[edit]




John Snow's dot map, showing the clusters of cholera cases in the London epidemic of 1854.


The science of epidemiology was founded by John Snow's identification of a polluted public water well as the source of an 1854 cholera outbreak in London. Dr. Snow believed in the germ theory of disease as opposed to the prevailing miasma theory. He first publicized his theory in an essay, On the Mode of Communication of Cholera, in 1849, followed by a more detailed treatise in 1855 incorporating the results of his investigation of the role of the water supply in the Soho epidemic of 1854.[70]
By talking to local residents (with the help of Reverend Henry Whitehead), he identified the source of the outbreak as the public water pump on Broad Street (now Broadwick Street). Although Snow's chemical and microscope examination of a water sample from the Broad Street pump did not conclusively prove its danger, his studies of the pattern of the disease were convincing enough to persuade the local council to disable the well pump by removing its handle.[71]
Snow later used a dot map to illustrate the cluster of cholera cases around the pump. He also used statistics to illustrate the connection between the quality of the water source and cholera cases. He showed that the Southwark and Vauxhall Waterworks Company was taking water from sewage-polluted sections of the Thames and delivering the water to homes, leading to an increased incidence of cholera. Snow's study was a major event in the history of public health and geography. It is regarded as the founding event of the science of epidemiology.[72]
Disease control[edit]




Paul-Louis Simond injecting a plague vaccine in Karachi, 1898.


With the pioneering work in bacteriology of French chemist Louis Pasteur and German scientist Robert Koch, methods for isolating the bacteria responsible for a given disease and vaccines for remedy were developed at the turn of the 20th century. British physician Ronald Ross identified the mosquito as the carrier of malaria and laid the foundations for combating the disease.[73] Joseph Lister revolutionized surgery by the introduction of antiseptic surgery to eliminate infection. French epidemiologist Paul-Louis Simond proved that plague was carried by fleas on the back of rats,[74] and Cuban scientist Carlos J. Finlay and U.S. Americans Walter Reed and James Carroll demonstrated that mosquitoes carry the virus responsible for yellow fever.[75][76] Brazilian scientist Carlos Chagas identified a tropical disease and its vector.[77]
With onset of the epidemiological transition and as the prevalence of infectious diseases decreased through the 20th century, public health began to put more focus on chronic diseases such as cancer and heart disease. Previous efforts in many developed countries had already led to dramatic reductions in the infant mortality rate using preventative methods. In Britain, the infant mortality rate fell from over 15% in 1870 to 7% by 1930.[78]
Country examples[edit]
France[edit]
France 1871-1914 followed well behind Bismarckian Germany, as well as Great Britain, in developing the welfare state including public health. Tuberculosis was the most dreaded disease of the day, especially striking young people in their 20s. Germany set up vigorous measures of public hygiene and public sanatoria, but France let private physicians handle the problem, which left it with a much higher death rate.[79] The French medical profession jealously guarded its prerogatives, and public health activists were not as well organized or as influential as in Germany, Britain or the United States.[80][81] For example, there was a long battle over a public health law which began in the 1880s as a campaign to reorganize the nation's health services, to require the registration of infectious diseases, to mandate quarantines, and to improve the deficient health and housing legislation of 1850. However the reformers met opposition from bureaucrats, politicians, and physicians. Because it was so threatening to so many interests, the proposal was debated and postponed for 20 years before becoming law in 1902. Success finally came when the government realized that contagious diseases had a national security impact in weakening military recruits, and keeping the population growth rate well below Germany's.[82]
United States[edit]




The seal of the United States Public Health Service.


See also: United States Public Health Service
Modern public health began developing in the 19th century, as a response to advances in science that led to the understanding of, the source and spread of disease. As the knowledge of contagious diseases increased, means to control them and prevent infection were soon developed. Once it became understood that these strategies would require community-wide participation, disease control began being viewed as a public responsibility. Various organizations and agencies were then created to implement these disease preventing strategies.[83]
Most of the Public health activity in the United States took place at the municipal level before the mid-20th century. There was some activity at the national and state level as well.[84]
In the administration of the second president of the United States John Adams, the Congress authorized the creation of hospitals for mariners. As the U.S. expanded, the scope of the governmental health agency expanded. In the United States, public health worker Sara Josephine Baker, M.D. established many programs to help the poor in New York City keep their infants healthy, leading teams of nurses into the crowded neighborhoods of Hell's Kitchen and teaching mothers how to dress, feed, and bathe their babies.
Another key pioneer of public health in the U.S. was Lillian Wald, who founded the Henry Street Settlement house in New York. The Visiting Nurse Service of New York was a significant organization for bringing health care to the urban poor.
Dramatic increases in average life span in the late 19th century and 20th century, is widely credited to public health achievements, such as vaccination programs and control of many infectious diseases including polio, diphtheria, yellow fever and smallpox; effective health and safety policies such as road traffic safety and occupational safety; improved family planning; tobacco control measures; and programs designed to decrease non-communicable diseases by acting on known risk factors such as a person's background, lifestyle and environment.
Another major public health improvement was the decline in the "urban penalty" brought about by improvements in sanitation. These improvements included chlorination of drinking water, filtration and sewage treatment which led to the decline in deaths caused by infectious waterborne diseases such as cholera and intestinal diseases.[85] The federal Office of Indian Affairs (OIA) operated a large-scale field nursing program. Field nurses targeted native women for health education, emphasizing personal hygiene and infant care and nutrition.[86]
Mexico[edit]
See also: Healthcare in Mexico § Public healthcare delivery




Logo for the Mexican Social Security Institute, a governmental agency dealing with public health.


Public health issues were important for the Spanish empire during the colonial era. Epidemic disease was the main factor in the decline of indigenous populations in the era immediately following the sixteenth-century conquest era and was a problem during the colonial era. The Spanish crown took steps in eighteenth-century Mexico to bring in regulations to make populations healthier.[87]
In the late nineteenth century, Mexico was in the process of modernization, and public health issues were again tackled from a scientific point of view.[88][89][90][91][92][93] Even during the Mexican Revolution (1910–20), public health was an important concern, with a text on hygiene published in 1916.[94] During the Mexican Revolution, feminist and trained nurse Elena Arizmendi Mejia founded the Neutral White Cross, treating wounded soldiers no matter for what faction they fought.
In the post-revolutionary period after 1920, improved public health was a revolutionary goal of the Mexican government.[95][96] The Mexican state promoted the health of the Mexican population, with most resources going to cities.[97][98] Concern about disease conditions and social impediments to the improvement of Mexicans' health were important in the formation of the Mexican Society for Eugenics. The movement flourished from the 1920s to the 1940s.[99] Mexico was not alone in Latin America or the world in promoting eugenics.[100] Government campaigns against disease and alcoholism were also seen as promoting public health.[101][102]
The Mexican Social Security Institute was established in 1943, during the administration of President Manuel Avila Camacho to deal with public health, pensions, and social security.
Cuba[edit]
See also: Timeline of healthcare in Cuba
Since the 1959 Cuban Revolution the Cuban government has devoted extensive resources to the improvement of health conditions for its entire population via universal access to health care. Infant mortality has plummeted.[103] Cuban medical internationalism as a policy has seen the Cuban government sent doctors as a form of aid and export to countries in need in Latin America, especially Venezuela, as well as Oceania and Africa countries.
Colombia and Bolivia[edit]
Public health was important elsewhere in Latin America in consolidating state power and integrating marginalized populations into the nation-state. In Colombia, public health was a means for creating and implementing ideas of citizenship.[104] In Bolivia, a similar push came after their 1952 revolution.[105]
See also[edit]


10 Essential Public Health Services
American Board of Preventive Medicine
American Osteopathic Board of Preventive Medicine
Behavioral medicine
Breastfeeding promotion
Criticisms of the sugar industry
Diseases of affluence / Diseases of poverty
Environmental epidemiology
Epidemiology
Eugenics
Evidence-based medicine
Molecular epidemiology
Molecular pathological epidemiology
GIS and public health
Global health
Global Mental Health
Health care delivery
Health care providers
Health Officers
Health profession
HEPRO
List of preventable causes of death
National public health institutes
Nutrition psychology
One Health
Personalized medicine
Precision medicine
Preventive medicine
Public health journals
Public health law
Timeline of global health
Universal health care
Veterinary equivalency
World Health Report

International public health strategies and programs

Global Strategy for Women's and Children's Health
International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes
Millennium Development Goals
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
Social determinants of health in poverty


References[edit]


^ Winslow, Charles-Edward Amory (1920). "The Untilled Field of Public Health". Modern Medicine. 2: 183–191. 
^ "What is Public Health". Centers for Disease Control Foundation. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control. Retrieved 27 January 2017. 
^ Frequently asked questions from the "Preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization" as adopted by the International Health Conference, 1946
^ Joint Task Group on Public Health Human Resources; Advisory Committee on Health Delivery & Human Resources; Advisory Committee on Population Health & Health Security (2005). Building the public health workforce for the 21st century. Ottawa: Public Health Agency of Canada. OCLC 144167975. 
^ Global Public-Private Partnership for Handwashing with Soap. Handwashing research, accessed 19 April 2011.
^ "EPA won't ban pesticide chlorpyrifos; is it safe?". CNN. 30 March 2017. 
^ World Health Organization. "Public health principles and neurological disorders. In: Neurological Disorders: Public Health Challenges. Geneva; 2006 - http://www.who.int/mental_health/neurology/neurodiso/en/index.html
^ World Health Organization. The role of WHO in public health, accessed 19 April 2011.
^ World Health Organization. Public health surveillance, accessed 19 April 2011.
^ Garrett Laurie (2007). "The Challenge of Global Health". Foreign Affairs. 86 (1): 14–38. 
^ World Health Organization. Diabetes Fact Sheet N°312, January 2011. Accessed 19 April 2011.
^ The Lancet (2010). "Type 2 diabetes—time to change our approach". The Lancet. 375 (9733): 2193. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61011-2. PMID 20609952. 
^ World Health Organization. Obesity and overweight Fact sheet N°311, Updated June 2016. Accessed 19 April 2011.
^ United Nations. Press Conference on General Assembly Decision to Convene Summit in September 2011 on Non-Communicable Diseases. New York, 13 May 2010.
^ Valerie Curtis and Robert Aunger. "Motivational mismatch: evolved motives as the source of—and solution to—global public health problems". In Roberts, S. C. (2011). Roberts, S. Craig, ed. "Applied Evolutionary Psychology". Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199586073.001.0001. ISBN 9780199586073. 
^ Gillam Stephen; Yates, Jan; Badrinath, Padmanabhan (2007). Essential Public Health : theory and practice. Cambridge University Press. OCLC 144228591. 
^ Pencheon, David; Guest, Charles; Melzer, David; Gray, JA Muir (2006). Pencheon, David, ed. Oxford Handbook of Public Health Practice. Oxford University Press. OCLC 663666786. 
^ Smith, Sarah; Sinclair, Don; Raine, Rosalind; Reeves, Barnarby (2005). Health Care Evaluation. Understanding Public Health. Open University Press. OCLC 228171855. 
^ Sanderson, Colin J.; Gruen, Reinhold (2006). Analytical Models for Decision Making. Understanding Public Health. Open University Press. OCLC 182531015. 
^ Birn, A. E.; Solórzano, A. (1999). "Public health policy paradoxes: Science and politics in the Rockefeller Foundation's hookworm campaign in Mexico in the 1920s". Social Science & Medicine. 49 (9): 1197–1213. doi:10.1016/S0277-9536(99)00160-4. PMID 10501641. 
^ Farmer, P. E.; Nizeye, B.; Stulac, S.; Keshavjee, S. (2006). "Structural Violence and Clinical Medicine". PLoS Medicine. 3 (10): e449. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0030449. PMC 1621099 . PMID 17076568. 
^ Wilson, Kumanan; Keelan, Jennifer (May 2009). "Coping with public health 2.0". Canadian Medical Association Journal. 180 (10): 1080. doi:10.1503/cmaj.090696. PMC 2679846 . PMID 19433834. 
^ Vance, K.; Howe, W.; Dellavalle, R.P. (April 2009). "Social internet sites as a source of public health information". Dermatologic Clinics. 27 (2): 133–136. doi:10.1016/j.det.2008.11.010. PMID 19254656. 
^ "Public Health 2.0: Spreading like a virus" (PDF). 24 April 2007. Retrieved 2011-06-13. 
^ Lampos, Vasileios; Yom-Tov, Elad; Pebody, Richard; Cox, Ingemar J. (2 July 2015). "Assessing the impact of a health intervention via user-generated Internet content". Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. 29: 1434–1457. doi:10.1007/s10618-015-0427-9. 
^ DLSPH Conference Planning Committee. "Public Health 2.0 FAQs". Public Health 2.0 Conference. Retrieved 2011-06-13. 
^ D. Parvaz (26 April 2011). "Crowdsourcing Japan's radiation levels". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 2011-06-13. 
^ Hardey, Michael (July 2008). "Public health and Web 2.0". Perspectives in Public Health. 128 (4): 181–189. doi:10.1177/1466424008092228. 
^ Lincoln C Chen; David Evans; Tim Evans; Ritu Sadana; Barbara Stilwell; Phylida Travis; Wim Van Lerberghe; Pascal Zurn (2006). World Health Report 2006: working together for health. Geneva: WHO. OCLC 71199185. 
^ "10 facts on breastfeeding". World Health Organization. Retrieved 20 April 2011. 
^ Richard G. Wilkinson; Michael G. Marmot, eds. (2003). The Solid Facts: Social Determinants of Health. WHO. OCLC 54966941. 
^ "2015 - United Nations sustainable development agenda". United Nations Sustainable Development. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ a b "Sustainable development goals - United Nations". United Nations Sustainable Development. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ "NCCP | Child Poverty". www.nccp.org. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ a b c "Health - United Nations Sustainable Development". United Nations Sustainable Development. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ "Hunger and food security - United Nations Sustainable Development". United Nations Sustainable Development. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ "World Development Report". openknowledge.worldbank.org. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ a b "Water and Sanitation - United Nations Sustainable Development". United Nations Sustainable Development. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ a b c U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. (1999). Achievements in Public Health, 1900–1999 - https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/wk/mm4850.pdf
^ Public Health Agency of Canada. Canadian Public Health Workforce Core Competencies, accessed 19 April 2011.
^ White F. The imperative of public health education: a global perspective. Med Princ Pract 2013;22:515-529 doi:10.1159/000354198</
^ Welch, William H.; Rose, Wickliffe (1915). "Institute of Hygiene: Being a report by Dr. William H. Welch and Wickliffe Rose to the General Education Board, Rockefeller Foundation": 660–668  reprinted in Fee, Elizabeth (1992). The Welch-Rose Report: Blueprint for Public Health Education in America (PDF). Washington, DC: Delta Omega Honorary Public Health Society. 
^ a b c d Patel, Kant; Rushefsky, Mark E.; McFarlane, Deborah R. (2005). The Politics of Public Health in the United States. M.E. Sharpe. p. 91. ISBN 0-7656-1135-X. 
^ Brandt AM, Gardner M (2000). "Antagonism and accommodation: interpreting the relationship between public health and medicine in the United States during the 20th century". American Journal of Public Health. 90 (5): 707–15. doi:10.2105/AJPH.90.5.707. PMC 1446218 . PMID 10800418. 
^ White, Kerr L. (1991). Healing the schism: Epidemiology, medicine, and the public's health. New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-97574-8. 
^ Darnell, Regna (2008). Histories of anthropology annual. University of Nebraska Press. p. 36. ISBN 0-8032-6664-2. 
^ Dyer, John Percy (1966). Tulane: the biography of a university, 1834-1965. Harper & Row. p. 136. 
^ The World Book Encyclopedia, 1994, p. 135.
^ Education of the Physician: International Dimensions. Education Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates., Association of American Medical Colleges. Meeting. (1984 : Chicago, Ill), p. v.
^ Milton Terris, "The Profession of Public Health", Conference on Education, Training, and the Future of Public Health. March 22–24, 1987. Board on Health Care Services. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, p. 53.
^ JSTOR.org
^ "Schools of Public Health and Public Health Programs" (PDF). Council on Education for Public Health. 11 March 2011. Retrieved 30 March 2011. 
^ Association of Schools of Public Health
^ Council on Education for Public Health
^ Delta Omega website (primary source)
^ [[:it:Magistrato alla Sanità|]] [Magistrato alla Sanità]
^ Carruthers, G. Barry. History of Britain's Hospitals (2005)
^ a b c "public health". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
^ Vale, Brian. "The Conquest of Scurvy in the Royal Navy 1793–1800: A Challenge to Current Orthodoxy". The Mariners' Mirror, volume 94, number 2, May 2008, pp. 160–175.
^ Selwyn, S (1966), "Sir John Pringle: hospital reformer, moral philosopher and pioneer of antiseptics", Medical History (published July 1966), 10 (3), pp. 266–74, doi:10.1017/s0025727300011133, PMC 1033606 , PMID 5330009 
^ Amanda J. Thomas (2010). The Lambeth cholera outbreak of 1848-1849: the setting, causes, course and aftermath of an epidemic in London. McFarland. pp. 55–6. ISBN 978-0-7864-3989-8. Retrieved 5 April 2012. 
^ Margaret Stacey (1 June 2004). The Sociology of Health and Healing. Taylor and Francis. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-203-38004-8. Retrieved 5 April 2012. 
^ Samuel Edward Finer (1952). The Life and Times of Sir Edwin Chadwick. Methuen. pp. 424–5. ISBN 978-0-416-17350-5. 
^ a b Ashton, John; Ubido, Janet (1991). "The Healthy City and the Ecological Idea" (PDF). Journal of the Society for the Social History of Medicine. 4 (1): 173–181. doi:10.1093/shm/4.1.173. Retrieved 8 July 2013. 
^ Chadwick, Edwin (1842). "Chadwick's Report on Sanitary Conditions". excerpt from Report...from the Poor Law Commissioners on an Inquiry into the Sanitary Conditions of the Labouring Population of Great Britain (pp.369-372) (online source). added by Laura Del Col: to The Victorian Web. Retrieved 2009-11-08. 
^ Chadwick, Edwin (1843). Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population of Great Britain. A Supplementary Report on the results of a Special Inquiry into The Practice of Interment in Towns. London: Printed by R. Clowes & Sons, for Her Majesty's Stationery Office. Retrieved 2009-11-08.  Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org)
^ "Decline of Infant Mortality in England and Wales, 1871-1948 : a Medical Conundrum". Retrieved 2012-12-17. 
^ Mooney, Graham (2015). Intrusive Interventions: Public Health, Domestic Space, and Infectious Disease Surveillance in England, 1840-1914. Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press. ISBN 9781580465274. 
^ United States Public Health Service, Municipal Health Department Practice for the Year 1923 (Public Health Bulletin # 164, July 1926), pp. 348, 357, 364
^ Concepts and practice of humanitarian medicine (2008) Par S. William Gunn, M. Masellis ISBN 0-387-72263-7 [1]
^ Vinten-Johansen, Peter, et al. (2003). Cholera, Chloroform, and the Science of Medicine: A Life of John Snow. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513544-X
^ Johnson, Steven (2006). The Ghost Map: The Story of London's Most Terrifying Epidemic – and How it Changed Science, Cities and the Modern World. Riverhead Books. ISBN 1-59448-925-4
^ ":: Laboc Hospital - A Noble Prize Winner's Workplace". easternpanorama.in. Retrieved 2013-07-11. 
^ Edward Marriott (1966) in “Plague. A Story of Science, Rivalry and the Scourge That Won't Go Away” ISBN 978-1-4223-5652-4
^ Ronn F. Pineo, "Public Health" in Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture, vol. 4, p. 481. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons 1996.
^ Pierce J.R., J, Writer. 2005. Yellow Jack: How Yellow Fever Ravaged America and Walter Reed Discovered its Deadly Secrets. John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 0-471-47261-1
^ Pineo, "Public Health", p. 481.
^ "The declines in infant mortality and fertility: Evidence from British cities in demographic transition". Retrieved 2012-12-17. 
^ Allan Mitchell, The Divided Path: The German Influence on Social Reform in France After 1870 (1991) pp 252-75 excerpt
^ Martha L. Hildreth, Doctors, Bureaucrats & Public Health in France, 1888-1902 (1987)
^ Alisa Klaus, Every Child a Lion: The Origins of Maternal & Infant Health Policy in the United States & France, 1890-1920 (1993).
^ Ann-Louise Shapiro, "Private Rights, Public Interest, and Professional Jurisdiction: The French Public Health Law of 1902." Bulletin of the History of Medicine 54.1 (1980): 4+
^ Health, Institute of Medicine (US) Committee for the Study of the Future of Public (1988). A History of the Public Health System. National Academies Press (US). 
^ John Duffy, The sanitarians: a history of American public health (1992).
^ Cutler, David; Grant Miller (February 2004). "The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances: The Twentieth Century United States". Demography. 42 (1): 1–22. doi:10.1353/dem.2005.0002. OCLC 703811616. PMID 15782893. 
^ Hancock Christin L (2001). "Healthy Vocatoons: Field Nursing and the Religious Overtones of Public Health". Journal of Women's History. 23 (3): 113–137. 
^ Donald Cooper, Epidemic Disease in Mexico City, 1761-1813: An Administrative, Social, and Medical History. Austin: University of Texas Press 1965.
^ Gabriela Soto Laveaga and Claudia Agostoni, "Science and Public Health in the Century of Revolution," in A Companion to Mexican History and Culture, William H. Beezley, ed. Blackwell Publishing 2011, pp. 561-574.
^ Claudia Agostoni, Monuments of Progress: Modernization and Public Health in Mexico City, 1876-1910. Calgary: University of Calgary Press; Boulder: University of Colorado Press; Mexico City: Instituto de Investigaciones Históricos 2003.
^ Claudia Agostoni, "Discurso médico, cultura higiénica y la mjuer en la ciudad de México al cambio de siglo (XIX-XX)", Mexican Studies / Estudios Mexicanos vol. 18, no. 1. Winter 2002, pp. 1-22.
^ Ana María Carrillo, "Economía, Política, y Saludo Pública en el México Porfiriana, 1876-1910", Historia, Ciencias, Saúde - Maginguinhos 9, suplemento 2002, pp. 67-87.
^ Patience A. Schell. "Nationalizing children through schools and hypgiene: Porfirian and Revolutionary Mexico City". The Americas 60:4, April 2004, pp. 559-587.
^ Anna Rose Alexander, City on Fire: Technology, Social Change, and the Hazards of Progress in Mexico City, 1860-1910. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press 2016.
^ Alberto J. Pani, La higiene en México. Mexico: Imprenta de J. Ballescá 1916.
^ Katherine Elaine Bliss, "The Science of Redemption: Syphilis, Sexual Promiscuity, and Reformism in Revolutionary Mexico City" Hispanic American Historical Review 79:1 1999, pp. 1-40.
^ Ernesto Aréchiga Córdoba, "Educación, propaganda o 'Dictadura sanitaria'. Estrategias discursivas de higiene y salubridad pública en el México posrevolucionario, 1917-1934". Dynamis 25, 2005, pp. 117-143.
^ Anthony J. Mazzaferri, "Public Health and Social Revolution in Mexico." PhD dissertation, Kent State University 1968.
^ David Sowell, Medicine on the Periphery: Public Health in Yucatán, 1870-1960. Lanham: Lexington Books 2015.
^ Alexandra Minna Stern, "Responsible Mother and Normal Children: Eugenics, Nationalism, and Welfare in Post-revolutionary Mexico, 1920-1940." Journal of Historical Sociology vol. 12, no. 4, December 1999, pp. 369-397.
^ Nancy Leys Stepan, The Hour of Eugenics: Race, Gender, and Nation in Latin America. Ithaca: Cornell University Press 1991.
^ Gretchen Pierce, "Fighting Bacteria, the Bible, and the Bottle: Projects to Create New Men, Women, and Children, 1910-1940" in Companion to Mexican History and Culture, William H. Beezley, ed. Wiley-Blackwell Publishers, pp. 505-517.
^ T. Mitchell, Intoxicated Identities: Alcohol's Power in Mexican History and Culture. Routledge 2004.
^ Pineo, “Public Health”, p. 483.
^ Hanni Jalil, "Curing a Sick Nation: Public Health and Citizenship in Colombia, 1930-1940." PhD dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara 2015.
^ Nicole Pacino, "Prescription for a Nation: Public Health in Post-Revolutionary Bolivia, 1952-1964." PhD dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara 2013.


Further reading[edit]


Berridge, Virginia. Public Health: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford University Press, 2016).
Berridge, Virginia, et al. Public Health in History (2011).
Breslow, Lester, ed. (2002). Encyclopedia of Public Health. New York: Macmillan Reference USA. ISBN 978-0-02-865354-9. 
Garrett, Laurie (2000). Betrayal of Trust: the Collapse of Global Public Health. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 0-7868-6522-9. 
Heymann, David L., ed. (2008). Control of Communicable Diseases Manual. Washington, D.C.: American Public Health Association. ISBN 978-0-87553-189-2. 
Heggenhougen, Kris; Stella R Quah, eds. (2008). International Encyclopedia of Public Health. Amsterdam Boston: Elsevier/Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-227225-7. 
Jalil, Hanni. "Curing a Sick Nation: Public Health and Citizenship in Colombia, 1930-1940." PhD dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2015.
La Berge, Ann F. Mission and Method: The Early Nineteenth-Century French Public Health Movement. New York: Cambridge University Press 1992.
Novick, Lloyd F; Cynthia B Morrow; Glen P Mays (2008). Public Health Administration: Principles for Population-Based Management (2nd ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett Pub. ISBN 978-0-7637-3842-6. 
Pacino, Nicole. "Prescription for a Nation: Public Health in Post-Revolutionary Bolivia, 1952-1964." PhD dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara 2013.
Schneider, Dona; David E Lilienfeld (2008). Public Health: the Development of a Discipline. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-4231-7. 
Rosen, George. A History of Public Health. New York: MD Publications 1958.
Soto Laveaga, Gabriela and Claudia Agostoni, "Science and Public Health in the Century of Revolution," in A Companion to Mexican History and Culture, William H. Beezley, ed. Blackwell Publishing 2011, pp. 561–574.
Stokols, D.; Hall, K.L.; Vogel, A.L. (2013). "Transdisciplinary public health: Core characteristics, definitions, and strategies for success". In Haire-Joshu, D.; McBride, T.D. Transdisciplinary public health: Research, methods, and practice (PDF). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. pp. 3–30. 
Tausch, Arno (2012). Globalization, the Human Condition, and Sustainable Development in the Twenty-first Century: Cross-national Perspectives and European Implications. With Almas Heshmati and a Foreword by Ulrich Brand (1st ed.). Anthem Press, London. ISBN 9780857284105. 
Turnock, Bernard (2009). Public Health: What It Is and How It Works (4th ed.). Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7637-5444-0. 
Oxford Textbook of Public Health (5th ed.). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. 2009. ISBN 978-0-19-921870-7. 
White, Franklin; Stallones, Lorann; Last, John M. (2013). Global Public Health: Ecological Foundations. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-975190-7. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Public health.





Wikiversity has learning resources about Public health





Wikipedia's health care articles can be viewed offline with the Medical Wikipedia app.

Health-EU, the official public health portal of the European Union
The Healthy Village, Public Health Awareness and Advocacy
Public Health - Educational Articles by United Medical Education; a public resource for health related educational articles and emergency training in ACLS, PALS, and BLS certification online.
What Is Public Health? by the Association of Schools and Programs of Public Health







v
t
e


Public health



General



Auxology
Biological hazard
Chief Medical Officer
Cultural competence
Deviance
Environmental health
Euthenics
Genomics
Globalization and disease
Health economics
Health literacy
Health policy

Health system
Health care reform
Public health law


Maternal health
Medical anthropology
Medical sociology
Mental health
Pharmaceutical policy
Public health laboratory
Reproductive health
Social psychology
Sociology of health and illness





Preventive healthcare



Behavior change

Theories


Family planning
Health promotion
Human nutrition
Preventive nutrition
Hygiene

Food safety
Hand washing
Infection control
Oral hygiene


Occupational safety and health

Human factors and ergonomics
Hygiene
Injury prevention
Medicine
Nursing


Patient safety

Organization


Pharmacovigilance
Safe sex
Sanitation

Emergency
Fecal–oral transmission
Open defecation
Sanitary sewer
Waterborne diseases


Smoking cessation
Vaccination
Vector control





Population health



Biostatistics
Child mortality
Community health
Epidemiology
Global health
Health impact assessment
Health system
Infant mortality
Open-source healthcare software
Public health informatics
Social determinants of health

Health equity
Race and health


Social medicine





Biological and
epidemiological statistics



Case-control study
Randomized controlled trial
Relative risk
Statistical hypothesis testing

Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Regression analysis
ROC curve
Student's t-test
Z-test


Statistical software





Infectious and epidemic
disease prevention



Asymptomatic carrier
Epidemics

List


Notifiable diseases

List


Public health surveillance

Disease surveillance


Quarantine
Sexually transmitted infection
Tropical disease
Vaccine trial





Food hygiene and
safety management



Food

Additive
Chemistry
Engineering
Microbiology
Processing
Safety
Safety scandals


Genetically modified food
Good agricultural practice
Good manufacturing practice

HACCP
ISO 22000







Health behavioral
sciences



Diffusion of innovations
Health belief model
Health communication
Health psychology
Positive deviance
PRECEDE-PROCEED model
Social cognitive theory
Social norms approach
Theory of planned behavior
Transtheoretical model





Organizations,
education
and history




Organizations



Europe

Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety


India

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare


U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
City and county health departments
Council on Education for Public Health
Public Health Service


World Health Organization
World Toilet Organization





Education



Health education
Higher education

Bachelor of Science in Public Health
Doctor of Public Health
Professional degrees of public health
Schools of public health







History



Sara Josephine Baker
Samuel Jay Crumbine
Carl Rogers Darnall
Joseph Lister
Margaret Sanger
John Snow
Typhoid Mary
Germ theory of disease
Social hygiene movement











 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Occupational safety and health



Occupational diseases
and injuries



Acrodynia
Asbestosis
Asthma
Berylliosis
Brucellosis
Byssinosis ("brown lung")
Chalicosis
Chimney sweeps' carcinoma
Chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy (CSE)
Coalworker's pneumoconiosis ("black lung")
Concussions in sport
Decompression sickness
De Quervain syndrome
Exposure to human nail dust
Farmer's lung
Fiddler's neck
Flock worker's lung
Glassblower's cataract
Golfer's elbow
Hearing Loss
Hospital-acquired infection
Indium lung
Laboratory animal allergy
Lead poisoning
Mad hatter disease
Mesothelioma
Metal fume fever
Mule spinners' cancer
Noise-induced hearing loss
Phossy jaw
Pneumoconiosis
Radium jaw
Repetitive strain injury
Silicosis
Silo-filler's disease
Sports injury
Surfer's ear
Tennis elbow
Tinnitus
Writer's cramp








Occupational hygiene



Occupational hazard
Hierarchy of hazard controls
Prevention through design
Exposure assessment
Occupational exposure limit
Occupational epidemiology





Professions



Environmental health
Industrial engineering
Occupational health nursing
Occupational health psychology
Occupational medicine
Occupational therapist
Safety engineering





Agencies and organizations



European Agency for Safety and Health at Work
UK Health and Safety Executive
International Labour Organization
U.S. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration
World Health Organization





Standards



Bangladesh Accord
Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981
OHSAS 18001
Worker Protection Standard (US)
Working Environment Convention, 1977





See also



Environment, health and safety
Environmental toxicology
Ergonomics
Health physics
Indoor air quality
International Chemical Safety Card
National Day of Mourning (Canadian observance)
Process safety management
Public health
Risk management
Safety data sheet (SDS)
Toxic tort
Workers' compensation








 Category
Occupational diseases
 Commons
Journals
Organizations












v
t
e


Social sciences



Primary



Anthropology

archaeology
cultural
linguistics
social


Economics

microeconomics
macroeconomics


Geography

human
integrative


History

cultural
economic
military
political
social


Law

jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems


Political science

international relations
psephology
public administration
public policy


Psychology

abnormal
biological
cognitive
developmental
personality
social


Sociology

criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban







Interdisciplinary



Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Media studies
Philosophy of science

economics
history
psychology
social science


Planning

land use
regional
urban


Political ecology
Political economy
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies

historical


Social work





Other categorizations



Humanities
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science








Index
Journals
Outline
Wikiversity









Authority control



GND: 4139691-1
NDL: 00566768








Health portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_health&oldid=815796505"					Categories: Public healthEuthenicsHealth economicsHealth policyMedical humanitiesSanitationHidden categories: Articles with inconsistent citation formatsUse dmy dates from August 2017All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2014Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012Articles with medical app sidebarWikipedia articles with GND identifiers