This article is about government action. Policy, both public and private, is a broader concept. The article on public policy doctrine discusses the use of the phrase 'public policy' in legal doctrine. For other uses, see Public policy (disambiguation).


Part of a series on


Politics







Primary topics



Index of politics articles
Politics by country
Politics by subdivision
Political economy
Political history
Political history of the world
Political philosophy









Political systems



Anarchy


City-state
Democracy


Federacy
Feudalism


Dictatorship
Directory


Meritocracy
Monarchy


Parliamentary
Presidential


Republic
Semi-parliamentary


Semi-presidential
Theocracy









Academic disciplines




Political science
(political scientists)


International relations
(theory)

Comparative politics









Public administration



Bureaucracy (street-level)
Adhocracy









Policy



Public policy (doctrine)


Domestic and foreign policy


Civil society


Public interest









Organs of government



Separation of powers


Legislature
Executive


Judiciary
Election commission









Related topics



Sovereignty
Theories of political behavior
Political psychology
Biology and political orientation
Political organisations
Foreign electoral intervention









Subseries



Electoral systems


Elections (voting)


Federalism
Form of government


Ideology
Political campaigning


Political parties










v
t
e





Public policy is the principled guide to action taken by the administrative executive branches of the state with regard to a class of issues, in a manner consistent with law and institutional customs.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Government actions and process
3 Academic discipline
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading



Overview[edit]
The foundation of public policy is composed of national constitutional laws and regulations. Further substrates include both judicial interpretations and regulations which are generally authorized by legislation. Public policy is considered strong when it solves problems efficiently and effectively, serves justice, supports governmental institutions and policies, and encourages active citizenship.[1]
Other scholars define public policy as a system of "courses of action, regulatory measures, laws, and funding priorities concerning a given topic promulgated by a governmental entity or its representatives."[2] Public policy is commonly embodied in "constitutions, legislative acts, and judicial decisions."[3]
In the United States, this concept refers not only to the result of policies, but more broadly to the decision-making and analysis of governmental decisions. As an academic discipline, public policy is studied by professors and students at public policy schools of major universities throughout the country. The U.S. professional association of public policy practitioners, researchers, scholars, and students is the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management.
Government actions and process[edit]
Public policy making can be characterized as a dynamic, complex, and interactive system through which public problems are identified and countered by creating new public policy or by reforming existing public policy.[4]
Public problems can originate in endless ways and require different policy responses (such as regulations, subsidies, Import quota|quotas, and laws) on the local, national, or international level.[5]
Public policy making is a continuous process that has many feedback loops. Verification and program evaluation are essential to the functioning of this system.[6]
The public problems that influence public policy making can be of economic, social, or political nature.[7]
Each system is influenced by different public problems and issues, and has different stakeholders; as such, each requires different public policy.[6]
In public policy making, numerous individuals, corporations, non-profit organizations and interest groups compete and collaborate to influence policymakers to act in a particular way.[8]
The large set of actors in the public policy process, such as politicians, civil servants, lobbyists, domain experts, and industry or sector representatives, use a variety of tactics and tools to advance their aims, including advocating their positions publicly, attempting to educate supporters and opponents, and mobilizing allies on a particular issue.[5]
Many actors can be important in the public policy process, but government officials ultimately choose public policy in response to the public issue or problem at hand. In doing so, government officials are expected to meet public sector ethics and take the needs of all project stakeholder|stakeholders into account.[6]
Since societies have changed in the past decades, the public policy making system changed too. In the 2010s, public policy making is increasingly goal-oriented, aiming for measurable results and goals, and decision-centric, focusing on decisions that must be taken immediately.[6]
Furthermore, mass communications and technological changes such as the widespread availability of the Internet have caused the public policy system to become more complex and interconnected.[9] The changes pose new challenges to the current public policy systems and pressures leaders to evolve to remain effective and efficient.[6]
Academic discipline[edit]
Main article: Policy Studies
As an academic discipline, public policy brings in elements of many social science fields and concepts, including economics, sociology, political economy, program evaluation, policy analysis, and public management, all as applied to problems of governmental administration, management, and operations.[10] At the same time, the study of public policy is distinct from political science or economics, in its focus on the application of theory to practice. While the majority of public policy degrees are master's and doctoral degrees, there are several universities also offer undergraduate education in public policy.
Traditionally, the academic field of public policy focused on domestic policy. However, the wave of economic globalization which occurred in the late 20th and early 21st centuries created a need for a subset of public policy that focuses on global governance, especially as it relates to issues that transcend national borders such as climate change, terrorism, nuclear proliferation, and economic development.[11] Consequently, many traditional public policy schools had to tweak their curricula to adjust to this new policy landscape, as well as developed whole new ones.[citation needed]
See also[edit]

Advocacy
Advocacy evaluation
Eightfold Path (policy analysis)
Harold Lasswell
List of public policy topics by country
List of public administration schools
Mandate (politics)
Overton window
Public comment
Public policy school

References[edit]


^ "Characteristics of Successful Public Policy". Norwich University Public Administration. Norwich University Public Administration. Retrieved 24 November 2014. 
^ Kilpatrick, Dean, "Definitions of Public Policy and Law"
^ Schuster II, W. Michael, "For the Greater Good: The Use of Public Policy Considerations in Confirming Chapter 11 Plans of Reorganization"
^ John, Peter (1998). Analysing Public Policy. Continuum. 
^ a b Sharkansky, Ira; R. Hofferbert. "Dimensions of State Politics, Economics, and Public Policy". The American Political Science Review. 
^ a b c d e Thei, Geurts; Be Informed (2010). "Public Policy: The 21st Century Perspective". 
^ Hill, Michael (2005). Public Policy Process. Pearson. 
^ Kilpatrick
^ Schramm, Wilbur (165). The Process and Effects of mass communication. ISBN 0252001974. 
^ Pellissery, Sony (2015). Public Policy. The SAGE Encyclopedia of World Poverty. Sage. 
^ http://www.gppi.net/fileadmin/gppi/Global_Public_Policy_Foreign_Affairs.pdf


Further reading[edit]

Gilbert, Brett Anitra; David B. Audretsch, McDougall, Patricia P. (2004), The Emergence of Entrepreneurship Policy, Small Business Economics 22
Cohen, Nissim (2012) “Policy entrepreneurs and the design of public policy: Conceptual framework and the case of the National Health Insurance Law in Israel” Journal of Social Research & Policy, 3 (1): 5-26.
David B. Audretsch; Grilo, Isabel; Thurik, A. Roy (2007), Explaining entrepreneurship and the role of policy: a framework, in: David Audretsch, Isabel Grilo and A. Roy Thurik (eds.), Handbook of Research on Entrepreneurship Policy, Edward Elgar Publishing
David B. Audretsch and Beckmann, Iris A.M. (2007), From Small Business to Entrepreneurship Policy, in: David Audretsch, Isabel Grilo and A. Roy Thurik (eds.), Handbook of Research on Entrepreneurship Policy, Edward Elgar Publishing
Considine, Mark (2005). Making Public Policy. Polity Press.







v
t
e


Public policy



Fields



Agricultural
Commercial
Cultural
Domestic
Drug

reform


Economic

Fiscal
Incomes
Industrial
Investment
Monetary
Tax


Education
Energy

Nuclear energy
Renewable energy


Environmental
Food
Foreign
Health

Pharmaceutical
Vaccination


Housing
Immigration
Knowledge
Language
Military
Science

Climate change
Stem cell
Space
Technology


Social





Other topics



Public administration
Public policy doctrine
Public policy school
Policy analysis
Policy studies
Regulation
Public policy by country












v
t
e


Public services






Municipalization
Nationalization
Progressive tax





Concepts



Public administration
Public domain
Public health
Public interest
Public land
Public ownership
Public policy
Public procurement
Public value





Basic services



Civil service
Fire department
Law enforcement
Postal service

Savings system


Public broadcasting
Public transport





Public utility



Electric utility
Oil & gas
Telecommunication

Municipal broadband


Public water system
Waste management





Public works



Infrastructure
Public bank
Public hospital
Public library
Public school
Public space
Public university





Social services



Single-payer health care

National health insurance


Public housing
Social insurance

Social pension
Social security










 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Civil service



Concepts



Public sector
Government agency
Bureaucracy
Bureaucrat
Technocracy
Diplomat
Public administration
Public policy
Public service





By country



Australia
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
China
European Union
France
Germany
Hong Kong
India
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Malaysia
New Zealand
Nigeria
Northern Ireland
Pakistan
Russia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
United Kingdom
United States





Categories



National civil service commissions
Government occupations
Civil service by country








See also: Civil service reform in developing countries












v
t
e


Social sciences



Primary



Anthropology

archaeology
cultural
linguistics
social


Economics

microeconomics
macroeconomics


Geography

human
integrative


History

cultural
economic
military
political
social


Law

jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems


Political science

international relations
psephology
public administration
public policy


Psychology

abnormal
biological
cognitive
developmental
personality
social


Sociology

criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban







Interdisciplinary



Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Media studies
Philosophy of science

economics
history
psychology
social science


Planning

land use
regional
urban


Political ecology
Political economy
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies

historical


Social work





Other categorizations



Humanities
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science








Index
Journals
Outline
Wikiversity











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_policy&oldid=816807117"					Categories: Public policyPolitical sciencePublic economicsPublic administrationSocial policyHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2013