Public policy consists of a system of laws, regulatory measures, courses of action, and funding priorities by a government or its representatives. Public policy decisions are often decided by a group of individuals with different beliefs and interests.[1] The policies of the United States of America comprise all actions taken by its federal government. The executive branch is the primary entity through which policies are enacted, however the policies are derived from a collection of laws, executive decisions, and legal precedents.




The United States Capitol.





Contents


1 Types of policies
2 Agricultural policy
3 Drug policy
4 Energy policy
5 Environmental policy
6 Foreign policy
7 Policy responses to the late-2000s recession
8 Notes



Types of policies[edit]
Main article: List of public policy topics by country § United States
The policies of the United States The Almanac of Policy Issues, which provides background information, archived documents, and links to major U.S. public policy issues, organized the public policy of the United States into nine categories. The following lists these categories followed by a few examples of specific, respective policies:

Criminal Justice: death penalty,[2] drug policy,[3] and gun control[4]
Culture and Society: abortion,[5] arts,[6] and civil rights[7]
Economic Affairs: budget and taxes[8]
Education: elementary and secondary,[9] and higher education[10]
Environment: air quality[11] and global warming[12]
Government Operations: campaign finance reform[13] and privatization[14]
Health: health insurance[15] and Medicare[16]
Social Welfare: social security[17] and welfare[18]
Foreign Affairs and National Security: defense spending.[19]

Agricultural policy[edit]
Agricultural policy of the United States is the governing policy for agriculture in the United States and is composed primarily of the periodically renewed federal U.S. farm bills.
In "A New Agricultural Policy for the United States," authors Dennis Keeney and Long Kemp summarize the agricultural policy of the United States as follows: "Because of its unique geography, weather, history and policies, the United States has an agriculture that has been dominated by production of commodity crops for use in animal, industrial and export enterprises. Over time agricultural policies evolved to support an industrialized, commodity-based agriculture. This evolution resulted in farmers leaving the land with agriculture moving to an industrial structure."[20]
Drug policy[edit]
The drug policy of the United States is established by The Office of National Drug Control Policy, a former cabinet-level[21] component of the Executive Office of the President of the United States, which was established by the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988. Its stated goal is to establish policies, priorities, and objectives to eradicate illicit drug use, drug manufacturing, and trafficking, drug-related crime and violence, and drug-related health consequences in the U.S.
The Office of National Drug Control Policy's two current specific goals are to "curtail illicit drug consumption in America" and to "improve the public health and public safety of the American people by reducing the consequences of drug abuse."[22] They plan to achieve these goals by taking the following actions:

Strengthen efforts to prevent drug use in communities
Seek early intervention opportunities in health care
Integrate treatment for substance use disorders into health care, and expand support for recovery
Break the cycle of drug use, crime, delinquency, and incarceration
Disrupt domestic drug trafficking and production
Strengthen international partnerships
Improve information systems for analysis, assessment, and local management[22]

Energy policy[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The energy policy of the United States addresses issues of energy production, distribution, and consumption, such as building codes and gas mileage standards. The United States Department of Energy plays a major role, and its mission is "to ensure America's security and prosperity by addressing its energy, environmental, and nuclear challenges through transformative science and technology solutions."
Moreover, the White House provides a summary of the United States' current condition regarding its energy policy: "For decades it has been clear that the way Americans produce and consume energy is not sustainable. Our addiction to foreign oil and fossil fuels puts our economy, our national security and our environment at risk. To take this country in a new direction, the President is working with Congress to pass comprehensive energy and climate legislation to protect our nation from the serious economic and strategic risks associated with our reliance on foreign oil, to create jobs, and to cut down on the carbon pollution that contributes to the destabilizing effects of climate change."
The following is a snapshot of the United States' current energy policy goals:

Clean Energy Economy: make the investments in clean energy sources that will put Americans back in control of our energy future, create millions of new jobs and lay the foundation for long-term economic security. This will be accomplished by taking the following actions:

Initiating recovery act investments in clean energy
Applying more stringent appliance efficiency standards
Leading the way in sustainability
Creating efficiency standards for cars and trucks
Making homes more energy efficient



Environmental policy[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The environmental policy of the United States addresses and regulates activities that impact the environment. Its general goal is to protect the environment for the welfare of future generations. The environmental policy goals are detailed below:

The Environment: the United States is committed to protecting our country's air, water, and land, from restoring ecosystems in the Chesapeake Bay and the Everglades, to reducing the impacts of mountaintop mining. Specifically, the environment will be protected by taking the following actions:

Protecting our oceans
Land conservation
Restoring our ecosystems
Renewing the federal commitment to California's Bay Delta
Chesapeake Bay protection and restoration
Great Lakes restoration
Limiting mercury emissions
Reducing the environmental impact of mountaintop coal mining
Reinvigorate the National Environmental Policy Act


Climate Change: the United States is committed to leading the charge to reduce the dangerous pollution that causes global warming, and to make the investments in the clean energy technology that will power sustainable growth in the future. The following are actions that will be taken to accomplish climate change goals:

Providing international leadership
Monitoring greenhouse gas emissions
Developing climate change adaptations[23]
Improving the educational curriculum for climate change science



Foreign policy[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The foreign policy of the United States defines how the United States interacts with foreign nations. It only addresses the security of the American people and promotes international order. The following are the most prominent foreign policies of the United States:

Refocusing on the threat from al Qaeda in Afghanistan and Pakistan
Ending the war in Iraq responsibly
Keeping nuclear weapons out of the hands of terrorists
Promoting peace and security in Israel and the Middle East
Re-energizing America's alliances
Maintaining core American values
Restoring American leadership in Latin America
Ensuring energy security and fighting climate change

Policy responses to the late-2000s recession[edit]
Main article: United States policy responses to the Great Recession
The Federal Reserve, Treasury, and Securities and Exchange Commission took several steps on September 19 to intervene in the crisis. To stop the potential run on money market mutual funds, the Treasury also announced on September 19 a new $50 billion program to insure the investments, similar to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) program.[24] Part of the announcements included temporary exceptions to section 23A and 23B (Regulation W), allowing financial groups to more easily share funds within their group. The exceptions would expire on January 30, 2009, unless extended by the Federal Reserve Board.[25] The Securities and Exchange Commission announced termination of short-selling of 799 financial stocks, as well as action against naked short selling, as part of its reaction to the mortgage crisis.[26]
Notes[edit]


^ "Characteristics of Successful Public Policy". Norwich University. Retrieved 30 September 2014. 
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Capital Punishment 2000", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 21, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Drug Abuse in America:2001", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 21, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Gun Control", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 21, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Abortion Law Development: A Brief Overview", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 21, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Arts and humanities", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 21, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Federal Anti-Discrimination Laws", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 21, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Budget and Taxes", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "The State of U.S. Education", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Post-Secondary Education Statistics", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Plain English Guide To The Clean Air Act", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Climate Change", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Summary of the Shay's-Meehan Campaign Finance Reform Law", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Charity and Volunteerism", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Health Insurance Coverage", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "2000 Ways and Means Green Book: Medicare", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Social Security Reform", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "Welfare Reform: An Issue Overview", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ Almanac of Policy Issues "FY 2004 Pentagon Budget", Almanac of Policy Issues, September 23, 2004, accessed March 30, 2011.
^ The Minnesota Project A New Agricultural Policy of the United States., July, 2003, accessed February 16, 2011.
^ Cook, Dave (2009-03-11). "New drug czar gets lower rank, promise of higher visibility". Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 2009-03-16. For one thing, in the Obama administration the Drug Czar will not have Cabinet status, as the job did during George W. Bush's administration. 
^ a b President Obama "2010 National Drug Control Policy.", Office of National Drug Control Policy, 2010, accessed February 21, 2011.
^ "Global Climate Change". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 1 October 2014. 
^ Gullapalli, Diya and Anand, Shefali. "Bailout of Money Funds Seems to Stanch Outflow", The Wall Street Journal, September 20, 2008.
^ (Press Release) FRB: Board Approves Two Interim Final Rules, Federal Reserve Bank, September 19, 2008.
^ Boak, Joshua (Chicago Tribune). "SEC temporarily suspends short selling", San Jose Mercury News, September 19, 2008.








v
t
e


Public policy of the United States






Agricultural
Arctic
Climate change (G. W. Bush)
Domestic (Reagan, G. W. Bush)
Drug
Economic (G. W. Bush, Obama)
Energy (Obama)
Environmental
Fiscal
Foreign (History, Criticism, Reagan, Clinton, G. W. Bush, Obama, Trump)
Gun control (Clinton)
Low-level radioactive waste
Monetary
Native American (Nixon, Obama)
Nuclear energy
Science
Social (Obama)
Space (G. W. Bush, Obama)
Stem cell
Telecommunications
Trade
Visa












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865–1895 / 1896–1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Civil Rights Movement
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_policy_of_the_United_States&oldid=810258664"					Categories: Government of the United StatesPolicyUnited States federal policyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2011All articles needing additional references