This article is about human races as a social concept and in anthropology. For the sociological concept, see Race and society. For "the human race" (all of humanity), see Human. For the term "race" in biology, see Race (biology).


Race




Categorization




Genetics and differences




Race and genetics
Human genetic variation




Society




Historical concepts

Race


in Brazil
in the United States




Racial inequality in the United States
Racial wage gap in the United States
Racial profiling

Racism
in the United States
Scientific racism




Race and...





Crime in the United Kingdom
Crime in the United States


Race and health


in the United States





Intelligence
History of the race
and intelligence controversy

Sports
Video games




Related topics




Ethnic group
Eugenics
Genetics
Human evolution






Index
Category







v
t
e







Anthropology





Outline
History







Types



Archaeological
Biological
Cultural
Linguistic
Social









Archaeological



Aerial
Aviation
Battlefield
Biblical
Bioarchaeological
Environmental
Ethnoarchaeological
Feminist
Forensic
Maritime
Paleoethnobotanical
Zooarchaeological









Biological



Anthrozoological
Biocultural
Evolutionary
Forensic
Molecular
Neurological
Nutritional
Palaeoanthropological
Primatological












Social
Cultural






Applied
Art
Cognitive
Cyborg
Development
Digital
Ecological
Environmental
Economic
Political economy
Historical
Feminist
Institutional
Kinship
Legal
Media
Medical
Museums
Musical
Political
Psychological
Public
Religion
Symbolic
Transpersonal
Urban
Visual









Linguistic



Anthropological
Descriptive
Ethnological
Ethnopoetical
Historical
Semiotic
Sociological









Research framework



Anthropometry
Ethnography (online)
Ethnology
Cross-cultural comparison
Participant observation
Holism
Reflexivity
Thick description
Cultural relativism
Ethnocentrism
Emic and etic









Key concepts



Culture
Development
Ethnicity
Evolution (sociocultural)
Gender
Kinship and descent
Meme
Prehistory

Race
Society
Value



Colonialism / Postcolonialism








Key theories



Actor–network theory
Alliance theory
Cross-cultural studies
Cultural materialism
Culture theory
Diffusionism
Feminism
Historical particularism
Boasian anthropology
Functionalism
Interpretive
Performance studies
Political economy
Practice theory
Structuralism
Post-structuralism
Systems theory









Lists


Anthropologists by nationality
Anthropology by year



Bibliography
Journals
List of indigenous peoples
Organizations









 Anthropology portal







v
t
e





Race is a concept used in the categorization of humans into groups, called races or racial groups, based on combinations of shared physical traits, ancestry, genetics, and social or cultural traits. Although such groupings lack a firm basis in modern biology, they continue to have a strong influence over contemporary social relations.[1][2][3][4][5][6] First used to refer to speakers of a common language and then to denote national affiliations, by the 17th century race began to refer to physical (phenotypical) traits. The term was often used in a general biological taxonomic sense,[7] starting from the 19th century, to denote genetically differentiated human populations defined by phenotype.[8][9]
Social conceptions and groupings of races vary over time, involving folk taxonomies[10] that define essential types of individuals based on perceived traits. Scientists consider biological essentialism obsolete,[11] and generally discourage racial explanations for collective differentiation in both physical and behavioral traits.[12][13][14][15][16]
Even though there is a broad scientific agreement that essentialist and typological conceptualizations of race are untenable, scientists around the world continue to conceptualize race in widely differing ways, some of which have essentialist implications.[17] While some researchers use the concept of race to make distinctions among fuzzy sets of traits or observable differences in behaviour, others in the scientific community suggest that the idea of race often is used in a naive[12] or simplistic way,[18] and argue that, among humans, race has no taxonomic significance by pointing out that all living humans belong to the same species, Homo sapiens, and (as far as applicable) subspecies, Homo sapiens sapiens.[19][20]
Since the second half of the 20th century, the association of race with the ideologies and theories of scientific racism has led to the use of the word race itself becoming problematic.[according to whom?] Although still used in general contexts, race has often been replaced by less ambiguous and loaded terms: populations, people(s), ethnic groups, or communities, depending on context.[7][21]



Contents


1 Defining race
2 Historical origins of racial classification

2.1 Race and colonialism
2.2 Early taxonomic models
2.3 Race and polygenism


3 Modern scholarship

3.1 Models of human evolution
3.2 Biological classification

3.2.1 Morphologically differentiated populations
3.2.2 Ancestrally differentiated populations

3.2.2.1 Clines


3.2.3 Genetically differentiated populations

3.2.3.1 Fixation index
3.2.3.2 Cluster analysis




3.3 Social constructions

3.3.1 Brazil
3.3.2 European Union
3.3.3 France
3.3.4 United States




4 Views across disciplines over time

4.1 Anthropology

4.1.1 United States


4.2 Biology, anatomy, and medicine


5 Political and practical uses

5.1 Biomedicine
5.2 Law enforcement

5.2.1 Forensic anthropology




6 See also
7 References
8 Bibliography
9 Further reading

9.1 Popular press


10 External links

10.1 Official statements





Defining race
Modern scholarship views racial categories as socially constructed, that is, race is not intrinsic to human beings but rather an identity created to establish meaning in a social context.[22] Such racial identities reflect the cultural attitudes of imperial powers dominant during the age of European colonial expansion.[3] This view rejects the notion that race is biologically defined.[23][24][25][26][27][28][29][excessive citations] Nonetheless, some biologists argue that racial categories correlate with biological traits (e.g. phenotype), and that certain genetic markers have varying frequencies among human populations, some of which correspond more or less to traditional racial groupings. For this reason, there is no current consensus about whether racial categories can be considered to have significance for understanding human genetic variation.[30][undue weight? – discuss]
When people define and talk about a particular conception of race, they create a social reality through which social categorization is achieved.[31] In this sense, races are said to be social constructs.[32] These constructs develop within various legal, economic, and sociopolitical contexts, and may be the effect, rather than the cause, of major social situations.[33] While race is understood to be a social construct by many, most scholars agree that race has real material effects in the lives of people through institutionalized practices of preference and discrimination.
Socioeconomic factors, in combination with early but enduring views of race, have led to considerable suffering within disadvantaged racial groups.[34] Racial discrimination often coincides with racist mindsets, whereby the individuals and ideologies of one group come to perceive the members of an outgroup as both racially defined and morally inferior.[35] As a result, racial groups possessing relatively little power often find themselves excluded or oppressed, while hegemonic individuals and institutions are charged with holding racist attitudes.[36] Racism has led to many instances of tragedy, including slavery and genocide.[37]
In some countries, law enforcement uses race to profile suspects. This use of racial categories is frequently criticized for perpetuating an outmoded understanding of human biological variation, and promoting stereotypes. Because in some societies racial groupings correspond closely with patterns of social stratification, for social scientists studying social inequality, race can be a significant variable. As sociological factors, racial categories may in part reflect subjective attributions, self-identities, and social institutions.[38][39]
Scholars continue to debate the degrees to which racial categories are biologically warranted and socially constructed.[40] For example, in 2008, John Hartigan, Jr. argued for a view of race that focused primarily on culture, but which does not ignore the potential relevance of biology or genetics.[41] Accordingly, the racial paradigms employed in different disciplines vary in their emphasis on biological reduction as contrasted with societal construction.
In the social sciences, theoretical frameworks such as racial formation theory and critical race theory investigate implications of race as social construction by exploring how the images, ideas and assumptions of race are expressed in everyday life. A large body of scholarship has traced the relationships between the historical, social production of race in legal and criminal language, and their effects on the policing and disproportionate incarceration of certain groups.
Historical origins of racial classification
See also: Historical race concepts




The three great races according to Meyers Konversations-Lexikon of 1885-90. The subtypes of the Mongoloid race are shown in yellow and orange tones, those of the Caucasoid race in light and medium grayish spring green-cyan tones and those of the Negroid race in brown tones. Dravidians and Sinhalese are in olive green and their classification is described as uncertain. The Mongoloid race sees the widest geographic distribution, including all of the Americas, North Asia, East Asia, and Southeast Asia, the entire inhabited Arctic while they form most of Central Asia and the Pacific Islands.






The racial diversity of Asia's peoples, Nordisk familjebok (1904)


Groups of humans have always identified themselves as distinct from neighboring groups, but such differences have not always been understood to be natural, immutable and global. These features are the distinguishing features of how the concept of race is used today. In this way the idea of race as we understand it today came about during the historical process of exploration and conquest which brought Europeans into contact with groups from different continents, and of the ideology of classification and typology found in the natural sciences.[42]
Race and colonialism
According to Smedley and Marks the European concept of "race", along with many of the ideas now associated with the term, arose at the time of the scientific revolution, which introduced and privileged the study of natural kinds, and the age of European imperialism and colonization which established political relations between Europeans and peoples with distinct cultural and political traditions.[42][43] As Europeans encountered people from different parts of the world, they speculated about the physical, social, and cultural differences among various human groups. The rise of the Atlantic slave trade, which gradually displaced an earlier trade in slaves from throughout the world, created a further incentive to categorize human groups in order to justify the subordination of African slaves.[44] Drawing on sources from classical antiquity and upon their own internal interactions – for example, the hostility between the English and Irish powerfully influenced early European thinking about the differences between people[45] – Europeans began to sort themselves and others into groups based on physical appearance, and to attribute to individuals belonging to these groups behaviors and capacities which were claimed to be deeply ingrained. A set of folk beliefs took hold that linked inherited physical differences between groups to inherited intellectual, behavioral, and moral qualities.[46] Similar ideas can be found in other cultures,[47] for example in China, where a concept often translated as "race" was associated with supposed common descent from the Yellow Emperor, and used to stress the unity of ethnic groups in China. Brutal conflicts between ethnic groups have existed throughout history and across the world.[48]
Early taxonomic models
The first post-Graeco-Roman published classification of humans into distinct races seems to be François Bernier's Nouvelle division de la terre par les différents espèces ou races qui l'habitent ("New division of Earth by the different species or races which inhabit it"), published in 1684.[49] In the 18th century the differences among human groups became a focus of scientific investigation. But the scientific classification of phenotypic variation was frequently coupled with racist ideas about innate predispositions of different groups, always attributing the most desirable features to the White, European race and arranging the other races along a continuum of progressively undesirable attributes. The 1735 classification of Carl Linnaeus, inventor of zoological taxonomy, divided the human species Homo sapiens into continental varieties of europaeus, asiaticus, americanus, and afer, each associated with a different humour: sanguine, melancholic, choleric, and phlegmatic, respectively.[50][51] Homo sapiens europaeus was described as active, acute, and adventurous, whereas Homo sapiens afer was said to be crafty, lazy, and careless.[52]
The 1775 treatise "The Natural Varieties of Mankind", by Johann Friedrich Blumenbach proposed five major divisions: the Caucasoid race, the Mongoloid race, the Ethiopian race (later termed Negroid), the American Indian race, and the Malayan race, but he did not propose any hierarchy among the races.[52] Blumenbach also noted the graded transition in appearances from one group to adjacent groups and suggested that "one variety of mankind does so sensibly pass into the other, that you cannot mark out the limits between them".[53]
From the 17th through 19th centuries, the merging of folk beliefs about group differences with scientific explanations of those differences produced what Smedley has called an "ideology of race".[43] According to this ideology, races are primordial, natural, enduring and distinct. It was further argued that some groups may be the result of mixture between formerly distinct populations, but that careful study could distinguish the ancestral races that had combined to produce admixed groups.[48] Subsequent influential classifications by Georges Buffon, Petrus Camper and Christoph Meiners all classified "Negros" as inferior to Europeans.[52] In the United States the racial theories of Thomas Jefferson were influential. He saw Africans as inferior to Whites especially in regards to their intellect, and imbued with unnatural sexual appetites, but described Native Americans as equals to whites.[54]
Race and polygenism
In the last two decades of the 18th century, the theory of polygenism, the belief that different races had evolved separately in each continent and shared no common ancestor,[55] was advocated in England by historian Edward Long and anatomist Charles White, in Germany by ethnographers Christoph Meiners and Georg Forster, and in France by Julien-Joseph Virey. In the US, Samuel George Morton, Josiah Nott and Louis Agassiz promoted this theory in the mid-nineteenth century. Polygenism was popular and most widespread in the 19th century, culminating in the founding of the Anthropological Society of London (1863) during the period of the American Civil War, in opposition to the Ethnological Society of London, which had abolitionist sympathies.[56]
 Modern scholarship
Models of human evolution
See also: Multiregional hypothesis and Recent single origin hypothesis
Today, all humans are classified as belonging to the species Homo sapiens. However, this is not the first species of homininae: the first species of genus Homo, Homo habilis, evolved in East Africa at least 2 million years ago, and members of this species populated different parts of Africa in a relatively short time. Homo erectus evolved more than 1.8 million years ago, and by 1.5 million years ago had spread throughout Europe and Asia. Virtually all physical anthropologists agree that Archaic Homo sapiens (A group including the possible species H. heidelbergensis, H. rhodesiensis and H. neanderthalensis) evolved out of African Homo erectus (sensu lato) or Homo ergaster.[57][58] Anthropologists support the idea that anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens) evolved in North or East Africa from an archaic human species such as H. heidelbergensis and then migrated out of Africa, mixing with and replacing H. heidelbergensis and H. neanderthalensis populations throughout Europe and Asia, and H. rhodesiensis populations in Sub-Saharan Africa (a combination of the Out of Africa and Multiregional models).[59][verification needed]
Biological classification
Further information: Race (biology), Species, Subspecies, Systematics, Phylogenetics, and Cladistics
In the early 20th century, many anthropologists taught that race was an entirely biologically phenomenon and that this was core to a person's behavior and identity, a position commonly called racial essentialism.[60] This, coupled with a belief that linguistic, cultural, and social groups fundamentally existed along racial lines, formed the basis of what is now called scientific racism.[61] After the Nazi eugenics program, along with the rise of anti-colonial movements, racial essentialism lost widespread popularity.[62] New studies of culture and the fledgling field of population genetics undermined the scientific standing of racial essentialism, leading race anthropologists to revise their conclusions about the sources of phenotypic variation.[60] A significant number of modern anthropologists and biologists in the West came to view race as an invalid genetic or biological designation.[63]
The first to challenge the concept of race on empirical grounds were the anthropologists Franz Boas, who provided evidence of phenotypic plasticity due to environmental factors,[64] and Ashley Montagu, who relied on evidence from genetics.[65] E. O. Wilson then challenged the concept from the perspective of general animal systematics, and further rejected the claim that "races" were equivalent to "subspecies".[66]
Human genetic variation is predominantly within races, continuous, and complex in structure, which is inconsistent with the concept of genetic human races.[67] According to Jonathan Marks,[42]

By the 1970s, it had become clear that (1) most human differences were cultural; (2) what was not cultural was principally polymorphic – that is to say, found in diverse groups of people at different frequencies; (3) what was not cultural or polymorphic was principally clinal – that is to say, gradually variable over geography; and (4) what was left – the component of human diversity that was not cultural, polymorphic, or clinal -was very small.
A consensus consequently developed among anthropologists and geneticists that race as the previous generation had known it – as largely discrete, geographically distinct, gene pools – did not exist.

The term race in biology is used with caution because it can be ambiguous. Generally, when it is used it is effectively a synonym of subspecies.[68] (For animals, the only taxonomic unit below the species level is usually the subspecies;[69] there are narrower infraspecific ranks in botany, and race does not correspond directly with any of them.)
Population geneticists have debated whether the concept of population can provide a basis for a new conception of race. To do this, a working definition of population must be found. Surprisingly, there is no generally accepted concept of population that biologists use. Although the concept of population is central to ecology, evolutionary biology and conservation biology, most definitions of population rely on qualitative descriptions such as "a group of organisms of the same species occupying a particular space at a particular time".[70] Waples and Gaggiotti identify two broad types of definitions for populations; those that fall into an ecological paradigm, and those that fall into an evolutionary paradigm. Examples of such definitions are:

Ecological paradigm: A group of individuals of the same species that co-occur in space and time and have an opportunity to interact with each other.
Evolutionary paradigm: A group of individuals of the same species living in close-enough proximity that any member of the group can potentially mate with any other member.[70]

Morphologically differentiated populations
Traditionally, subspecies are seen as geographically isolated and genetically differentiated populations.[71] That is, "the designation 'subspecies' is used to indicate an objective degree of microevolutionary divergence".[19] One objection to this idea is that it does not specify what degree of differentiation is required. Therefore, any population that is somewhat biologically different could be considered a subspecies, even to the level of a local population. As a result, Templeton has argued that it is necessary to impose a threshold on the level of difference that is required for a population to be designated a subspecies.[71]
In 1978, Sewall Wright suggested that human populations that have long inhabited separated parts of the world should, in general, be considered different subspecies by the usual criterion that most individuals of such populations can be allocated correctly by inspection. Wright argued that it does not require a trained anthropologist to classify an array of Englishmen, West Africans, and Chinese with 100% accuracy by features, skin color, and type of hair despite so much variability within each of these groups that every individual can easily be distinguished from every other. However, it is customary to use the term race rather than subspecies for the major subdivisions of the human species as well as for minor ones.[72]
On the other hand, in practice subspecies are often defined by easily observable physical appearance, but there is not necessarily any evolutionary significance to these observed differences, so this form of classification has become less acceptable to evolutionary biologists.[73] Likewise this typological approach to race is generally regarded as discredited by biologists and anthropologists.
Because of the difficulty in classifying subspecies morphologically, many biologists have found the concept problematic, citing issues such as:[19]

Visible physical differences do not always correlate with one another, leading to the possibility of different classifications for the same individual organisms.
Parallel evolution can lead to the existence of the appearance of similarities between groups of organisms that are not part of the same species.
Isolated populations within previously designated subspecies have been found to exist.
The criteria for classification may be arbitrary if they ignore gradual variation in traits.

Sesardic argues that when several traits are analyzed at the same time, forensic anthropologists can classify a person's race with an accuracy of close to 100% based on only skeletal remains.[74] Sesardic's claim has been disputed by Massimo Pigliucci, who accused Sesardic of "cherry pick[ing] the scientific evidence and reach[ing] conclusions that are contradicted by it." Specifically, Pigliucci argues that Sesardic misrepresented a paper by Ousley et al. (2009), and neglected to mention that they identified differentiation not just between individuals from different races, but also between individuals from different tribes, local environments, and time periods.[75] This is discussed in a later section.
Ancestrally differentiated populations
Some researchers have tried to clarify the idea of race by equating it to the biological idea of the clade. A clade is a taxonomic group of organisms consisting of a single common ancestor and all the descendants of that ancestor. Every creature produced by sexual reproduction has two immediate lineages, one maternal and one paternal.[76] Whereas Carl Linnaeus established a taxonomy of living organisms based on anatomical similarities and differences, cladistics seeks to establish a taxonomy – the phylogenetic tree – based on genetic similarities and differences and tracing the process of acquisition of multiple characteristics by single organisms.
The smooth gradation of human genetic variation in general tends to rule out any idea that human population groups can be considered monophyletic (cleanly divided), as there appears to always have been considerable gene flow between human populations.[71] Rachel Caspari (2003) have argued that clades are by definition monophyletic groups (a taxon that includes all descendants of a given ancestor) and since no groups currently regarded as races are monophyletic, none of those groups can be clades.
Philosopher Robin Andreasen (2000) proposes that cladistics can be used to categorize human races biologically, and that races can be both biologically real and socially constructed.[77] Andreasen cites tree diagrams of relative genetic distances among populations published by Luigi Cavalli-Sforza as the basis for a phylogenetic tree of human races: "Cavalli-Sforza's research illustrates that it is possible to reconstruct human evolutionary history, and this means that it is possible to provide a cladistic definition of race" (p. S661). Evolutionary biologist Alan Templeton (2013) argues that while "Much of the recent scientific literature on human evolution portrays human populations as separate branches on an evolutionary tree," multiple lines of evidence falsify a phylogenetic tree structure, and confirm the presence of gene flow among populations.[29] Jonathan Marks (2008) argues that Andreasen has misinterpreted the genetic literature: "These trees are phenetic (based on similarity), rather than cladistic (based on based on monophyletic descent, that is from a series of unique ancestors)."[78] Marks, Templeton, and Cavalli-Sforza all conclude that genetics does not provide evidence of human races.[29][79]
For the anthropologists Lieberman and Jackson (1995), however, there are methodological and conceptual problems with using cladistics to support concepts of race. They claim that "the molecular and biochemical proponents of this model explicitly use racial categories in their initial grouping of samples". For example, the large and highly diverse macroethnic groups of East Indians, North Africans, and Europeans are presumptively grouped as Caucasians prior to the analysis of their DNA variation. This is claimed to limit and skew interpretations, obscure other lineage relationships, deemphasize the impact of more immediate clinal environmental factors on genomic diversity, and can cloud our understanding of the true patterns of affinity. They argue that however significant the empirical research, these studies use the term race in conceptually imprecise and careless ways. They suggest that the authors of these studies find support for racial distinctions only because they began by assuming the validity of race. "For empirical reasons we prefer to place emphasis on clinal variation, which recognizes the existence of adaptive human hereditary variation and simultaneously stresses that such variation is not found in packages that can be labeled races."[80]
These scientists do not dispute the importance of cladistic research, only its retention of the word race, when reference to populations and clinal gradations are more than adequate to describe the results.[citation needed]
Clines
One crucial innovation in reconceptualizing genotypic and phenotypic variation was the anthropologist C. Loring Brace's observation that such variations, insofar as it is affected by natural selection, slow migration, or genetic drift, are distributed along geographic gradations or clines.[81] In part this is due to isolation by distance. This point called attention to a problem common to phenotype-based descriptions of races (for example, those based on hair texture and skin color): they ignore a host of other similarities and differences (for example, blood type) that do not correlate highly with the markers for race. Thus, anthropologist Frank Livingstone's conclusion, that since clines cross racial boundaries, "there are no races, only clines".[82]
In a response to Livingstone, Theodore Dobzhansky argued that when talking about race one must be attentive to how the term is being used: "I agree with Dr. Livingstone that if races have to be 'discrete units', then there are no races, and if 'race' is used as an 'explanation' of the human variability, rather than vice versa, then the explanation is invalid." He further argued that one could use the term race if one distinguished between "race differences" and "the race concept". The former refers to any distinction in gene frequencies between populations; the latter is "a matter of judgment". He further observed that even when there is clinal variation, "Race differences are objectively ascertainable biological phenomena ... but it does not follow that racially distinct populations must be given racial (or subspecific) labels."[82] In short, Livingstone and Dobzhansky agree that there are genetic differences among human beings; they also agree that the use of the race concept to classify people, and how the race concept is used, is a matter of social convention. They differ on whether the race concept remains a meaningful and useful social convention.
In 1964, the biologists Paul Ehrlich and Holm pointed out cases where two or more clines are distributed discordantly – for example, melanin is distributed in a decreasing pattern from the equator north and south; frequencies for the haplotype for beta-S hemoglobin, on the other hand, radiate out of specific geographical points in Africa.[83] As the anthropologists Leonard Lieberman and Fatimah Linda Jackson observed, "Discordant patterns of heterogeneity falsify any description of a population as if it were genotypically or even phenotypically homogeneous".[80]
Patterns such as those seen in human physical and genetic variation as described above, have led to the consequence that the number and geographic location of any described races is highly dependent on the importance attributed to, and quantity of, the traits considered. Scientists discovered a skin-lighting mutation that partially accounts for the appearance of Light skin in humans (people who migrated out of Africa northward into what is now Europe) which they estimate occurred 20,000 to 50,000 years ago. The East Asians owe their relatively light skin to different mutations.[84] On the other hand, the greater the number of traits (or alleles) considered, the more subdivisions of humanity are detected, since traits and gene frequencies do not always correspond to the same geographical location. Or as Ossorio & Duster (2005) put it:

Anthropologists long ago discovered that humans' physical traits vary gradually, with groups that are close geographic neighbors being more similar than groups that are geographically separated. This pattern of variation, known as clinal variation, is also observed for many alleles that vary from one human group to another. Another observation is that traits or alleles that vary from one group to another do not vary at the same rate. This pattern is referred to as nonconcordant variation. Because the variation of physical traits is clinal and nonconcordant, anthropologists of the late 19th and early 20th centuries discovered that the more traits and the more human groups they measured, the fewer discrete differences they observed among races and the more categories they had to create to classify human beings. The number of races observed expanded to the 1930s and 1950s, and eventually anthropologists concluded that there were no discrete races.[85] Twentieth and 21st century biomedical researchers have discovered this same feature when evaluating human variation at the level of alleles and allele frequencies. Nature has not created four or five distinct, nonoverlapping genetic groups of people.

Recent studies of human genetic clustering have included a debate over how genetic variation is organized, with clusters and clines as the main possible orderings. Serre & Pääbo (2004) argued for smooth, clinal genetic variation in ancestral populations even in regions previously considered racially homogeneous, with the apparent gaps turning out to be artifacts of sampling techniques. Rosenberg et al. (2005) disputed this and offered an analysis of the Human Genetic Diversity Panel showing that there were small discontinuities in the smooth genetic variation for ancestral populations at the location of geographic barriers such as the Sahara, the Oceans, and the Himalayas. Nonetheless, Rosenberg et al. (2005) stated that their findings “should not be taken as evidence of our support of any particular concept of biological race... Genetic differences among human populations derive mainly from gradations in allele frequencies rather than from distinctive 'diagnostic' genotypes." Using a sample of 40 populations distributed roughly evenly across the Earth's land surface, Xing et al. (2010) found that "genetic diversity is distributed in a more clinal pattern when more geographically intermediate populations are sampled."
Genetically differentiated populations
Main article: Race and genetics
Another way to look at differences between populations is to measure genetic differences rather than physical differences between groups. The mid-20th-century anthropologist William C. Boyd defined race as: "A population which differs significantly from other populations in regard to the frequency of one or more of the genes it possesses. It is an arbitrary matter which, and how many, gene loci we choose to consider as a significant 'constellation'".[86] Leonard Lieberman and Rodney Kirk have pointed out that "the paramount weakness of this statement is that if one gene can distinguish races then the number of races is as numerous as the number of human couples reproducing."[87] Moreover, the anthropologist Stephen Molnar has suggested that the discordance of clines inevitably results in a multiplication of races that renders the concept itself useless.[88] The Human Genome Project states "People who have lived in the same geographic region for many generations may have some alleles in common, but no allele will be found in all members of one population and in no members of any other."[89] Massimo Pigliucci and Jonathan Kaplan argue that human races do exist, and that they correspond to the genetic classification of ecotypes, but that real human races do not correspond very much, if at all, to folk racial categories.[90] In contrast, Walsh & Yun reviewed the literature in 2011 and reported that "Genetic studies using very few chromosomal loci find that genetic polymorphisms divide human populations into clusters with almost 100 percent accuracy and that they correspond to the traditional anthropological categories."[91]
Fixation index
The population geneticist Sewall Wright developed one way of measuring genetic differences between populations known as the Fixation index, which is often abbreviated to FST. This statistic is often used in taxonomy to compare differences between any two given populations by measuring the genetic differences among and between populations for individual genes, or for many genes simultaneously.[92] It is often stated that the fixation index for humans is about 0.15. This translates to an estimated 85% of the variation measured in the overall human population is found within individuals of the same population, and about 15% of the variation occurs between populations. These estimates imply that any two individuals from different populations are almost as likely to be more similar to each other than either is to a member of their own group.[19][71][93] Richard Lewontin, who affirmed these ratios, thus concluded neither "race" nor "subspecies" were appropriate or useful ways to describe human populations.[94] However, others have noticed that group variation was relatively similar to the variation observed in other mammalian species.[95][96]
Wright himself believed that values >0.25 represent very great genetic variation and that an FST of 0.15–0.25 represented great variation. However, about 5% of human variation occurs between populations within continents, therefore FST values between continental groups of humans (or races) of as low as 0.1 (or possibly lower) have been found in some studies, suggesting more moderate levels of genetic variation.[92] Graves (1996) has countered that FST should not be used as a marker of subspecies status, as the statistic is used to measure the degree of differentiation between populations,[92] although see also Wright (1978).[72]
In an ongoing debate, some geneticists[who?] argue that race is neither a meaningful concept nor a useful heuristic device,[97] and even that genetic differences among groups are biologically meaningless,[98] because more genetic variation exists within such races than among them, and that racial traits overlap without discrete boundaries.[99]
Jeffrey Long and Rick Kittles give a long critique of the application of FST to human populations in their 2003 paper "Human Genetic Diversity and the Nonexistence of Biological Races". They find that the figure of 85% is misleading because it implies that all human populations contain on average 85% of all genetic diversity. They claim that this does not correctly reflect human population history, because it treats all human groups as independent. A more realistic portrayal of the way human groups are related is to understand that some human groups are parental to other groups and that these groups represent paraphyletic groups to their descent groups. For example, under the recent African origin theory the human population in Africa is paraphyletic to all other human groups because it represents the ancestral group from which all non-African populations derive, but more than that, non-African groups only derive from a small non-representative sample of this African population. This means that all non-African groups are more closely related to each other and to some African groups (probably east Africans) than they are to others, and further that the migration out of Africa represented a genetic bottleneck, with much of the diversity that existed in Africa not being carried out of Africa by the emigrating groups. This view produces a version of human population movements that do not result in all human populations being independent; but rather, produces a series of dilutions of diversity the further from Africa any population lives, each founding event representing a genetic subset of its parental population. Long and Kittles find that rather than 85% of human genetic diversity existing in all human populations, about 100% of human diversity exists in a single African population, whereas only about 70% of human genetic diversity exists in a population derived from New Guinea. Long and Kittles argued that this still produces a global human population that is genetically homogeneous compared to other mammalian populations.[100]
Cluster analysis
Main article: Human genetic clustering
A 2002 study of random biallelic genetic loci found little to no evidence that humans were divided into distinct biological groups.[101]
In his 2003 paper, "Human Genetic Diversity: Lewontin's Fallacy", A. W. F. Edwards argued that rather than using a locus-by-locus analysis of variation to derive taxonomy, it is possible to construct a human classification system based on characteristic genetic patterns, or clusters inferred from multilocus genetic data.[102][103] Geographically based human studies since have shown that such genetic clusters can be derived from analyzing of a large number of loci which can assort individuals sampled into groups analogous to traditional continental racial groups.[104] Joanna Mountain and Neil Risch cautioned that while genetic clusters may one day be shown to correspond to phenotypic variations between groups, such assumptions were premature as the relationship between genes and complex traits remains poorly understood.[105] However, Risch denied such limitations render the analysis useless: "Perhaps just using someone's actual birth year is not a very good way of measuring age. Does that mean we should throw it out? ... Any category you come up with is going to be imperfect, but that doesn't preclude you from using it or the fact that it has utility."[106]
Early human genetic cluster analysis studies were conducted with samples taken from ancestral population groups living at extreme geographic distances from each other. It was thought that such large geographic distances would maximize the genetic variation between the groups sampled in the analysis and thus maximize the probability of finding cluster patterns unique to each group. In light of the historically recent acceleration of human migration (and correspondingly, human gene flow) on a global scale, further studies were conducted to judge the degree to which genetic cluster analysis can pattern ancestrally identified groups as well as geographically separated groups. One such study looked at a large multiethnic population in the United States, and "detected only modest genetic differentiation between different current geographic locales within each race/ethnicity group. Thus, ancient geographic ancestry, which is highly correlated with self-identified race/ethnicity – as opposed to current residence – is the major determinant of genetic structure in the U.S. population." (Tang et al. (2005))
Witherspoon et al. (2007) have argued that even when individuals can be reliably assigned to specific population groups, it may still be possible for two randomly chosen individuals from different populations/clusters to be more similar to each other than to a randomly chosen member of their own cluster. They found that many thousands of genetic markers had to be used in order for the answer to the question "How often is a pair of individuals from one population genetically more dissimilar than two individuals chosen from two different populations?" to be "never". This assumed three population groups separated by large geographic ranges (European, African and East Asian). The entire world population is much more complex and studying an increasing number of groups would require an increasing number of markers for the same answer. The authors conclude that "caution should be used when using geographic or genetic ancestry to make inferences about individual phenotypes."[107] Witherspoon, et al. concluded that, "The fact that, given enough genetic data, individuals can be correctly assigned to their populations of origin is compatible with the observation that most human genetic variation is found within populations, not between them. It is also compatible with our ﬁnding that, even when the most distinct populations are considered and hundreds of loci are used, individuals are frequently more similar to members of other populations than to members of their own population."[107]
Anthropologists such as C. Loring Brace,[108] the philosophers Jonathan Kaplan and Rasmus Winther,[6][109][110][111] and the geneticist Joseph Graves,[18] have argued that while there it is certainly possible to find biological and genetic variation that corresponds roughly to the groupings normally defined as "continental races", this is true for almost all geographically distinct populations. The cluster structure of the genetic data is therefore dependent on the initial hypotheses of the researcher and the populations sampled. When one samples continental groups, the clusters become continental; if one had chosen other sampling patterns, the clustering would be different. Weiss and Fullerton have noted that if one sampled only Icelanders, Mayans and Maoris, three distinct clusters would form and all other populations could be described as being clinally composed of admixtures of Maori, Icelandic and Mayan genetic materials.[112] Kaplan and Winther therefore argue that, seen in this way, both Lewontin and Edwards are right in their arguments. They conclude that while racial groups are characterized by different allele frequencies, this does not mean that racial classification is a natural taxonomy of the human species, because multiple other genetic patterns can be found in human populations that crosscut racial distinctions. Moreover, the genomic data underdetermines whether one wishes to see subdivisions (i.e., splitters) or a continuum (i.e., lumpers). Under Kaplan and Winther's view, racial groupings are objective social constructions (see Mills 1998[113]) that have conventional biological reality only insofar as the categories are chosen and constructed for pragmatic scientific reasons. In earlier work, Winther had identified "diversity partitioning" and "clustering analysis" as two separate methodologies, with distinct questions, assumptions, and protocols. Each is also associated with opposing ontological consequences vis-a-vis the metaphysics of race.[114] Philosopher Lisa Gannett has argued that biogeographical ancestry, a concept devised by Mark Shriver and Tony Frudakis, is not an objective measure of the biological aspects of race as Shriver and Frudakis claim it is. She argues that it is actually just a "local category shaped by the U.S. context of its production, especially the forensic aim of being able to predict the race or ethnicity of an unknown suspect based on DNA found at the crime scene."[115]
Guido Barbujani has written that human genetic variation is generally distributed continuously in gradients across much of Earth, and that there is no evidence that genetic boundaries between human populations exist as would be necessary for human races to exist.[116]
Over time, human genetic variation has formed a nested structure that is inconsistent with the concept of races that have evolved independently of one another.[117]
Social constructions
Main articles: Race and society and Racialism
As anthropologists and other evolutionary scientists have shifted away from the language of race to the term population to talk about genetic differences, historians, cultural anthropologists and other social scientists re-conceptualized the term "race" as a cultural category or social construct, i.e., a way among many possible ways in which a society chooses to divide its members into categories.
Many social scientists have replaced the word race with the word "ethnicity" to refer to self-identifying groups based on beliefs concerning shared culture, ancestry and history.[dubious – discuss] Alongside empirical and conceptual problems with "race", following the Second World War, evolutionary and social scientists were acutely aware of how beliefs about race had been used to justify discrimination, apartheid, slavery, and genocide. This questioning gained momentum in the 1960s during the civil rights movement in the United States and the emergence of numerous anti-colonial movements worldwide. They thus came to believe that race itself is a social construct, a concept that was believed to correspond to an objective reality but which was believed in because of its social functions.[118]
Craig Venter and Francis Collins of the National Institute of Health jointly made the announcement of the mapping of the human genome in 2000. Upon examining the data from the genome mapping, Venter realized that although the genetic variation within the human species is on the order of 1–3% (instead of the previously assumed 1%), the types of variations do not support notion of genetically defined races. Venter said, "Race is a social concept. It's not a scientific one. There are no bright lines (that would stand out), if we could compare all the sequenced genomes of everyone on the planet." "When we try to apply science to try to sort out these social differences, it all falls apart."[119]
Stephan Palmié asserted that race "is not a thing but a social relation";[120] or, in the words of Katya Gibel Mevorach, "a metonym", "a human invention whose criteria for differentiation are neither universal nor fixed but have always been used to manage difference."[121] As such, the use of the term "race" itself must be analyzed. Moreover, they argue that biology will not explain why or how people use the idea of race: History and social relationships will.
Imani Perry has argued that race "is produced by social arrangements and political decision making."[122] Perry explains race more in stating, "race is something that happens, rather than something that is. It is dynamic, but it holds no objective truth."[123]
Some scholars have challenged the notion that race is primarily a social construction by arguing that race has a biological basis.[124] One of the researchers, Neil Risch, noted: "we looked at the correlation between genetic structure [based on microsatellite markers] versus self-description, we found 99.9% concordance between the two. We actually had a higher discordance rate between self-reported sex and markers on the X chromosome! So you could argue that sex is also a problematic category. And there are differences between sex and gender; self-identification may not be correlated with biology perfectly. And there is sexism."[125]
Brazil
Main article: Race in Brazil




Portrait "Redenção de Cam" (1895), showing a Brazilian family becoming "whiter" each generation.


Compared to 19th-century United States, 20th-century Brazil was characterized by a perceived relative absence of sharply defined racial groups. According to anthropologist Marvin Harris, this pattern reflects a different history and different social relations.
Basically, race in Brazil was "biologized", but in a way that recognized the difference between ancestry (which determines genotype) and phenotypic differences. There, racial identity was not governed by rigid descent rule, such as the one-drop rule, as it was in the United States. A Brazilian child was never automatically identified with the racial type of one or both parents, nor were there only a very limited number of categories to choose from,[126] to the extent that full siblings can pertain to different racial groups.[127]
Over a dozen racial categories would be recognized in conformity with all the possible combinations of hair color, hair texture, eye color, and skin color. These types grade into each other like the colors of the spectrum, and not one category stands significantly isolated from the rest. That is, race referred preferentially to appearance, not heredity, and appearance is a poor indication of ancestry, because only a few genes are responsible for someone's skin color and traits: a person who is considered white may have more African ancestry than a person who is considered black, and the reverse can be also true about European ancestry.[128] The complexity of racial classifications in Brazil reflects the extent of miscegenation in Brazilian society, a society that remains highly, but not strictly, stratified along color lines. These socioeconomic factors are also significant to the limits of racial lines, because a minority of pardos, or brown people, are likely to start declaring themselves white or black if socially upward,[129] and being seen as relatively "whiter" as their perceived social status increases (much as in other regions of Latin America).[130]


Self-reported ancestry of people from
Rio de Janeiro, by race or skin color (2000 survey)[131]


Ancestry
brancos
pardos
negros


European only
48%
6%
–


African only
–
12%
25%


Amerindian only
–
2%
–


African and European
23%
34%
31%


Amerindian and European
14%
6%
–


African and Amerindian
–
4%
9%


African, Amerindian and European
15%
36%
35%


Total
100%
100%
100%


Any African
38%
86%
100%


Fluidity of racial categories aside, the "biologification" of race in Brazil referred above would match contemporary concepts of race in the United States quite closely, though, if Brazilians are supposed to choose their race as one among, Asian and Indigenous apart, three IBGE's census categories. While assimilated Amerindians and people with very high quantities of Amerindian ancestry are usually grouped as caboclos, a subgroup of pardos which roughly translates as both mestizo and hillbilly, for those of lower quantity of Amerindian descent a higher European genetic contribution is expected to be grouped as a pardo. In several genetic tests, people with less than 60-65% of European descent and 5–10% of Amerindian descent usually cluster with Afro-Brazilians (as reported by the individuals), or 6.9% of the population, and those with about 45% or more of Subsaharan contribution most times do so (in average, Afro-Brazilian DNA was reported to be about 50% Subsaharan African, 37% European and 13% Amerindian).[132][133][134][135]
If a more consistent report with the genetic groups in the gradation of miscegenation is to be considered (e.g. that would not cluster people with a balanced degree of African and non-African ancestry in the black group instead of the multiracial one, unlike elsewhere in Latin America where people of high quantity of African descent tend to classify themselves as mixed), more people would report themselves as white and pardo in Brazil (47.7% and 42.4% of the population as of 2010, respectively), because by research its population is believed to have between 65 and 80% of autosomal European ancestry, in average (also >35% of European mt-DNA and >95% of European Y-DNA).[132][136][137][138]


Ethnic groups in Brazil (census data)[139]


Ethnic group
white
black
multiracial


1872
3,787,289
1,954,452
4,188,737


1940
26,171,778
6,035,869
8,744,365


1991
75,704,927
7,335,136
62,316,064




Ethnic groups in Brazil (1872 and 1890)[140]


Years
whites
multiracial
blacks
Indians
Total


1872
38.1%
38.3%
19.7%
3.9%
100%


1890
44.0%
32.4%
14.6%
9%
100%


From the last decades of the Empire until the 1950s, the proportion of the white population increased significantly while Brazil welcomed 5.5 million immigrants between 1821 and 1932, not much behind its neighbor Argentina with 6.4 million,[141] and it received more European immigrants in its colonial history than the United States. Between 1500 and 1760, 700.000 Europeans settled in Brazil, while 530.000 Europeans settled in the United States for the same given time.[142] Thus, the historical construction of race in Brazilian society dealt primarily with gradations between persons of majoritarily European ancestry and little minority groups with otherwise lower quantity therefrom in recent times.
European Union
According to European Council:

The European Union rejects theories which attempt to determine the existence of separate human races.
— Directive 2000/43/EC[143]

The European Union uses the terms racial origin and ethnic origin synonymously in its documents and according to it "the use of the term 'racial origin' in this directive does not imply an acceptance of such [racial] theories".[143][144][full citation needed] Haney López warns that using "race" as a category within the law tends to legitimize its existence in the popular imagination. In the diverse geographic context of Europe, ethnicity and ethnic origin are arguably more resonant and are less encumbered by the ideological baggage associated with "race". In European context, historical resonance of "race" underscores its problematic nature. In some states, it is strongly associated with laws promulgated by the Nazi and Fascist governments in Europe during the 1930s and 1940s. Indeed, in 1996, the European Parliament adopted a resolution stating that "the term should therefore be avoided in all official texts".[145]
The concept of racial origin relies on the notion that human beings can be separated into biologically distinct "races", an idea generally rejected by the scientific community. Since all human beings belong to the same species, the ECRI (European Commission against Racism and Intolerance) rejects theories based on the existence of different "races". However, in its Recommendation ECRI uses this term in order to ensure that those persons who are generally and erroneously perceived as belonging to "another race" are not excluded from the protection provided for by the legislation. The law claims to reject the existence of "race", yet penalize situations where someone is treated less favourably on this ground.[145]
France
Since the end of the Second World War, France has become an ethnically diverse country. Today, approximately five percent of the French population is non-European and non-white. This does not approach the number of non-white citizens in the United States (roughly 28–37%, depending on how Latinos are classified (see Demographics of the United States). Nevertheless, it amounts to at least three million people, and has forced the issues of ethnic diversity onto the French policy agenda. France has developed an approach to dealing with ethnic problems that stands in contrast to that of many advanced, industrialized countries. Unlike the United States, Britain, or even the Netherlands, France maintains a "color-blind" model of public policy. This means that it targets virtually no policies directly at racial or ethnic groups. Instead, it uses geographic or class criteria to address issues of social inequalities. It has, however, developed an extensive anti-racist policy repertoire since the early 1970s. Until recently, French policies focused primarily on issues of hate speech – going much further than their American counterparts – and relatively less on issues of discrimination in jobs, housing, and in provision of goods and services.[146]
United States
Main article: Race and ethnicity in the United States
See also: Miscegenation § Admixture in the United States, and Historical racial and ethnic demographics of the United States
In the United States, there is disagreement on the nature of race within the biological sciences, whereas the social constructionist view is dominant in the social sciences; over time, biological views on race have become more controversial across all disciplines, with clear divides along generational, cultural, and racial lines.[147]
The immigrants to the Americas came from every region of Europe, Africa, and Asia. They mixed among themselves and with the indigenous inhabitants of the continent. In the United States most people who self-identify as African–American have some European ancestors, while many people who identify as European American have some African or Amerindian ancestors.
Since the early history of the United States, Amerindians, African–Americans, and European Americans have been classified as belonging to different races. Efforts to track mixing between groups led to a proliferation of categories, such as mulatto and octoroon. The criteria for membership in these races diverged in the late 19th century. During Reconstruction, increasing numbers of Americans began to consider anyone with "one drop" of known "Black blood" to be Black, regardless of appearance.3 By the early 20th century, this notion was made statutory in many states.4 Amerindians continue to be defined by a certain percentage of "Indian blood" (called blood quantum). To be White one had to have perceived "pure" White ancestry. The one-drop rule or hypodescent rule refers to the convention of defining a person as racially black if he or she has any known African ancestry. This rule meant that those that were mixed race but with some discernible African ancestry were defined as black. The one-drop rule is specific to not only those with African ancestry but to the United States, making it a particularly African-American experience.[148]
The decennial censuses conducted since 1790 in the United States created an incentive to establish racial categories and fit people into these categories.[149]
The term "Hispanic" as an ethnonym emerged in the 20th century with the rise of migration of laborers from the Spanish-speaking countries of Latin America to the United States. Today, the word "Latino" is often used as a synonym for "Hispanic". The definitions of both terms are non-race specific, and include people who consider themselves to be of distinct races (Black, White, Amerindian, Asian, and mixed groups).[150] However, there is a common misconception in the US that Hispanic/Latino is a race[151] or sometimes even that national origins such as Mexican, Cuban, Colombian, Salvadoran, etc. are races. In contrast to "Latino" or "Hispanic", "Anglo" refers to non-Hispanic White Americans or non-Hispanic European Americans, most of whom speak the English language but are not necessarily of English descent.
Views across disciplines over time
One result of debates over the meaning and validity of the concept of race is that the current literature across different disciplines regarding human variation lacks consensus, though within some fields, such as some branches of anthropology, there is strong consensus. Some studies use the word race in its early essentialist taxonomic sense. Many others still use the term race, but use it to mean a population, clade, or haplogroup. Others eschew the concept of race altogether, and use the concept of population as a less problematic unit of analysis.
Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, Sociology professor at Duke University, remarks,[152] "I contend that racism is, more than anything else, a matter of group power; it is about a dominant racial group (whites) striving to maintain its systemic advantages and minorities fighting to subvert the racial status quo."[153] The types of practices that take place under this new color-blind racism is subtle, institutionalized, and supposedly not racial. Color-blind racism thrives on the idea that race is no longer an issue in the United States.[153] There are contradictions between the alleged color-blindness of most whites and the persistence of a color-coded system of inequality.[citation needed]In Poland, the race concept was rejected by 25 percent of anthropologists in 2001, although: "Unlike the U.S. anthropologists, Polish anthropologists tend to regard race as a term without taxonomic value, often as a substitute for population."[154]
Anthropology






This section needs additional citations to secondary or tertiary sources such as review articles, monographs, or textbooks. Please add such references to provide context and establish the relevance of any primary research articles cited. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2017)



Wagner et al. (2017) surveyed American anthropologists' views on race and genetics. They found a consensus among them that biological races do not exist in humans, but that race does exist insofar as the social experiences of members of different races can have significant effects on health.[155]
Wang, Štrkalj et al. (2003) examined the use of race as a biological concept in research papers published in China's only biological anthropology journal, Acta Anthropologica Sinica. The study showed that the race concept was widely used among Chinese anthropologists.[156][157] In a 2007 review paper, Štrkalj suggested that the stark contrast of the racial approach between the United States and China was due to the fact that race is a factor for social cohesion among the ethnically diverse people of China, whereas "race" is a very sensitive issue in America and the racial approach is considered to undermine social cohesion – with the result that in the socio-political context of US academics scientists are encouraged not to use racial categories, whereas in China they are encouraged to use them.[158]
Lieberman et al. in a 2004 study researched the acceptance of race as a concept among anthropologists in the United States, Canada, the Spanish speaking areas, Europe, Russia and China. Rejection of race ranged from high to low, with the highest rejection rate in the United States and Canada, a moderate rejection rate in Europe, and the lowest rejection rate in Russia and China. Methods used in the studies reported included questionnaires and content analysis.[17]
Kaszycka et al. (2009) in 2002–2003 surveyed European anthropologists' opinions toward the biological race concept. Three factors, country of academic education, discipline, and age, were found to be significant in differentiating the replies. Those educated in Western Europe, physical anthropologists, and middle-aged persons rejected race more frequently than those educated in Eastern Europe, people in other branches of science, and those from both younger and older generations." The survey shows that the views on race are sociopolitically (ideologically) influenced and highly dependent on education."[159]
United States
Since the second half of the 20th century, physical anthropology in the United States has moved away from a typological understanding of human biological diversity towards a genomic and population-based perspective. Anthropologists have tended to understand race as a social classification of humans based on phenotype and ancestry as well as cultural factors, as the concept is understood in the social sciences.[160] Since 1932, an increasing number of college textbooks introducing physical anthropology have rejected race as a valid concept: from 1932 to 1976, only seven out of thirty-two rejected race; from 1975 to 1984, thirteen out of thirty-three rejected race; from 1985 to 1993, thirteen out of nineteen rejected race. According to one academic journal entry, where 78 percent of the articles in the 1931 Journal of Physical Anthropology employed these or nearly synonymous terms reflecting a bio-race paradigm, only 36 percent did so in 1965, and just 28 percent did in 1996.[161]
The "Statement on 'Race'" (1998) composed by a select committee of anthropologists and issued by the executive board of the American Anthropological Association as a statement they "believe [...] represents generally the contemporary thinking and scholarly positions of a majority of anthropologists", declares:[162]

In the United States both scholars and the general public have been conditioned to viewing human races as natural and separate divisions within the human species based on visible physical differences. With the vast expansion of scientific knowledge in this century, however, it has become clear that human populations are not unambiguous, clearly demarcated, biologically distinct groups. Evidence from the analysis of genetics (e.g., DNA) indicates that most physical variation, about 94%, lies within so-called racial groups. Conventional geographic "racial" groupings differ from one another only in about 6% of their genes. This means that there is greater variation within "racial" groups than between them. In neighboring populations there is much overlapping of genes and their phenotypic (physical) expressions. Throughout history whenever different groups have come into contact, they have interbred. The continued sharing of genetic materials has maintained all of humankind as a single species. [...]
With the vast expansion of scientific knowledge in this century, ... it has become clear that human populations are not unambiguous, clearly demarcated, biologically distinct groups. [...] Given what we know about the capacity of normal humans to achieve and function within any culture, we conclude that present-day inequalities between so-called "racial" groups are not consequences of their biological inheritance but products of historical and contemporary social, economic, educational, and political circumstances.

A survey, taken in 1985 (Lieberman et al. 1992), asked 1,200 American scientists how many disagree with the following proposition: "There are biological races in the species Homo sapiens." The responses were for anthropologists:

physical anthropologists 41%
cultural anthropologists 53%[163]

The figure for physical anthropologists at PhD granting departments was slightly higher, rising from 41% to 42%, with 50% agreeing. Lieberman's study also showed that more women reject the concept of race than men.[164] This survey, however, did not specify any particular definition of race (although it did clearly specify biological race within the species Homo sapiens); it is difficult to say whether those who supported the statement thought of race in taxonomic or population terms.
The same survey, taken in 1999,[165] showed the following changing results for anthropologists:

physical anthropologists 69%
cultural anthropologists 80%

However, a line of research conducted by Cartmill (1998) seemed to limit the scope of Lieberman's finding that there was "a significant degree of change in the status of the race concept". Goran Štrkalj has argued that this may be because Lieberman and collaborators had looked at all the members of the American Anthropological Association irrespective of their field of research interest, while Cartmill had looked specifically at biological anthropologists interested in human variation.[166]
According to the 2000 edition of a popular physical anthropology textbook, forensic anthropologists are overwhelmingly in support of the idea of the basic biological reality of human races.[167] Forensic physical anthropologist and professor George W. Gill has said that the idea that race is only skin deep "is simply not true, as any experienced forensic anthropologist will affirm" and "Many morphological features tend to follow geographic boundaries coinciding often with climatic zones. This is not surprising since the selective forces of climate are probably the primary forces of nature that have shaped human races with regard not only to skin color and hair form but also the underlying bony structures of the nose, cheekbones, etc. (For example, more prominent noses humidify air better.)" While he can see good arguments for both sides, the complete denial of the opposing evidence "seems to stem largely from socio-political motivation and not science at all". He also states that many biological anthropologists see races as real yet "not one introductory textbook of physical anthropology even presents that perspective as a possibility. In a case as flagrant as this, we are not dealing with science but rather with blatant, politically motivated censorship".[167]
In partial response to Gill's statement, Professor of Biological Anthropology C. Loring Brace argues that the reason laymen and biological anthropologists can determine the geographic ancestry of an individual can be explained by the fact that biological characteristics are clinally distributed across the planet, and that does not translate into the concept of race. He states:

Well, you may ask, why can't we call those regional patterns "races"? In fact, we can and do, but it does not make them coherent biological entities. "Races" defined in such a way are products of our perceptions. ... We realize that in the extremes of our transit – Moscow to Nairobi, perhaps – there is a major but gradual change in skin color from what we euphemistically call white to black, and that this is related to the latitudinal difference in the intensity of the ultraviolet component of sunlight. What we do not see, however, is the myriad other traits that are distributed in a fashion quite unrelated to the intensity of ultraviolet radiation. Where skin color is concerned, all the northern populations of the Old World are lighter than the long-term inhabitants near the equator. Although Europeans and Chinese are obviously different, in skin color they are closer to each other than either is to equatorial Africans. But if we test the distribution of the widely known ABO blood-group system, then Europeans and Africans are closer to each other than either is to Chinese.[168]

"Race" is still sometimes used within forensic anthropology (when analyzing skeletal remains), biomedical research, and race-based medicine.[169][170] Brace has criticized this, the practice of forensic anthropologists for using the controversial concept "race" out of convention when they in fact should be talking about regional ancestry. He argues that while forensic anthropologists can determine that a skeletal remain comes from a person with ancestors in a specific region of Africa, categorizing that skeletal as being "black" is a socially constructed category that is only meaningful in the particular context of the United States, and which is not itself scientifically valid.[171]
In 2007, Ann Morning interviewed over 40 American biologists and anthropologists and found significant disagreements over the nature of race, with no one viewpoint holding a majority among either group. Morning also argues that a third position, "antiessentialism", which holds that race is not a useful concept for biologists, should be introduced into this debate in addition to "constructionism" and "essentialism".[172]
Biology, anatomy, and medicine
In the same 1985 survey (Lieberman et al. 1992), 16% of the surveyed biologists and 36% of the surveyed developmental psychologists disagreed with the proposition: "There are biological races in the species Homo sapiens."
The authors of the study also examined 77 college textbooks in biology and 69 in physical anthropology published between 1932 and 1989. Physical anthropology texts argued that biological races exist until the 1970s, when they began to argue that races do not exist. In contrast, biology textbooks did not undergo such a reversal but many instead dropped their discussion of race altogether. The authors attributed this to biologists trying to avoid discussing the political implications of racial classifications, instead of discussing them, and to the ongoing discussions in biology about the validity of the concept "subspecies". The authors also noted that some widely used textbooks in biology such as Douglas J. Futuyma's 1986 "Evolutionary Biology" had abandoned the race concept, "The concept of race, masking the overwhelming genetic similarity of all peoples and the mosaic patterns of variation that do not correspond to racial divisions, is not only socially dysfunctional but is biologically indefensible as well (pp. 5 18–5 19)."(Lieberman et al. 1992, pp. 316–17)
A 1994 examination of 32 English sport/exercise science textbooks found that 7 (21.9%) claimed that there are biophysical differences due to race that might explain differences in sports performance, 24 (75%) did not mention nor refute the concept, and 1 (3.12%) expressed caution with the idea.[173]
In February 2001, the editors of Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine asked "authors to not use race and ethnicity when there is no biological, scientific, or sociological reason for doing so."[174] The editors also stated that "analysis by race and ethnicity has become an analytical knee-jerk reflex."[175] Nature Genetics now ask authors to "explain why they make use of particular ethnic groups or populations, and how classification was achieved."[176]
Morning (2008) looked at high school biology textbooks during the 1952–2002 period and initially found a similar pattern with only 35% directly discussing race in the 1983–92 period from initially 92% doing so. However, this has increased somewhat after this to 43%. More indirect and brief discussions of race in the context of medical disorders have increased from none to 93% of textbooks. In general, the material on race has moved from surface traits to genetics and evolutionary history. The study argues that the textbooks' fundamental message about the existence of races has changed little.[177]
Surveying views on race in the scientific community in 2008, Morning says that they often split along culture and demographic lines and that, since Lieberman's surveys, biologists have failed to come to a clear consensus, noting that "At best, one can conclude that biologists and anthropologists now appear equally divided in their beliefs about the nature of race."[172]
Gissis (2008) examined several important American and British journals in genetics, epidemiology and medicine for their content during the 1946–2003 period. He wrote that "Based upon my findings I argue that the category of race only seemingly disappeared from scientific discourse after World War II and has had a fluctuating yet continuous use during the time span from 1946 to 2003, and has even become more pronounced from the early 1970s on".[178]
33 health services researchers from differing geographic regions were interviewed in a 2008 study. The researchers recognized the problems with racial and ethnic variables but the majority still believed these variables were necessary and useful.[179]
A 2010 examination of 18 widely used English anatomy textbooks found that they all represented human biological variation in superficial and outdated ways, many of them making use of the race concept in ways that were current in 1950s anthropology. The authors recommended that anatomical education should describe human anatomical variation in more detail and rely on newer research that demonstrates the inadequacies of simple racial typologies.[180]
Political and practical uses
Biomedicine
Main article: Race and health
See also: Pharmacogenomics
In the United States, federal government policy promotes the use of racially categorized data to identify and address health disparities between racial or ethnic groups.[181] In clinical settings, race has sometimes been considered in the diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. Doctors have noted that some medical conditions are more prevalent in certain racial or ethnic groups than in others, without being sure of the cause of those differences. Recent interest in race-based medicine, or race-targeted pharmacogenomics, has been fueled by the proliferation of human genetic data which followed the decoding of the human genome in the first decade of the twenty-first century. There is an active debate among biomedical researchers about the meaning and importance of race in their research. Proponents of the use of racial categories in biomedicine argue that continued use of racial categorizations in biomedical research and clinical practice makes possible the application of new genetic findings, and provides a clue to diagnosis.[182][183] Biomedical researchers' positions on race fall into two main camps: those who consider the concept of race to have no biological basis and those who consider it to have the potential to be biologically meaningful. Members of the latter camp often base their arguments around the potential to create genome-based personalized medicine.[184]
Other researchers point out that finding a difference in disease prevalence between two socially defined groups does not necessarily imply genetic causation of the difference.[185][186] They suggest that medical practices should maintain their focus on the individual rather than an individual's membership to any group.[187] They argue that overemphasizing genetic contributions to health disparities carries various risks such as reinforcing stereotypes, promoting racism or ignoring the contribution of non-genetic factors to health disparities.[188] International epidemiological data show that living conditions rather than race make the biggest difference in health outcomes even for diseases that have "race-specific" treatments.[189] Some studies have found that patients are reluctant to accept racial categorization in medical practice.[183]
Law enforcement






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Racial profiling
See also: Race and crime in the United Kingdom and Race and crime in the United States
In an attempt to provide general descriptions that may facilitate the job of law enforcement officers seeking to apprehend suspects, the United States FBI employs the term "race" to summarize the general appearance (skin color, hair texture, eye shape, and other such easily noticed characteristics) of individuals whom they are attempting to apprehend. From the perspective of law enforcement officers, it is generally more important to arrive at a description that will readily suggest the general appearance of an individual than to make a scientifically valid categorization by DNA or other such means. Thus, in addition to assigning a wanted individual to a racial category, such a description will include: height, weight, eye color, scars and other distinguishing characteristics.
Criminal justice agencies in England and Wales use at least two separate racial/ethnic classification systems when reporting crime, as of 2010. One is the system used in the 2001 Census when individuals identify themselves as belonging to a particular ethnic group: W1 (White-British), W2 (White-Irish), W9 (Any other white background); M1 (White and black Caribbean), M2 (White and black African), M3 (White and Asian), M9 (Any other mixed background); A1 (Asian-Indian), A2 (Asian-Pakistani), A3 (Asian-Bangladeshi), A9 (Any other Asian background); B1 (Black Caribbean), B2 (Black African), B3 (Any other black background); O1 (Chinese), O9 (Any other). The other is categories used by the police when they visually identify someone as belonging to an ethnic group, e.g. at the time of a stop and search or an arrest: White – North European (IC1), White – South European (IC2), Black (IC3), Asian (IC4), Chinese, Japanese, or South East Asian (IC5), Middle Eastern (IC6), and Unknown (IC0). "IC" stands for "Identification Code;" these items are also referred to as Phoenix classifications.[190] Officers are instructed to "record the response that has been given" even if the person gives an answer which may be incorrect; their own perception of the person's ethnic background is recorded separately.[191] Comparability of the information being recorded by officers was brought into question by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) in September 2007, as part of its Equality Data Review; one problem cited was the number of reports that contained an ethnicity of "Not Stated."[192]
In many countries, such as France, the state is legally banned from maintaining data based on race, which often makes the police issue wanted notices to the public that include labels like "dark skin complexion", etc.[citation needed]
In the United States, the practice of racial profiling has been ruled to be both unconstitutional and a violation of civil rights. There is active debate regarding the cause of a marked correlation between the recorded crimes, punishments meted out, and the country's populations. Many consider de facto racial profiling an example of institutional racism in law enforcement. The history of misuse of racial categories to impact adversely one or more groups and/or to offer protection and advantage to another has a clear impact on debate of the legitimate use of known phenotypical or genotypical characteristics tied to the presumed race of both victims and perpetrators by the government.
Mass incarceration in the United States disproportionately impacts African American and Latino communities. Michelle Alexander, author of The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness (2010), argues that mass incarceration is best understood as not only a system of overcrowded prisons. Mass incarceration is also, "the larger web of laws, rules, policies, and customs that control those labeled criminals both in and out of prison."[193] She defines it further as "a system that locks people not only behind actual bars in actual prisons, but also behind virtual bars and virtual walls", illustrating the second-class citizenship that is imposed on a disproportionate number of people of color, specifically African-Americans. She compares mass incarceration to Jim Crow laws, stating that both work as racial caste systems.[194]
Recent work using DNA cluster analysis to determine race background has been used by some criminal investigators to narrow their search for the identity of both suspects and victims.[195] Proponents of DNA profiling in criminal investigations cite cases where leads based on DNA analysis proved useful, but the practice remains controversial among medical ethicists, defense lawyers and some in law enforcement.[196]
Forensic anthropology
Main article: Forensic anthropology
Similarly, forensic anthropologists draw on highly heritable morphological features of human remains (e.g. cranial measurements) to aid in the identification of the body, including in terms of race. In a 1992 article, anthropologist Norman Sauer noted that anthropologists had generally abandoned the concept of race as a valid representation of human biological diversity, except for forensic anthropologists. He asked, "If races don't exist, why are forensic anthropologists so good at identifying them?"[197] He concluded:

[T]he successful assignment of race to a skeletal specimen is not a vindication of the race concept, but rather a prediction that an individual, while alive was assigned to a particular socially constructed "racial" category. A specimen may display features that point to African ancestry. In this country that person is likely to have been labeled Black regardless of whether or not such a race actually exists in nature.[197]

Identification of the ancestry of an individual is dependent upon knowledge of the frequency and distribution of phenotypic traits in a population. This does not necessitate the use of a racial classification scheme based on unrelated traits, although the race concept is widely used in medical and legal contexts in the United States.[198] Some studies have reported that races can be identified with a high degree of accuracy using certain methods, such as that developed by Giles and Elliot. However, this method sometimes fails to be replicated in other times and places; for instance, when the method was re-tested to identify Native Americans, the average rate of accuracy dropped from 85% to 33%.[67] Prior information about the individual (e.g. Census data) is also important in allowing the accurate identification of the individual's "race".[199]
In a different approach, anthropologist C. Loring Brace said:

The simple answer is that, as members of the society that poses the question, they are inculcated into the social conventions that determine the expected answer. They should also be aware of the biological inaccuracies contained in that "politically correct" answer. Skeletal analysis provides no direct assessment of skin color, but it does allow an accurate estimate of original geographical origins. African, eastern Asian, and European ancestry can be specified with a high degree of accuracy. Africa of course entails "black", but "black" does not entail African.[200]

In association with a NOVA program in 2000 about race, he wrote an essay opposing use of the term.[201]
A 2002 study found that about 13% of human craniometric variation existed between regions, while 81% existed within regions (the other 6% existed between local populations within the same region). In contrast, the opposite pattern of genetic variation was observed for skin color (which is often used to define race), with 88% of variation between regions. The study concluded that "The apportionment of genetic diversity in skin color is atypical, and cannot be used for purposes of classification."[202] Similarly, a 2009 study found that craniometrics could be used accurately to determine what part of the world someone was from based on their cranium; however, this study also found that there were no abrupt boundaries that separated craniometric variation into distinct racial groups.[203] Another 2009 study showed that American blacks and whites had different skeletal morphologies, and that significant patterning in variation in these traits exists within continents. This suggests that classifying humans into races based on skeletal characteristics would necessitate many different "races" being defined.[204]
See also


Breed
Clan
Cultural identity
Environmental racism
Epicanthic fold
Ethnic nationalism
Ethnic stereotype
History of anthropometry § Race, identity and cranio-facial description
Human skin color
Hypatia transracialism controversy
List of contemporary ethnic groups
Melanism
Multiracial
Nationalism
Nomen dubium – a scientific name that is of unknown or doubtful application.
Pre-Adamite
Race and ethnicity in censuses (US)
Race and health
Race of the future
Racialization
Raciolinguistics
Racism
Supremacism
Races of Mankind for the Field Museum of Natural History exhibition by sculptor Malvina Hoffman
The Race Question
All pages beginning with "Racial"


References


^ Anemone, Robert L. (2011). "Race and biological diversity in humans". Race and Human Diversity: A Biocultural Approach. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. pp. 1–10. ISBN 0-131-83876-8. 
^ Anemone, Robert L. (2011). "Race as a cultural construction". Race and Human Diversity: A Biocultural Approach. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. pp. 163–183. ISBN 0-131-83876-8. 
^ a b Smedley, Audrey; Takezawa, Yasuko I.; Wade, Peter. "Race: Human". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. Retrieved 22 August 2017. 
^ Cartmill, Matt (1998). "The status of the race concept in physical anthropology" (PDF). American Anthropologist. American Anthropological Association. 100 (3): 651–660. doi:10.1525/aa.1998.100.3.651. 
^ "UNESCO and Its Programme: The Race Question". Paris, France: UNESCO. 1950. Publication 791. 
^ a b Kaplan, Jonathan Michael (January 2011) "'Race': What Biology Can Tell Us about a Social Construct". In: Encyclopedia of Life Sciences (ELS). John Wiley & Sons, Ltd: Chichester
^ a b "Race2". Oxford Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 5 October 2012. 1. Each of the major division of humankind, having distinct physical characteristics [example elided]. 1.1. mass noun The fact or condition of belonging to a racial division or group; the qualities or characteristics associated with this. 1.2. A group of people sharing the same culture, history, language, etc.; an ethnic group [example elided].  Provides 8 definitions, from biological to literary; only the most pertinent have been quoted.
^ See:

Lie 2004
Thompson & Hickey 2005
Gordon 1964[page needed]
AAA 1998
Palmié 2007
Mevorach 2007
Segal 1991
Bindon 2005


^ Keita, S. O. Y.; Kittles, R. A.; Royal, C. D. M.; Bonney, G. E.; Furbert-Harris, P.; Dunston, G. M.; Rotimi, C. N.; et al. (2004). "Conceptualizing human variation". Nature Genetics. 36 (11s): S17–S20. doi:10.1038/ng1455. PMID 15507998. Retrieved September 5, 2015. Religious, cultural, social, national, ethnic, linguistic, genetic, geographical and anatomical groups have been and sometimes still are called 'races' 
^ See:

Montagu 1962
Bamshad & Olson 2003


^ Sober 2000
^ a b Lee et al. 2008: "We caution against making the naive leap to a genetic explanation for group differences in complex traits, especially for human behavioral traits such as IQ scores"
^ AAA 1998: "For example, 'Evidence from the analysis of genetics (e.g., DNA) indicates that most physical variation, about 94%, lies within so-called racial groups. Conventional geographic "racial" groupings differ from one another only in about 6% of their genes. This means that there is greater variation within 'racial' groups than between them.'"
^ Keita, S O Y; Kittles, R A; Royal, C D M; Bonney, G E; Furbert-Harris, P; Dunston, G M; Rotimi, C N (2004). "Conceptualizing human variation". Nature Genetics. 36 (11s): S17–S20. doi:10.1038/ng1455. PMID 15507998. Modern human biological variation is not structured into phylogenetic subspecies ('races'), nor are the taxa of the standard anthropological 'racial' classifications breeding populations. The 'racial taxa' do not meet the phylogenetic criteria. 'Race' denotes socially constructed units as a function of the incorrect usage of the term. 
^ Harrison, Guy (2010). Race and Reality. Amherst: Prometheus Books. Race is a poor empirical description of the patterns of difference that we encounter within our species. The billions of humans alive today simply do not fit into neat and tidy biological boxes called races. Science has proven this conclusively. The concept of race (...) is not scientific and goes against what is known about our ever-changing and complex biological diversity. 
^ Roberts, Dorothy (2011). Fatal Invention. London, New York: The New Press. The genetic differences that exist among populations are characterized by gradual changes across geographic regions, not sharp, categorical distinctions. Groups of people across the globe have varying frequencies of polymorphic genes, which are genes with any of several differing nucleotide sequences. There is no such thing as a set of genes that belongs exclusively to one group and not to another. The clinal, gradually changing nature of geographic genetic difference is complicated further by the migration and mixing that human groups have engaged in since prehistory. Human beings do not fit the zoological definition of race. A mountain of evidence assembled by historians, anthropologists, and biologists proves that race is not and cannot be a natural division of human beings. 
^ a b Lieberman, L.; Kaszycka, K. A.; Martinez Fuentes, A. J.; Yablonsky, L.; Kirk, R. C.; Strkalj, G.; Wang, Q.; Sun, L. (December 2004). "The race concept in six regions: variation without consensus". Coll Antropol. 28 (2): 907–21. PMID 15666627. 
^ a b Graves 2001[page needed]
^ a b c d Keita et al. 2004
^ AAPA 1996 "Pure races, in the sense of genetically homogeneous populations, do not exist in the human species today, nor is there any evidence that they have ever existed in the past." p. 714
^ Keita, S O Y; Kittles, R A; Royal, C D M; Bonney, G E; Furbert-Harris, P; Dunston, G M; Rotimi, C N (2004). "Conceptualizing human variation". Nature Genetics. 36 (11s): S17–S20. doi:10.1038/ng1455. PMID 15507998. Many terms requiring definition for use describe demographic population groups better than the term 'race' because they invite examination of the criteria for classification. 
^ Schaefer, Richard T. (2008). Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Society. SAGE Publications. pp. 1091, 1096. ISBN 978-1-45-226586-5. 
^ Marks, Jonathan (2003). What it means to be 98% chimpanzee apes, people, and their genes. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 9780520930766. 
^ Templeton, A. R. (1998). "Human Races: A Genetic and Evolutionary Perspective". American Anthropologist. 100 (3): 632–650. doi:10.1525/aa.1998.100.3.632. 
^ Williams, S. M.; Templeton, A. R. (2003). "Race and Genomics". New England Journal of Medicine. 348 (25): 2581–2582. doi:10.1056/nejm200306193482521. 
^ Templeton, A. R. "The genetic and evolutionary significance of human races". In Race and Intelligence: Separating Science from Myth. J. M. Fish (ed.), pp. 31–56. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002.
^ American; Anthropological, Physical (1996). "Statement on Biological Aspects of Race". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 101 (4): 569. doi:10.1002/ajpa.1331010408. 
^ Steve Olson, Mapping Human History: Discovering the Past Through Our Genes, Boston, 2002
^ a b c Templeton 2013
^ Bamshad, M.; Wooding, S.; Salisbury, B. A.; Stephens, J. C. (2004). "Deconstructing the relationship between genetics and race". Nature Reviews Genetics. 5 (8): 598–609. doi:10.1038/nrg1401. PMID 15266342. 
^ Lee 1997
^ See:

Blank, Dabady & Citro 2004
Smaje 1997


^ See:

Lee 1997
Nobles 2000
Morgan 1975 as cited in Lee 1997, p. 407


^ See:

Morgan 1975 as cited in Lee 1997, p. 407
Smedley 2007
Sivanandan 2000
Crenshaw 1988
Conley 2007
Winfield 2007: "It was Aristotle who first arranged all animals into a single, graded scale that placed humans at the top as the most perfect iteration. By the late 19th century, the idea that inequality was the basis of natural order, known as the great chain of being, was part of the common lexicon."


^ Lee 1997 citing Morgan 1975 and Appiah 1992
^ See:

Sivanandan 2000
Muffoletto 2003
McNeilly et al. 1996: Psychiatric instrument called the "Perceived Racism Scale" "provides a measure of the frequency of exposure to many manifestations of racism ... including individual and institutional"; also assesses motional and behavioral coping responses to racism.
Miles 2000


^ Owens & King 1999
^ King 2007: For example, "the association of blacks with poverty and welfare ... is due, not to race per se, but to the link that race has with poverty and its associated disadvantages". p. 75.
^ Schaefer 2008: "In many parts of Latin America, racial groupings are based less on the biological physical features and more on an intersection between physical features and social features such as economic class, dress, education, and context. Thus, a more fluid treatment allows for the construction of race as an achieved status rather than an ascribed status as is the case in the United States"
^ See:

Brace 2000
Gill 2000
Lee 1997: "The very naturalness of 'reality' is itself the effect of a particular set of discursive constructions. In this way, discourse does not simply reflect reality, but actually participates in its construction"


^ Hartigan, John (June 2008). "Is Race Still Socially Constructed? The Recent Controversy over Race and Medical Genetics". Science as Culture. 17 (2): 163–193. doi:10.1080/09505430802062943. 
^ a b c Marks 2008, p. 28
^ a b Smedley 1999
^ Meltzer 1993
^ Takaki 1993
^ Banton 1977
^ For examples see:

Lewis 1990
Dikötter 1992


^ a b Race, Ethnicity, and Genetics Working Group (October 2005). "The Use of Racial, Ethnic, and Ancestral Categories in Human Genetics Research". American Journal of Human Genetics. 77 (4): 519–32. doi:10.1086/491747. PMC 1275602 . PMID 16175499. 
^ Todorov 1993
^ Brace 2005, p. 27
^ Slotkin 1965, p. 177.
^ a b c Graves 2001, p. 39
^ Marks 1995
^ Graves 2001, pp. 42–43
^ Stocking 1968, pp. 38–40
^ Desmond & Moore 2009, pp. 332–341
^ Camilo J. Cela-Conde and Francisco J. Ayala. 2007. Human Evolution Trails from the Past Oxford University Press p. 195
^ Lewin, Roger. 2005. Human Evolution an illustrated introduction. Fifth edition. p. 159. Blackwell
^ Stringer, Chris (2012). Lone Survivors: How We Came to Be the Only Humans on Earth. London: Times Books. ISBN 978-0805088915. 
^ a b Cravens 2010
^ Currell & Cogdell 2006
^ Hirschman, Charles (2004). "The Origins and Demise of the Concept of Race". Population and Development Review. 30 (3): 385–415. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2004.00021.x. ISSN 1728-4457. Retrieved 2014-01-06. 
^ See:

Cravens 2010
Angier 2000
Amundson 2005
Reardon 2005


^ See:

Smedley 2002
Boas 1912


^ See:

Marks 2002
Montagu 1941
Montagu 1942


^ Wilson & Brown 1953
^ a b Goodman, A. H. (November 2000). "Why genes don't count (for racial differences in health)". American Journal of Public Health. 90 (11): 1699–1702. ISSN 0090-0036. PMC 1446406 . PMID 11076233. 
^ See:

Keita et al. 2004
Templeton 1998
Long & Kittles 2003


^ Haig et al. 2006
^ a b Waples & Gaggiotti 2006
^ a b c d Templeton 1998
^ a b Wright 1978
^ See:

Keita et al. 2004
Templeton 1998


^ Sesardic 2010
^ Pigliucci 2013
^ "Understanding Race and Human Variation: A Public Education Program". Anthropology News. 47 (2): 7. 2006. doi:10.1525/an.2006.47.2.7. 
^ Andreasen 2000
^ Marks 2008, pp. 28–29.
^ Marks 2008
^ a b Lieberman & Jackson 1995
^ Brace 1964
^ a b Livingstone & Dobzhansky 1962
^ Ehrlich & Holm 1964
^ Weiss 2005
^ Marks 2002
^ Boyd 1950
^ Lieberman & Kirk 1997, p. 195
^ Molnar 1992
^ Human Genome Project 2003
^ Pigliucci, Massimo; Kaplan, Jonathan (December 2003). "On the Concept of Biological Race and Its Applicability to Humans". Philosophy of Science. 70 (5): 1161–1172. doi:10.1086/377397. 
^ Walsh, Anthony; Yun, Ilhong (October 2011). "Race and Criminology in the Age of Genomic Science". Social Science Quarterly: n/a. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6237.2011.00818.x. 
^ a b c Graves 2006
^ Hawks 2013, p. 438 "The shared evolutionary history of living humans has resulted in a high relatedness among all living people, as indicated for example by the very low fixation index (FST) among living human populations."
^ Lewontin 1972
^ Woodley, Michael A (19 August 2009). "Is Homo sapiens polytypic? Human taxonomic diversity and its implications". Med. Hypotheses. 74 (1): 195–201. doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2009.07.046. PMID 19695787. 
^ Fischer, A; Pollack, J; Thalmann, O; Nickel, B; Pääbo, S (June 2006). "Demographic history and genetic differentiation in apes". Curr. Biol. 16 (11): 1133–1138. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2006.04.033. PMID 16753568. 
^ Wilson et al. 2001, Cooper, Kaufman & Ward 2003 (given in summary by Bamshad et al. 2004, p. 599)
^ (Schwartz 2001), (Stephens 2003) (given in summary by Bamshad et al. 2004, p. 599)
^ Smedley & Smedley 2005, Helms, Jernigan & Mascher 2005, Travassos & Williams 2004. Lewontin (1972) argues that there is no biological basis for race on the basis of research indicating that more genetic variation exists within such races than among them.
^ Long & Kittles 2003
^ Romualdi, Chiara; Balding, David; Nasidze, Ivane S.; Risch, Gregory; Robichaux, Myles; Sherry, Stephen T.; Stoneking, Mark; Batzer, Mark A.; Barbujani, Guido (April 2002). "Patterns of human diversity, within and among continents, inferred from biallelic DNA polymorphisms". Genome Research. 12 (4): 602–612. doi:10.1101/gr.214902. ISSN 1088-9051. PMID 11932244. 
^ Edwards 2003
^ Dawkins, Richard; Wong, Yan (2005). The Ancestor's Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Evolution. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. pp. 406–407. ISBN 978-0-61-861916-0. (Summarizing Edwards' thesis): We can all happily agree that human racial classification is of no social value and is positively destructive of social and human relations. That is one reason why I object to ticking boxes on forms and why I object to positive discrimination in job selection. But that doesn't mean that race is of "virtually no genetic or taxonomic significance." This is Edwards's point, and he reasons as follows. However small the racial partition of total variation may be, if such racial characteristics as there are highly correlated with other racial characteristics, they are by definition informative, and therefore of taxonomic significance. 
^ See:

Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi & Piazza 1994
Bamshad et al. 2004, p. 599
Tang et al. 2004
Rosenberg et al. 2005: "If enough markers are used... individuals can be partitioned into genetic clusters that match major geographic subdivisions of the globe."


^ Mountain & Risch 2004
^ Gitschier 2005
^ a b Witherspoon et al. 2007
^ Brace, C. Loring 2005. Race is a four letter word. Oxford University Press.
^ Kaplan, Jonathan Michael Winther, Rasmus Grønfeldt (2014). 'Realism, Antirealism, and Conventionalism About Race' Philosophy of Science http://philpapers.org/rec/KAPRAA
^ Winther, Rasmus Grønfeldt (2015). "The Genetic Reification of 'Race'?: A Story of Two Mathematical Methods" (PDF). Critical Philosophy of Race. 2 (2): 204–223. 
^ Kaplan, Jonathan Michael, Winther, Rasmus Grønfeldt (2012). Prisoners of Abstraction? The Theory and Measure of Genetic Variation, and the Very Concept of 'Race' Biological Theory http://philpapers.org/archive/KAPPOA.14.pdf
^ Weiss, KM; Fullerton, SM (2005). "Racing around, getting nowhere". Evolutionary Anthropology. 14 (5): 165–69. doi:10.1002/evan.20079. 
^ Mills CW (1988) "But What Are You Really? The Metaphysics of Race" in Blackness visible: essays on philosophy and race, pp. 41–66. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY
^ Winther, Rasmus Grønfeldt (2014/2011). The Genetic Reification of Race? A Story of Two Mathematical Methods. Critical Philosophy of Race http://philpapers.org/archive/WINTGR.pdf
^ Gannett, Lisa (September 2014). "Biogeographical ancestry and race". Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences. 47: 173–84. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2014.05.017. 
^ Barbujani (2005)
^ Hunley, Keith L.; Healy, Meghan E.; Long, Jeffrey C. (18 February 2009). "The global pattern of gene identity variation reveals a history of long-range migrations, bottlenecks, and local mate exchange: Implications for biological race". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 139 (1): 35–46. doi:10.1002/ajpa.20932. PMID 19226641. 
^ Gordon 1964[page needed]
^ "New Ideas, New Fuels: Craig Venter at the Oxonian". FORA.tv. 2008-11-03. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
^ Palmié, Stephan (May 2007). "Genomics, divination, 'racecraft'". American Ethnologist. 34 (2): 205–22. doi:10.1525/ae.2007.34.2.205. 
^ Mevorach, Katya Gibel (2007). "Race, racism, and academic complicity". American Ethnologist. 34 (2): 238–41. doi:10.1525/ae.2007.34.2.238. 
^ Imani Perry, More Beautiful and More Terrible: The Embrace and Transcendence of Racial Inequality in the United States (New York, NY: New York University Press, 2011), 23.
^ Imani Perry, More Beautiful and More Terrible: The Embrace and Transcendence of Racial Inequality in the United States (New York, NY: New York University Press, 2011), 24.
^ Tang, H.; Quertermous, T.; Rodriguez, B.; et al. (February 2005). "Genetic Structure, Self-Identified Race/Ethnicity, and Confounding in Case-Control Association Studies". American Journal of Human Genetics. 76 (2): 268–75. doi:10.1086/427888. PMC 1196372 . PMID 15625622. 
^ Risch, N. (July 2005). "The whole side of it – an interview with Neil Risch by Jane Gitschier". PLoS Genetics. 1 (1): e14. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0010014. PMC 1183530 . PMID 17411332. 
^ Harris 1980
^ Parra, FC; Amado, RC; Lambertucci, JR; Rocha, J; Antunes, CM; Pena, SD (January 2003). "Color and genomic ancestry in Brazilians". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100 (1): 177–82. Bibcode:2003PNAS..100..177P. doi:10.1073/pnas.0126614100. PMC 140919 . PMID 12509516. 
^ BBC delves into Brazilians' roots accessed July 13, 2009
^ RIBEIRO, Darcy. O Povo Brasileiro, Companhia de Bolso, fourth reprint, 2008 (2008).
^ Levine-Rasky, Cynthia. 2002. "Working through whiteness: international perspectives. SUNY Press (p. 73) "Money whitens" If any phrase encapsulates the association of whiteness and the modern in Latin America, this is it. It is a cliché formulated and reformulated throughout the region, a truism dependant upon the social experience that wealth is associated with whiteness, and that in obtaining the former one may become aligned with the latter (and vice versa)"."
^ Telles, Edward Eric (2004). "Racial Classification". Race in Another America: The significance of skin color in Brazil. Princeton University Press. pp. 81–84. ISBN 0-691-11866-3. 
^ a b Pena, Sérgio D. J.; Di Pietro, Giuliano; Fuchshuber-Moraes, Mateus; Genro, Julia Pasqualini; Hutz, Mara H.; Kehdy, Fernanda de Souza Gomes; Kohlrausch, Fabiana; Magno, Luiz Alexandre Viana; Montenegro, Raquel Carvalho; Moraes, Manoel Odorico; de Moraes, Maria Elisabete Amaral; de Moraes, Milene Raiol; Ojopi, Élida B.; Perini, Jamila A.; Racciopi, Clarice; Ribeiro-dos-Santos, Ândrea Kely Campos; Rios-Santos, Fabrício; Romano-Silva, Marco A.; Sortica, Vinicius A.; Suarez-Kurtz, Guilherme (2011). Harpending, Henry, ed. "The Genomic Ancestry of Individuals from Different Geographical Regions of Brazil Is More Uniform Than Expected". PLoS ONE. 6 (2): e17063. Bibcode:2011PLoSO...617063P. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0017063. PMC 3040205 . PMID 21359226. 
^ Negros de origem européia. afrobras.org.br
^ Guerreiro-Junior, Vanderlei; Bisso-Machado, Rafael; Marrero, Andrea; Hünemeier, Tábita; Salzano, Francisco M.; Bortolini, Maria Cátira (2009). "Genetic signatures of parental contribution in black and white populations in Brazil". Genetics and Molecular Biology. 32 (1): 1–11. doi:10.1590/S1415-47572009005000001. PMC 3032968 . PMID 21637639. 
^ Pena, S.D.J.; Bastos-Rodrigues, L.; Pimenta, J.R.; Bydlowski, S.P. (2009). "Genetic heritage variability of Brazilians in even regional averages, 2009 study". Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research. 42 (10): 870–876. doi:10.1590/S0100-879X2009005000026. PMID 19738982. 
^ De Assis Poiares, Lilian; De Sá Osorio, Paulo; Spanhol, Fábio Alexandre; Coltre, Sidnei César; Rodenbusch, Rodrigo; Gusmão, Leonor; Largura, Alvaro; Sandrini, Fabiano; Da Silva, Cláudia Maria Dornelles (2010). "Allele frequencies of 15 STRs in a representative sample of the Brazilian population" (PDF). Forensic Science International: Genetics. 4 (2): e61. doi:10.1016/j.fsigen.2009.05.006. PMID 20129458. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-04-08. 
^ Brazilian DNA is nearly 80% European, indicates study.
^ NMO Godinho O impacto das migrações na constituição genética de populações latino-americanas Archived 2011-07-06 at the Wayback Machine.. PhD Thesis, Universidade de Brasília (2008).
^ "IBGE teen". Ibge.gov.br. Archived from the original on 2009-09-23. Retrieved 2011-12-29. 
^ Ramos, Arthur (2003). A mestiçagem no Brasil (in Portuguese). Maceió: EDUFAL. p. 82. ISBN 978-85-7177-181-9. 
^ Argentina. by Arthur P. Whitaker. New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc, 1984. Cited in Yale immigration study
^ Renato Pinto Venâncio, "Presença portuguesa: de colonizadores a imigrantes" i.e. Portuguese presence: from colonizers to immigrants, chap. 3 of Brasil: 500 anos de povoamento (IBGE). Relevant extract available here "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2013-02-24. Retrieved 2013-02-24. 
^ a b Council of the European Union (July 19, 2000). "Council Directive 2000/43/EC of 29 June 2000 implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin". Official Journal. European Union: 22–26. CELEX: 32000L0043. Retrieved September 5, 2015. 
^ "European Union Directives on the Prohibition of Discrimination". HumanRights.is. Icelandic Human Rights Centre. 
^ a b Bell, Mark (2009). Racism and Equality in the European Union (PDF). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199297849.001.0001. ISBN 9780199297849. 
^ Race Policy in France by Erik Bleich, Middlebury College, 2012-05-01
^ Morning, Ann (2011). How Scientists Think and Teach about Human Difference. University of California Press. p. 47. ISBN 9780520950146. 
^ Sexton, Jared (2008). Amalgamation Schemes. Univ of Minnesota Press. 
^ Nobles 2000
^ "Revisions to the Standards for the Classification of Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity". Office of Management and Budget. October 30, 1997. Archived from the original on March 15, 2009. Retrieved March 19, 2009.  Also: U.S. Census Bureau Guidance on the Presentation and Comparison of Race and Hispanic Origin Data and B03002. Hispanic or Latino Origin by Race. 2007 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates
^ Horsman, Reginald, Race and Manifest Destiny: The Origins of American Radial Anglo-Saxonism, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1981 p. 210. This reference is speaking in historic terms bt there is not reason to think that this perception has altered much
^ Race, Class, and Gender in the United States (text only) 7th (Seventh) edition by P. S. Rothenberg p131
^ a b Eduardo Bonilla-Silva, Racism Without Racists (Second Edition) (2006), Rowman and Littlefield
^ Kaszycka, Katarzyna A.; Strziko, January (2003). "'Race' Still an Issue for Physical Anthropology? Results of Polish Studies Seen in the Light of the U.S. Findings". American Anthropologist. 105 (1): 116–24. doi:10.1525/aa.2003.105.1.116. 
^ Wagner, Jennifer K.; Yu, Joon-Ho; Ifekwunigwe, Jayne O.; Harrell, Tanya M.; Bamshad, Michael J.; Royal, Charmaine D. (February 2017). "Anthropologists' views on race, ancestry, and genetics". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 162 (2): 318–327. doi:10.1002/ajpa.23120. PMC 5299519 . PMID 27874171. 
^ Štrkalj, Goran; Wang, Qian (2003). "On the Concept of Race in Chinese Biological Anthropology: Alive and Well" (PDF). Current Anthropology. The University of Chicago Press. 44 (3): 403. doi:10.1086/374899. 
^ Black, Sue; Ferguson, Elidh (2011). Forensic Anthropology: 2000 to 2010. Taylor & Francis. p. 125. ISBN 1-439-84588-3. 
^ Štrkalj, Goran (2007). "The Status of the Race Concept in Contemporary Biological Anthropology: A Review" (PDF). Anthropologist. Kamla-Raj. 9 (1). 
^ Kaszycka, Katarzyna A.; Štrkalj, Goran; Strzalko, Jan (2009). "Current Views of European Anthropologists on Race: Influence of Educational and Ideological Background". American Anthropologist. 111 (1): 43–56. doi:10.1111/j.1548-1433.2009.01076.x. 
^ Caspari 2003; Lieberman, Kirk & Corcoran 2003
^ Lieberman, Leonard; Kirk, Rodney C.; Littlefield, Alice (2003). "Perishing Paradigm: Race 1931–1999". American Anthropologist. 105 (1): 110–113. doi:10.1525/aa.2003.105.1.110. 
A following article in the same issue questions the precise rate of decline, but from their opposing perspective agrees that the Negroid/Caucasoid/Mongoloid paradigm has fallen into near-total disfavor: Cartmill, Matt; Brown, Kaye (2003). "Surveying the Race Concept: A Reply to Lieberman, Kirk, and Littlefield". American Anthropologist. 105 (1): 114–15. doi:10.1525/aa.2003.105.1.114. 
^ AAA 1998
^ Bindon, Jim. University of Alabama. "Post World War II". 2005. August 28, 2006.
^ Reynolds, Larry T.; Lieberman, Leonard (1996). Race and Other Misadventures: Essays in Honor of Ashley Montagu in His Ninetieth Year. Altamira Press. p. 159. ISBN 1-882-28935-8. 
^ Lieberman, L. (February 2001). "How "Caucasoids" got such big crania and why they shrank. From Morton to Rushton". Current Anthropology. 42 (1): 69–95. doi:10.1086/318434. PMID 14992214. 
^ Štrkalj, Goran (2007). "The Status of the Race Concept in Contemporary Biological Anthropology: A Review" (PDF). Anthropologist. 
^ a b Does race exist? A proponent's perspective. Gill, G. W. (2000) PBS. https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/first/gill.html
^ "NOVA | Does Race Exist?". Pbs.org. Retrieved 2012-12-30. 
^ See:

Gill 2000
Armelagos & Smay 2000
Risch et al. 2002
Bloche 2004


^ Witzig 1996
^ Brace, C. Loring (1995). "Region Does not Mean "Race"--Reality Versus Convention in Forensic Anthropology". Journal of Forensic Sciences. 40 (2): 29–33. 
^ a b Morning, Ann (November 2007). ""Everyone Knows It's a Social Construct": Contemporary Science and the Nature of Race". Sociological Focus. 40 (4): 436–454. doi:10.1080/00380237.2007.10571319. 
^ The presentation of human biological diversity in sport and exercise science textbooks: the example of "race.", Christopher J. Hallinan, Journal of Sport Behavior, March 1994
^ Frederick P. Rivara and Laurence Finberg, (2001) "Use of the Terms Race and Ethnicity", Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 155, no. 2 119. "In future issues of the ARCHIVES, we ask authors to not use race and ethnicity when there is no biological, scientific, or sociological reason for doing so. Race or ethnicity should not be used as explanatory variables, when the underlying constructs are variables that can, and should, be measured directly (eg, educational level of subjects, household income of the families, single vs 2-parent households, employment of parents, owning vs renting one's home, and other measures of socioeconomic status). In contrast, the recent attention on decreasing health disparities uses race and ethnicity not as explanatory variables but as ways of examining the underlying sociocultural reasons for these disparities and appropriately targeting attention and resources on children and adolescents with poorer health. In select issues and questions such as these, use of race and ethnicity is appropriate."
^ See program announcement and requests for grant applications at the NIH website, at nih.gov.
^ Robert S. Schwartz, "Racial Profiling in Medical Research", The New England Journal of Medicine, 344 (no, 18, May 3, 2001)
^ Reconstructing Race in Science and Society:Biology Textbooks, 1952–2002, Ann Morning, American Journal of Sociology. 2008;114 Suppl:S106-37.
^ Gissis, S. (2008). "When is 'race' a race? 1946–2003". Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences. 39 (4): 437–50. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2008.09.006. PMID 19026975. 
^ The conceptualization and operationalization of race and ethnicity by health services researchers, Susan Moscou, Nursing Inquiry, Volume 15, Issue 2, pp. 94–105, June 2008
^ Štrkalj, Goran; Solyali, Veli (2010). "Human Biological Variation in Anatomy Textbooks: The Role of Ancestry". Studies on Ethno-Medicine. 4 (3): 157–61. 
^ "Office of Minority Health". Minorityhealth.hhs.gov. 2011-08-16. Retrieved 2012-12-30. 
^ Risch et al. 2002
^ a b Condit et al. 2003 In summary, they argues that, in order to predict the clinical success of pharmacogenomic research, scholars must conduct subsidiary research on two fronts: Science, wherein the degree of correspondence between popular and professional racial categories can be assessed; and society at large, through which attitudinal factors moderate the relationship between scientific soundness and societal acceptance. To accept race-as-proxy, then, may be necessary but insufficient to solidify the future of race-based pharmacogenomics.
^ Lee, Catherine (March 2009). ""Race" and "ethnicity" in biomedical research: How do scientists construct and explain differences in health?". Social Science & Medicine. 68 (6): 1183–1190. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2008.12.036. 
^ Graves 2011
^ Fullwiley 2011
^ Harpending 2006, p. 458 "On the other hand, information about the race of patients will be useless as soon as we discover and can type cheaply the underlying genes that are responsible for the associations. Can races be enumerated in any unambiguous way? Of course not, and this is well known not only to scientists but also to anyone on the street."
^ Lee et al. 2008
^ Kahn 2011, p. 132 "For example, what are we to make of the fact that African Americans suffer from disproportionately high rates of hypertension, but Africans in Nigeria have among the world's lowest rates of hypertension, far lower than the overwhelmingly white population of Germany? Genetics certainly plays a role in hypertension. But any role it plays in explaining such differences must surely be vanishingly small. (citing Richard Cooper et al., 'An International Comparative Study of Blood Pressure in Populations of European vs. African Descent,' BMC Medicine 3 (January 5, 2005): 2, http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/3/2 (accessed March 9, 2010).)"
^ "Statistics on Race and the Criminal Justice System 2010, Appendix C: Classifications of ethnicity ". BBC News. 15 June 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2014.
^ "Suffolk Constabulary Policies & Procedures: Encounter and Stop and Search" Retrieved 24 September 2014.
^ "Office of National Statistics: Review of equality data: audit report" Retrieved 24 September 2014.
^ Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness (New York, NY: The New Press, 2010), 13.
^ Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness (New York, NY: The New Press, 2010), 12.
^ Abraham 2009
^ Willing 2005
^ a b Sauer 1992
^ Kennedy 1995
^ Konigsberg, Lyle W.; Algee-Hewitt, Bridget F.B.; Steadman, Dawnie Wolfe (2009-05-01). "Estimation and evidence in forensic anthropology: Sex and race". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 139 (1): 77–90. doi:10.1002/ajpa.20934. ISSN 1096-8644. PMID 19226642. 
^ Brace, C. L. 1995. Journal of Forensic Science Mar; 40(2) 171–75. "Region does not mean 'race': Reality versus convention in forensic anthropology".
^ "Does Race Exist?". www.pbs.org. 2000-02-15. Retrieved 2017-11-09. 
^ Relethford, John H. (2002). "Apportionment of global human genetic diversity based on craniometrics and skin color". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 118 (4): 393–98. doi:10.1002/ajpa.10079. PMID 12124919. 
^ Relethford, John H. (18 February 2009). "Race and global patterns of phenotypic variation". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 139 (1): 16–22. doi:10.1002/ajpa.20900. PMID 19226639. Craniometric variation is geographically structured, allowing high levels of classification accuracy when comparing crania from different parts of the world. Nonetheless, the boundaries in global variation are not abrupt and do not fit a strict view of the race concept; the number of races and the cutoffs used to define them are arbitrary. 
^ Ousley, Jantz & Fried 2009


Bibliography


Abraham, Carolyn (2009-04-07). "Molecular eyewitness: DNA gets a human face". The Globe and Mail. Phillip Crawley. Retrieved 2011-02-04. 
"American Anthropological Association Statement on 'Race'". AAAnet.org. American Anthropological Association (AAA). May 17, 1998. Retrieved April 18, 2009. 
AAPA (1996). "AAPA statement on biological aspects of race" (PDF). Am J Phys Anthropol. 101 (4): 569–70. doi:10.1002/ajpa.1331010408. 
Amadon, D. (1949). "The seventy-five percent rule for subspecies". Condor. 51 (6): 250–58. doi:10.2307/1364805. JSTOR 1364805. 
Amundson, Ron (2005). "Disability, Ideology, and Quality of Life: A Bias in Biomedical Ethics". In David T. Wasserman; Robert Samuel Wachbroit; Jerome Edmund Bickenbach. Quality of life and human difference: genetic testing, health care, and disability. Cambridge University Press. pp. 101–24. ISBN 9780521832014. 
Andreasen, Robin O. (2000). "Race: Biological Reality or Social Construct?". Philosophy of Science. 67 (Suppl.): S653–66. doi:10.1086/392853. JSTOR 188702. 
Angier, Natalie (2000-08-22). "Do Races Differ? Not Really, DNA Shows". The New York Times. Retrieved 9 August 2010. 
Appiah, Kwame Anthony (1992). In My Father's House: Africa in the Philosophy of Culture. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195068528. 
Armelagos, George; Smay, Diana (2000). "Galileo wept: A critical assessment of the use of race in forensic anthropolopy" (PDF). Transforming Anthropology. 9 (2): 19–29. doi:10.1525/tran.2000.9.2.19. 
Bamshad, Michael; Olson, Steve E (2003-11-10). "Does Race Exist?" (PDF). Scientific American. 289 (6): 78. Bibcode:2003SciAm.289f..78B. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1203-78. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-06-14. 
Bamshad, M; Wooding, S; Salisbury, BA; Stephens (August 2004). "Deconstructing the relationship between genetics and race". Nat. Rev. Genet. 5 (8): 598–609. doi:10.1038/nrg1401. PMID 15266342. 
Banton, Michael (1977). The idea of race (paperback). Boulder: Westview Press. ISBN 0891587195. 
Barbujani, Guido (1 June 2005). "Human Races: Classifying People vs Understanding Diversity". Current Genomics. 6 (4): 215–26. doi:10.2174/1389202054395973. 
Blank, Rebecca M.; Dabady, Marilyn; Citro, Constance Forbes (2004). "Chapter 2". Measuring racial discrimination. National Research Council (U.S.). Panel on Methods for Assessing Discrimination. National Adademies Press. p. 317. ISBN 9780309091268. 
Bloche, Gregg M. (2004). "Race-Based Therapeutics". New England Journal of Medicine. 351 (20): 2035–37. doi:10.1056/NEJMp048271. PMID 15533852. 
Boas, Franz (1912). "Change in Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants". American Anthropologist. 14 (3): 530–62. doi:10.1525/aa.1912.14.3.02a00080. 
Boyd, William C. (1950). Genetics and the races of man: an introduction to modern physical anthropology. Boston: Little, Brown and Company. p. 207. 
Brace, C. Loring (2000). "Does race exist? An antagonist's perspective". Pbs.org. Retrieved 2010-10-11. 
Brace, C. Loring (2005). Race is a four letter word. Oxford University Press. p. 326. ISBN 9780195173512. 
Caspari, Rachel (2003). "From types to populations: A century of race, physical anthropology, and the American Anthropological Association" (PDF). American Anthropologist. 105 (1): 65–76. doi:10.1525/aa.2003.105.1.65. 
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca; Menozzi, Paolo; Piazza, Alberto (1994). The History and Geography of Human Genes. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-08750-4. Lay summary (1 December 2013). 
Conley, D. (2007). "Being black, living in the red"". In P. S. Rothenberg. Race, Class, and Gender in the United States (7th ed.). New York: Worth Publishers. pp. 350–58. 
Coop, G.; Pickrell, J. K.; Novembre, J.; Kudaravalli, S.; Li, J. (2009). "The Role of Geography in Human Adaptation". PLoS Genetics. 5 (6): e1000500. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000500. PMC 2685456 . PMID 19503611. 
Cravens, Hamilton (2010). "What's New in Science and Race since the 1930s?: Anthropologists and Racial Essentialism". The Historian. 72 (2): 299–320. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6563.2010.00263.x. PMID 20726131. 
Crenshaw KW (1988). "Race, reform, and retrenchment: Transformation and legitimation in antidiscrimination law". Harvard Law Review. 101 (7): 1331–37. doi:10.2307/1341398. JSTOR 1341398. 
Cooper, RS; Kaufman, JS; Ward, R (2003). "Race and genomics". N Engl J Med. 348 (12): 1166–70. doi:10.1056/NEJMsb022863. PMID 12646675. 
Currell, Susan; Cogdell, Christina (2006). Popular Eugenics: National Efficiency and American Mass Culture in The 1930s. Athens, OH: Ohio University Press. p. 203. ISBN 082141691X. 
Desmond, Adrian; Moore, James (2009), Darwin's sacred cause: how a hatred of slavery shaped Darwin's views on human evolution, Allen Lane, Penguin Books, p. 484, ISBN 9781846140358 
Dikötter, Frank (1992). The discourse of race in modern China. Stanford: Stanford University Press. ISBN 9780804719940. 
Dobzhansky, T. (1970). Genetics of the Evolutionary Process. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0231028377. 
Duster, T. (2005). "Race and reification in science". Science. 307 (5712): 1050–51. doi:10.1126/science.1110303. PMID 15718453. 
Edwards, AW (August 2003). "Human genetic diversity: Lewontin's fallacy". BioEssays. 25 (8): 798–801. doi:10.1002/bies.10315. PMID 12879450. 
Ehrlich, Paul; Holm, Richard W. (1964). "A Biological View of Race". In Ashley Montagu. The Concept of Race. Collier Books. pp. 153–79. 
Fullwiley, Duana (2011). "Chapter 6: Can DNA "Witness" Race?". In Krimsky, Sheldon; Sloan, Kathleen. Race and the Genetic Revolution: Science, Myth, and Culture. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-52769-9. Retrieved 31 August 2013. Lay summary (31 August 2013). 
Gill, G (2000). "Does Race Exist? A proponent's perspective". Pbs.org. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
Gitschier, Jane (2005). "The Whole Side of It – An Interview with Neil Risch". PLoS Genet. 1 (1): e14. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0010014. PMC 1183530 . PMID 17411332. 
Gordon, Milton Myron (1964). Assimilation in American life: the role of race, religion, and national origins. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-500896-8. 
Graves, Joseph L (2001). The Emperor's New Clothes: Biological Theories of Race at the Millennium. Rutgers University Press. 
Graves, Joseph L. (2006). "What We Know and What We Don't Know: Human Genetic Variation and the Social Construction of Race". Is Race "Real"?. Social Science Research Council. Retrieved 2011-01-22. 
Graves, Joseph L. (2011). "Chapter 8: Evolutionary Versus Racial Medicine". In Krimsky, Sheldon; Sloan, Kathleen. Race and the Genetic Revolution: Science, Myth, and Culture. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-52769-9. Retrieved 31 August 2013. Lay summary (31 August 2013). 
Haig, SM; Beever, EA; Chambers, SM; Draheim, HM; et al. (December 2006). "Taxonomic considerations in listing subspecies under the U.S. Endangered Species Act". Conservation Biology. 20 (6): 1584–94. doi:10.1111/j.1523-1739.2006.00530.x. PMID 17181793. 
Harpending, Henry (2006). "Chapter 16: Anthropological Genetics: Present and Future". In Crawford, Michael. Anthropological Genetics: Theory, Methods and Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-54697-3. Lay summary (4 December 2013). 
Harris, Marvin (1980). Patterns of race in the Americas. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-22359-9. 
Hawks, John (2013). "Significance of Neandertal and Denisovan Genomes in Human Evolution". Annual Review of Anthropology. Annual Reviews. 42 (1): 433–49. doi:10.1146/annurev-anthro-092412-155548. ISBN 978-0-8243-1942-7. ISSN 0084-6570. Retrieved 4 January 2014. 
Helms, Janet E.; Jernigan, Maryam; Mascher, Jackquelyn (2005). "The meaning of race in psychology and how to change it: A methodological perspective". American Psychologist. 60 (1): 27–36. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.60.1.27. PMID 15641919. 
Hooton, Earnest A. (22 January 1926). "Methods of Racial Analysis". Science. 63 (1621): 75–81. Bibcode:1926Sci....63...75H. doi:10.1126/science.63.1621.75. PMID 17774966. 
Human Genome Project (2003). "Human Genome Project Information: Minorities, Race, and Genomics". U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) – Human Genome Program. 
Joseph, Celucien L. Race, Religion, and The Haitian Revolution: Essays on Faith, Freedom, and Decolonization (CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2012)
Joseph, Celucien L. From Toussaint to Price-Mars: Rhetoric, Race, and Religion in Haitian Thought (CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2013)
Kahn, Jonathan (2011). "Chapter 7: Bidil and Racialized Medicine". In Krimsky, Sheldon; Sloan, Kathleen. Race and the Genetic Revolution: Science, Myth, and Culture. Columbia University Press. p. 132. ISBN 978-0-231-52769-9. Retrieved 31 August 2013. Lay summary (31 August 2013). 
Kaplan, J. M.; Winther, R. G. "Prisoners of Abstraction? The Theory and Measure of Genetic Variation, and the Very Concept of 'Race'" (PDF). Biological Theory. 7. 
Keita, S. O. Y.; Kittles, R. A. (1997). "The persistence of racial thinking and the myth of racial divergence". Am Anthropol. 99 (3): 534–44. doi:10.1525/aa.1997.99.3.534. 
Keita, S. O. Y.; Kittles, R. A.; Royal, C. D. M.; Bonney, G. M.; Furbert-Harris, P.; Dunston, G. M.; Rotimi, C. M. (2004). "Conceptualizing human variation". Nature Genetics. 36 (S17–S20): S17–20. doi:10.1038/ng1455. PMID 15507998. 
Kennedy, Kenneth A. R. (1995). "But Professor, Why Teach Race Identification if Races Don't Exist?". Journal of Forensic Sciences. 40 (5): 15386J. doi:10.1520/jfs15386j. 
King, Desmond (2007). "Making people work: Democratic consequences of workfare". In Beem, Christopher; Mead, Lawrence M. Welfare Reform and Political Theory. New York: Russell Sage Foundation Publications. pp. 65–81. ISBN 0-87154-588-8. 
Krimsky, Sheldon; Sloan, Kathleen, eds. (2011). Race and the Genetic Revolution: Science, Myth, and Culture. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-52769-9. Lay summary (31 August 2013). 
Krulwich, Robert (2009-02-02). "Your Family May Once Have Been A Different Color". Morning Edition, National Public Radio. 
Lee, Jayne Chong-Soon (1997). "Review essay: Navigating the topology of race"". In Gates, E. Nathaniel. Critical Race Theory: Essays on the Social Construction and Reproduction of Race. 4:The Judicial Isolation of the "Racially" Oppressed. New York: Garland Pub. pp. 393–426. ISBN 9780815326038. 
Lee, Sandra SJ; Mountain, Joanna; Koenig, Barbara; Altman, Russ (2008). "The ethics of characterizing difference: guiding principles on using racial categories in human genetics". Genome Biol. 9 (7): 404. doi:10.1186/gb-2008-9-7-404. PMC 2530857 . PMID 18638359. 
Lewis, B (1990). Race and slavery in the Middle East. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195062833. 
Lie, John (2004). Modern Peoplehood. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674013271. 
Lieberman, L (2001). "How "Caucasoids" got such big crania and why they shrank: from Morton to Rushton". Curr Anthropol. 42 (1): 69–95. doi:10.1086/318434. PMID 14992214. 
Lieberman, Leonard; Kirk, Rodney (1997). "Teaching About Human Variation: An Anthropological Tradition for the Twenty-first Century". In Rice, Patricia; Kottak, Conrad Phillip; White, Jane G.; Richard H. Furlow. The Teaching of Anthropology: Problems, Issues, and Decisions. Mayfield Pub. p. 381. ISBN 1-55934-711-2. 
Lieberman, L.; Kirk, R.C.; Corcoran, M. (2003). "The decline of race in American physical anthropology" (PDF). Anthropological Review. 66: 3–21. ISSN 0033-2003. 
Lieberman, Leonard; Jackson, Fatimah Linda C. (1995). "Race and Three Models of Human Origins". American Anthropologist. 97 (2): 231–42. doi:10.1525/aa.1995.97.2.02a00030. 
Lieberman, Leonard; Hampton, Raymond E.; Littlefield, Alice; Hallead, Glen (1992). "Race in Biology and Anthropology: A Study of College Texts and Professors". Journal of Research in Science Teaching. 29 (3): 301–21. Bibcode:1992JRScT..29..301L. doi:10.1002/tea.3660290308. 
Lewontin, Richard C. (1972). "The Apportionment of Human Diversity". Evolutionary Biology. 6: 381–97. doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-9063-3_14. ISBN 978-1-4684-9065-7. 
Livingstone, Frank B.; Dobzhansky, Theodosius (1962). "On the Non-Existence of Human Races". Current Anthropology. 3 (3): 279–81. doi:10.1086/200290. JSTOR 2739576. 
Long, J. C.; Kittles, R. A. (August 2003). "Human genetic diversity and the nonexistence of biological races" (PDF). Human Biology. 75 (4): 449–71. doi:10.1353/hub.2003.0058. PMID 14655871. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
Marks, J. (1995). Human biodiversity: genes, race, and history. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. ISBN 0-585-39559-4. 
Marks, Jonathan (2002). "Folk Heredity". In Fish, Jefferson M. Race and Intelligence: Separating Science from Myth. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. p. 98. ISBN 0805837574. 
Marks, Jonathan (2008). "Race: Past, present and future. Chapter 1". In Koenig, Barbara; Soo-Jin Lee, Sandra; Richardson, Sarah S. Revisiting Race in a Genomic Age. Rutgers University Press. 
Mayr, Ernst (1969). Principles of Systematic Zoology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0070411433. 
Mayr, Ernst (Winter 2002). "The Biology of Race and the Concept of Equality". Daedalus. MIT Press on behalf of American Academy of Arts & Sciences. 31 (1): 89–94. JSTOR 20027740. 
McNeilly, M. D.; Anderson, M. B.; Armstead, C. A.; Clark, R.; Corbett, M.; Robinson, E. L. (1996). "The perceived racism scale: A multidimensional assessment of the experience of white racism among African Americans". 6 (1–2). Ethnicity & Disease: 154–66. 
Meltzer, M. (1993). Slavery: a world history (revised ed.). Cambridge, MA: DaCapo Press. ISBN 0306805367. 
Mevorach, Katya Gibel (2007). "Race, racism, and academic complicity". American Ethnologist. 34 (2): 238–41. doi:10.1525/ae.2007.34.2.238. 
Miles, Robert (2000). "Apropos the idea of race ... again". In Les Back; John Solomos. Theories of race and racism. Psychology Press. pp. 125–43. ISBN 9780415156721. 
Molnar, Stephen (1992). Human variation: races, types, and ethnic groups. Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-446162-2. 
Montagu, Ashley (1941). "The Concept of Race in The Human Species in the Light of Genetics" (PDF). Journal of Heredity. 32 (8): 243–48. 
Montagu, Ashley (1997) [1942]. Man's Most Dangerous Myth: The Fallacy of Race (paperback). AltaMira Press. ISBN 0803946481. 
Montagu, Ashley (1962). "The Concept of Race". American Ethnography Quasimonthly. Retrieved 26 January 2009. 
Morgan, Edmund S. (1975). American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial Virginia. W. W. Norton and Company, Inc. 
Mountain, Joanna L.; Risch, Neil (2004). "Assessing genetic contributions to phenotypic differences among 'racial' and 'ethnic' groups" (pdf). Nature Genetics. 36 (11 Suppl): S48–53. doi:10.1038/ng1456. PMID 15508003. 
Muffoletto, Robert (2003). "Ethics: A discourse of power". TechTrends. TechTrends. 47 (6): 62–66. doi:10.1007/BF02763286. 
Nobles, Melissa (2000). Shades of citizenship: race and the census in modern politics. Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-4059-3. 
Ossorio, P.; Duster, T. (2005). "Controversies in biomedical, behavioral, and forensic sciences". Am Psychol. 60 (1): 115–28. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.60.1.115. PMID 15641926. 
Ousley, Stephen; Jantz, Richard; Freid, Donna (18 February 2009). "Understanding race and human variation: Why forensic anthropologists are good at identifying race". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 139 (1): 68–76. doi:10.1002/ajpa.21006. PMID 19226647. 
Owens, K.; King, MC (1999). "Genomic Views of Human History". Science. 286 (5439): 451–53. doi:10.1126/science.286.5439.451. PMID 10521333. 
Palmié, Stephan (May 2007). "Genomics, divination, 'racecraft'". American Ethnologist. 34 (2): 205–22. doi:10.1525/ae.2007.34.2.205. 
Patten, M. A.; Unitt, P. (2002). "Diagnosability versus mean differences of sage sparrow subspecies". Auk. 119 (1): 26–35. doi:10.1642/0004-8038(2002)119[0026:DVMDOS]2.0.CO;2. 
Pigliucci, Massimo (September 2013). "What are we to make of the concept of race?". Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences. 44 (3): 272–77. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.04.008. 
Reardon, Jenny (2005). "Post World-War II Expert Discourses on Race". Race to the finish: identity and governance in an age of genomics. Princeton University Press. pp. 17ff. ISBN 9780691118574. 
Relethford, John H. (August 2002). "Apportionment of global human genetic diversity based on craniometrics and skin color" (PDF). American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 118 (4): 393–398. doi:10.1002/ajpa.10079. PMID 12124919. 
Rosenberg, N. A.; Mahajan, S.; Ramachandran, S.; Zhao, C.; Pritchard, J. K.; Feldman, M. W. (2005). "Clines, Clusters, and the Effect of Study Design on the Inference of Human Population Structure". PLoS Genetics. 1 (6): e70. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0010070. PMC 1310579 . PMID 16355252. 
Sauer, Norman J. (1992). "Forensic Anthropology and the Concept of Race: If Races Don't Exist, Why are Forensic Anthropologists So Good at Identifying them". Social Science and Medicine. 34 (2): 107–11. doi:10.1016/0277-9536(92)90086-6. PMID 1738862. 
Sesardic, Neven (2010). "Race: A Social Destruction of a Biological Concept". Biology. Biology & Philosophy. 25 (143): 143–62. doi:10.1007/s10539-009-9193-7. 
Segal, Daniel A. (1991). "'The European': Allegories of Racial Purity". Anthropology Today. Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. 7 (5): 7–9. doi:10.2307/3032780. JSTOR 3032780. 
Serre, D.; Pääbo, S. (September 2004). "Evidence for gradients of human genetic diversity within and among continents". Genome Res. 14 (9): 1679–85. doi:10.1101/gr.2529604. PMC 515312 . PMID 15342553. 
Schaefer, Richard T., ed. (2008). Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity and Society. Sage. p. 1096. ISBN 9781412926942. 
Shriver, M. D.; Kittles, R. A. (2004). "Opinion: Genetic ancestry and the search for personalized genetic histories". Nature Reviews Genetics. 5 (8): 611–18. doi:10.1038/nrg1405. PMID 15266343. 
Sivanandan, A. (2000). "Apropos the idea of 'race' ... again"". In Black, L.; J Solomos. Theories of Race and Racism. London: Routledge. pp. 125–43. 
Slotkin, J. S. (1965). "The Eighteenth Century". Readings in early Anthropology. Methuen Publishing. pp. 175–243. 
Smaje, Chris (1997). "Not just a social construct: Theorising race and ethnicity". Sociology. 31 (2): 307–27. doi:10.1177/0038038597031002007. 
Smedley, A. (1999). Race in North America: origin and evolution of a worldview (2nd ed.). Boulder: Westview Press. ISBN 0813334489. 
Smedley, Audrey (2002). "Science and the Idea of Race: A Brief History". In Fish, Jefferson M. Race and Intelligence: Separating Science from Myth. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. p. 172. ISBN 0805837574. 
Smedley, A.; Smedley, B. D. (January 2005). "Race as biology is fiction, racism as a social problem is real: Anthropological and historical perspectives on the social construction of race" (PDF). American Psychologist. 60 (1): 16–26. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.60.1.16. PMID 15641918. 
Sober, Elliott (2000). Philosophy of biology (2nd ed.). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0813391267. 
Stanton, W. (1982) [1960]. The leopard's spots: scientific attitudes toward race in America, 1815–1859. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226771229. 
Stocking, George W. (1968). Race, Culture and Evolution: Essays in the History of Anthropology. University of Chicago Press. p. 380. ISBN 9780226774947. 
Takaki, R (1993). A different mirror: a history of multicultural America (paperback). Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN 0316831123. 
Tang, Hua; Quertermous, Tom; Rodriguez, Beatriz; Kardia, Sharon L.R.; Zhu, Xiaofeng; Brown, Andrew; Pankow, James S.; Province, Michael A.; Hunt, Steven C.; Boerwinkle, Eric; Schork, Nicholas J.; Risch, Neil J. (2005). "Genetic Structure, Self-Identified Race/Ethnicity, and Confounding in Case-Control Association Studies". The American Journal of Human Genetics. 76 (2): 268–75. doi:10.1086/427888. PMC 1196372 . PMID 15625622. 
Templeton, A. R. (1998). "Human races: a genetic and evolutionary perspective". Am Anthropol. 100 (3): 632–50. doi:10.1525/aa.1998.100.3.632. 
Templeton, Alan R. (September 2013). "Biological Races in Humans". Studies in history and philosophy of biological and biomedical sciences. 44 (3): 262–271. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.04.010. ISSN 1369-8486. PMC 3737365 . PMID 23684745. 
Thompson, William; Hickey, Joseph (2005). Society in Focus. Boston, Massachusetts: Pearson. ISBN 0-205-41365-X. 
Tishkoff, Sarah A.; Kidd, Kenneth K. (2004). "Implications of biogeography of human populations for 'race' and medicine". Nature Genetics. 36 (11 Suppl): S21. doi:10.1038/ng1438. PMID 15507999. 
Travassos, Claudia; Williams, David R. (June 2004). "The concept and measurement of race and their relationship to public health: a review focused on Brazil and the United States" (PDF). Cadernos de Saúde Pública. 20 (3): 660–678. doi:10.1590/S0102-311X2004000300003. 
Todorov, T (1993). On human diversity. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674634381. 
von Vacano, Diego (2011). The Color of Citizenship: Race, Modernity and Latin American/Hispanic Political Thought. Oxford University Press. 
Waples, Robin S.; Gaggiotti, Oscar (2006). "What is a population? An empirical evaluation of some genetic methods for identifying the number of gene pools and their degree of connectivity". Molecular Ecology. 15 (6): 1419–39. doi:10.1111/j.1365-294X.2006.02890.x. PMID 16629801. 
Weiss, Rick (2005-12-16). "Scientists Find a DNA Change That Accounts for Light Skin". The Washington Post. 
Willing, Richard (2005-08-16). "DNA tests offer clues to suspect's race". USA Today. 
Wilson, E. O; Brown, W. L. (1953). "The Subspecies Concept and Its Taxonomic Application". Systematic Zoology. 2 (3): 97–110. doi:10.2307/2411818. JSTOR 2411818. 
Wilson, JF; Weale, ME; Smith, A. C.; Gratrix, F.; Fletcher, B.; Thomas, M. G.; Bradman, N.; Goldstein, D. B. (2001). "Population genetic structure of variable drug response". Nat Genet. 29 (3): 265–69. doi:10.1038/ng761. PMID 11685208. 
Winfield, A. G. (2007). Eugenics and education in America: Institutionalized racism and the implications of history, ideology, and memory. New York: Peter Lang Publishing, Inc. pp. 45–46. 
Witherspoon, D. J.; Wooding, S.; Rogers, A. R.; Marchani, E. E.; Watkins, W. S.; Batzer, M. A.; Jorde, L. B. (2007). "Genetic Similarities Within and Between Human Populations". Genetics. 176 (1): 351–59. doi:10.1534/genetics.106.067355. PMC 1893020 . PMID 17339205. 
Witzig, R (15 October 1996). "The medicalization of race: scientific legitimization of a flawed social construct". Annals of Internal Medicine. 125 (8): 675–79. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-125-8-199610150-00008. PMID 8849153. 
Wright, Sewall (1978). Evolution and the Genetics of Populations. 4, Variability Within and Among Natural Populations. Chicago, Illinois: Univ. Chicago Press. p. 438. 
Xing, Jinchuan; Watkins, W. Scott; Shlien, Adam; Walker, Erin; Huff, Chad D.; Witherspoon, David J.; Zhang, Yuhua; Simonson, Tatum S.; Weiss, Robert B.; Schiffman, Joshua D.; Malkin, David; Woodward, Scott R.; Jorde, Lynn B. (2010). "Toward a more uniform sampling of human genetic diversity: A survey of worldwide populations by high-density genotyping". Genomics. 96 (4): 199–210. doi:10.1016/j.ygeno.2010.07.004. ISSN 0888-7543. PMID 20643205. Retrieved 2016-02-10. 


Further reading

James, Michael. "Race". In Zalta, Edward N. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 ed.). 
Jorde, LB; Wooding, SP (November 2004). "Genetic variation, classification and 'race'". Nat. Genet. 36 (11 Suppl): S28–33. doi:10.1038/ng1435. PMID 15508000. 
Lieberman, Leonard; Hampton, Raymond E.; Littlefield, Alice; Hallead, Glen (1992). "Race in Biology and Anthropology: A Study of College Texts and Professors". Journal of Research in Science Teaching. 29 (3): 301–21. Bibcode:1992JRScT..29..301L. doi:10.1002/tea.3660290308. 
Smedley, Audrey (March 14, 2007). "The History of the Idea of Race... and Why It Matters" (PDF). presented at the conference "Race, Human Variation and Disease: Consensus and Frontiers" sponsored by the American Anthropological Association. 
Wade, Peter (2002). Race, Nature and Culture : An anthropological perspective. London, UK: Pluto Press. ISBN 0-74-531459-7. 
Whitmarsh, Ian; Jones, David S., eds. (2010). What's the Use of Race?: Modern Governance and the Biology of Difference. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-51424-8. Lay summary (28 April 2013).  This review of current research includes chapters by Ian Whitmarsh, David S. Jones, Jonathan Kahn, Pamela Sankar, Steven Epstein, Simon M. Outram, George T. H. Ellison, Richard Tutton, Andrew Smart, Richard Ashcroft, Paul Martin, George T. H. Ellison, Amy Hinterberger, Joan H. Fujimura, Ramya Rajagopalan, Pilar N. Ossorio, Kjell A. Doksum, Jay S. Kaufman, Richard S. Cooper, Angela C. Jenks, Nancy Krieger, and Dorothy Roberts.

Popular press

Dawkins, Richard (23 October 2004). "Race and creation". Prospect.  Extract from The Ancestor's Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Evolution. ISBN 978-0-61-861916-0.
Leroi, Armand Marie (14 March 2005). "A Family Tree in Every Gene". The New York Times. 
"The Nature of Normal Human Variety: A Talk with Armand Marie Leroi". Edge Foundation, Inc. 13 March 2005. 
"The Myth of Race". Medicine Magazine. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-01-01. 

External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to race.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Race (human categorization)



Race: the Power of an Illusion companion website to California Newsreel feature, 2003, PBS
"Understanding Race", the American Anthropological Association's educational website, with links for primary school educators and researchers
Is Race "Real"?, forum by the Social Science Research Council.

Official statements

"The Race Question", UNESCO, 1950
US Census Bureau: Definition of Race
"Standards for Maintaining, Collecting, and Presenting Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity", Federal Register, 1997, Department of Interior
RACE: Are we so different?, a public education program by the American Anthropological Association.







v
t
e


Ethnicity



Related
concepts



Clan
Ethnic group

Ethnolinguistic group
Ethnoreligious group


Indigenous peoples
Ingroups and outgroups
Meta-ethnicity
Metroethnicity
Minority group
Monoethnicity
Nation
Nationality
Panethnicity
Polyethnicity
Population
Race
Symbolic ethnicity
Tribe





Ethnology



Anthropology
Ethnic studies
Ethnoarchaeology
Ethnobiology

Ethnobotany
Ethnozoology
Ethnoecology


Ethnocinema
Ethnogeology
Ethnography

Autoethnography
Clinical
Critical
Cyber-
Netnography
Online
Person-centered
Salvage
Transidioethnography
Video


Ethnohistory
Ethnolinguistics
Ethnology
Ethnomathematics
Ethnomethodology
Ethnomuseology
Ethnomusicology
Ethnophilosophy
Ethnopoetics
Ethnoscience
Ethnosemiotics
Ethnotaxonomy





Groups
by region



Africa

Arab League


Americas

Indigenous
Canada
Mexico
United States
Central America
South America


Asia

Central Asia
East Asia
Northern Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
West Asia


Australia

Indigenous


Europe
Oceania

Indigenous
European








Identity and
ethnogenesis




Cross-race effect
Cultural assimilation
Cultural identity
Demonym
Development
Endonym
Ethnic flag
Ethnic option
Ethnic origin
Ethnic religion
Ethnicity in census
Ethnofiction
Ethnonym
Folk religion
Historical
Imagined community
Kinship
Legendary progenitor
Lineage-bonded society
Mores
Nation-building
Nation state
National language
National myth
Origin myth
Pantribal sodality
Tribal name
Tribalism
Urheimat





Multiethnic
society



Consociationalism
Diaspora politics
Dominant minority
Ethnic democracy
Ethnic enclave
Ethnic interest group
Ethnic majority
Ethnic media
Ethnic pornography
Ethnic theme park
Ethnoburb
Ethnocracy
Indigenous rights
Middleman minority
Minority rights
Model minority
Multinational state






Ideology and
ethnic conflict




Ethnic bioweapon
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnic nationalism
Ethnic nepotism
Ethnic penalty
Ethnic slur
Ethnic stereotype
Ethnic violence
Ethnocentrism
Ethnocide
Ethnosymbolism
Indigenism
Separatist movements
Xenophobia












v
t
e


Historical race concepts



By color



Black
Bronze
Brown
Red
White
Yellow





Anthropological



Australoid
Capoid
Caucasoid
Mongoloid
Negroid





Sub-types



Alpine
Arabid
Armenoid
Atlantid
Borreby
Brunn
Caspian
Dinaric
East Baltic
Ethiopid
Hamitic
Dravidian
Irano-Afghan
Japhetic
Malay
Mediterranean
Neo-Mongoloid
Neo-Danubian
Nordic
Northcaucasian
Ladogan
Lappish
Pamirid
Proto-Mongoloid
Semitic
Turanid





Multiracial



Miscegenation
Ethnogenesis
List of racially mixed groups





Writers



Louis Agassiz
John Baker
Erwin Baur
John Beddoe
Robert Bennett Bean
François Bernier
Renato Biasutti
Johann Friedrich Blumenbach
Franz Boas
Paul Broca
Alice Mossie Brues
Halfdan Bryn
Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon
Charles Caldwell
Petrus Camper
Samuel A. Cartwright
Houston Stewart Chamberlain
Sonia Mary Cole
Carleton S. Coon
Georges Cuvier
Jan Czekanowski
Charles Davenport
Joseph Deniker
Egon Freiherr von Eickstedt
Anténor Firmin
Eugen Fischer
John Fiske
Francis Galton
Stanley Marion Garn
Reginald Ruggles Gates
George Gliddon
Arthur de Gobineau
Madison Grant
John Grattan
Hans F. K. Günther
Ernst Haeckel
Frederick Ludwig Hoffman
Earnest Hooton
Julian Huxley
Thomas Henry Huxley
Calvin Ira Kephart
Robert Knox
Robert E. Kuttner
Georges Vacher de Lapouge
Fritz Lenz
Carl Linnaeus
Cesare Lombroso
Bertil Lundman
Felix von Luschan
Dominick McCausland
John Mitchell
Ashley Montagu
Lewis H. Morgan
Samuel George Morton
Josiah C. Nott
Karl Pearson
Oscar Peschel
Isaac La Peyrère
Charles Pickering
Ludwig Hermann Plate
Alfred Ploetz
James Cowles Prichard
Otto Reche
Gustaf Retzius
William Z. Ripley
Alfred Rosenberg
Benjamin Rush
Henric Sanielevici
Heinrich Schmidt
Ilse Schwidetzky
Charles Gabriel Seligman
Giuseppe Sergi
Samuel Stanhope Smith
Herbert Spencer
Morris Steggerda
Lothrop Stoddard
William Graham Sumner
Thomas Griffith Taylor
Paul Topinard
John H. Van Evrie
Otmar Freiherr von Verschuer
Rudolf Virchow
Voltaire
Alexander Winchell
Ludwig Woltmann





Writings



An Essay upon the Causes of the Different Colours of People in Different Climates (1744)
The Outline of History of Mankind (1785)
Occasional Discourse on the Negro Question (1849)
An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races (1855)
The Races of Europe (Ripley, 1899)
The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century (1899)
Race Life of the Aryan Peoples (1907)
Heredity in Relation to Eugenics (1911)
Castes in India: Their Mechanism, Genesis and Development (1916)
The Passing of the Great Race (1916)
The Rising Tide of Color Against White World-Supremacy (1920)
The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930)
Annihilation of Caste (1936)
The Races of Europe (Coon, 1939)
An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus (1943)
The Race Question (1950)





Theories



Eugenics
Great chain of being
Monogenism
Polygenism
Pre-Adamite





Related



History of anthropometry
Racial categorization

in India
in Latin America

in Brazil
in Colombia


in Singapore
in the United States


Scientific racism

Nazism and race


Racial hygiene
Whiteness

in the United States


Whitening

Branqueamento/Blanqueamiento


Passing
Racial stereotypes
Martial race
Master race
Color names

Colorism


Négritude









Authority control



GND: 4152838-4











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Race_(human_categorization)&oldid=816965196"					Categories: Kinship and descentRace (human categorization)Social constructionismSocial inequalityAnthropologyHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2010Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2015Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2017Citation overkillArticles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from October 2017Articles with minor POV problems from August 2017All pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2016Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2010All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from October 2016Articles needing more detailed referencesArticles with unsourced statements from November 2016Articles lacking reliable references from August 2017All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles needing additional references from January 2010All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from February 2010Commons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers