





This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: repetition, organisation, coherence. Please help improve this article if you can. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







African-American university student Vivian Malone entering the University of Alabama in the U.S. to register for classes as one of the first non-white students to attend the institution. Until 1963, the university was racially segregated and non-white students were not allowed to attend.




Part of a series on


Discrimination




General forms


Age
Caste
Class
Color
Disability
Gender
Genotype
Hair
Height
Language
Looks
Mental condition
Race / Ethnicity / Nationality
Rank
Religion
Sex
Sexuality
Size
Species






Specific forms


 




Social


AIDS stigma
Adultism
Anti-albinism
Anti-autism
Anti-homelessness
Anti-intellectualism
Anti-intersex
Anti-left handedness
Anti-Masonry
Audism
Binarism
Biphobia
Cronyism
Drug use
Elitism
Ephebiphobia
Ethnopluralism
Fatism
Genderism
Gerontophobia
Heteronormativity
Heterosexism
Homophobia
Leprosy stigma
Lesbophobia
Mentalism
Misandry
Misogyny
Nepotism
Pedophobia
Pregnancy
Reverse
Sectarianism
Shadism
Supremacism

Arab
Black
White


Transmisogyny
Transphobia
Vegaphobia
Xenophobia








Manifestations


Animal cruelty
Animal testing
Blood libel
Blood sport
Carnism
Class conflict
Compulsory sterilization
Counter-jihad
Cultural genocide
Democide
Disability hate crime
Economic
Eliminationism
Employment
Enemy of the people
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnocide
Forced conversion
Freak show
Gay bashing
Gendercide
Genital mutilation
Genocide

examples


Glass ceiling
Group libel
Hate crime
Hate group
Hate speech
Homeless dumping
Housing
Indian rolling
LGBT hate crime
Lavender scare
Lynching
Meat eating
Mortgage
Persecution
Murder music
Occupational segregation
Persecution
Pogrom
Purge
Race war
Red Scare
Religious persecution
Scapegoating
Segregation academy
Sex-selective abortion
Slavery
Slut-shaming
Trans bashing
Victimisation
Violence against women
White flight
White power music
Wife selling
Witch-hunt








Policies


Segregation

age
racial
religious
sex


Age of candidacy
Blood quantum
Cleanliness of blood
Crime of apartheid
Disabilities

Jewish
Catholic


Ethnocracy
Gender pay gap
Gender roles
Gerontocracy
Gerrymandering
Ghetto benches
Internment
Jewish quota
Jim Crow laws
Law for Protection of the Nation
McCarthyism
MSM blood donor controversy
Nonpersons
Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota)
Nuremberg Laws
One-drop rule
Racial quota
Racial steering
Redlining
Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting)
Sodomy law
Ugly law
Voter suppression








Countermeasures


Affirmative action
Animal rights
Anti-discrimination law
Classism
Cultural assimilation
Cultural pluralism
Desegregation
Diversity training
Empowerment
Feminism
Fighting Discrimination
Human rights
Intersex rights
Multiculturalism
Racial integration
Religious persecution
Self-determination
Social integration
Toleration
Vegetarianism
Veganism








Related topics


Allophilia
Anti-cultural sentiment
Assimilation
Bias
Christian privilege
Diversity
Ethnic penalty
Eugenics
Intersectionality
Male privilege
Masculism
Multiculturalism
Neurodiversity
Oppression
Police brutality
Political correctness
Power distance
Prejudice
Racial bias in criminal news
Racism by country
Regressive left
Religious intolerance
Second-generation gender bias
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social stigma
Stereotype

threat


White privilege






 Discrimination portal





v
t
e





Racism is the belief in the superiority of one race over another, which often results in discrimination and prejudice towards people based on their race or ethnicity. Today, the use of the term "racism" does not easily fall under a single definition.[1]
The ideology underlying racist practices often includes the idea that humans can be subdivided into distinct groups that are different due to their social behavior and their innate capacities as well as the idea that they can be ranked as inferior or superior.[2] The Holocaust is a classic example of institutionalized racism which led to the death of millions of people based on race.
While the concepts of race and ethnicity are considered to be separate in contemporary social science, the two terms have a long history of equivalence in both popular usage and older social science literature. "Ethnicity" is often used in a sense close to one traditionally attributed to "race": the division of human groups based on qualities assumed to be essential or innate to the group (e.g. shared ancestry or shared behavior). Therefore, racism and racial discrimination are often used to describe discrimination on an ethnic or cultural basis, independent of whether these differences are described as racial. According to a United Nations convention on racial discrimination, there is no distinction between the terms "racial" and "ethnic" discrimination. The UN convention further concludes that superiority based on racial differentiation is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous, and there is no justification for racial discrimination, anywhere, in theory or in practice.[3]
Racist ideology can become manifest in many aspects of social life. Racism can be present in social actions, practices, or political systems (e.g., apartheid) that support the expression of prejudice or aversion in discriminatory practices. Associated social actions may include nativism, xenophobia, otherness, segregation, hierarchical ranking, supremacism, and related social phenomena.



Contents


1 Etymology, definition and usage

1.1 Legal
1.2 Social and behavioral science
1.3 Humanities
1.4 Popular usage


2 Aspects

2.1 Aversive racism
2.2 Color blindness
2.3 Cultural
2.4 Economic
2.5 Institutional
2.6 Othering
2.7 Racial discrimination
2.8 Racial segregation
2.9 Supremacism
2.10 Symbolic/modern
2.11 Subconscious biases


3 International law and racial discrimination
4 Ideology
5 Ethnicity and ethnic conflicts

5.1 Ethnic nationalism


6 History

6.1 Ethnocentrism and proto-racism
6.2 Limpieza de sangre
6.3 19th century
6.4 20th century
6.5 Contemporary


7 Scientific racism

7.1 Scientific variants

7.1.1 Heredity and eugenics
7.1.2 Polygenism and racial typologies
7.1.3 Human zoos




8 Theories about the origins of racism
9 State-sponsored racism
10 Anti-racism

10.1 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
10.2 Teaching about racism


11 See also
12 References and notes
13 Further reading
14 External links



Etymology, definition and usage


Race




Categorization




Genetics and differences




Race and genetics
Human genetic variation




Society




Historical concepts

Race


in Brazil
in the United States




Racial inequality in the United States
Racial wage gap in the United States
Racial profiling

Racism
in the United States
Scientific racism




Race and...





Crime in the United Kingdom
Crime in the United States


Race and health


in the United States





Intelligence
History of the race
and intelligence controversy

Sports
Video games




Related topics




Ethnic group
Eugenics
Genetics
Human evolution






Index
Category







v
t
e









An early use of the word "racism" by Richard Henry Pratt in 1902: "Association of races and classes is necessary to destroy racism and classism."


In the 19th century, many scientists subscribed to the belief that the human population can be divided into races. The term racism is a noun describing the state of being racist, i.e., subscribing to the belief that the human population can be classified according to race. The origin of the root word "race" is not clear. Linguists generally agree that it came to the English language from Middle French, but there is no such agreement on how it came into Latin-based languages, generally. A recent proposal is that it derives from the Arabic ra's, which means "head, beginning, origin" or the Hebrew rosh, which has a similar meaning.[4] Early race theorists generally held the view that some races were inferior to others and they consequently believed that the differential treatment of races was fully justified.[1][5][6][7] These early theories guided pseudo-scientific research assumptions; the collective endeavors to adequately define and form hypotheses about racial differences are generally termed scientific racism, though this term is a misnomer due to the lack of any actual science backing the claims.
Today, most biologists, anthropologists, and sociologists reject a taxonomy of races in favor of more specific and/or empirically verifiable criteria, such as geography, ethnicity or a history of endogamy.[8] To date, there is little evidence in human genome research which indicates that race can be defined in such a way as to be useful in determining a genetic classification of humans.[9][10][11]
An entry in the Oxford English Dictionary (2008) simply defines racialism as "An earlier term than racism, but now largely superseded by it," and cites it in a 1902 quote.[12] The revised Oxford English Dictionary cites the shortened term "racism" in a quote from the following year, 1903.[13][14][15] It was first defined by the Oxford English Dictionary as "[t]he theory that distinctive human characteristics and abilities are determined by race", which gives 1936 as the first recorded use. Additionally, the Oxford English Dictionary records racism as a synonym of racialism: "belief in the superiority of a particular race". By the end of World War II, racism had acquired the same supremacist connotations formerly associated with racialism: racism now implied racial discrimination, racial supremacism and a harmful intent. (The term "race hatred" had also been used by sociologist Frederick Hertz in the late 1920s.)
As its history indicates, the popular use of the word racism is relatively recent. The word came into widespread usage in the Western world in the 1930s, when it was used to describe the social and political ideology of Nazism, which saw "race" as a naturally given political unit.[16] It is commonly agreed that racism existed before the coinage of the word, but there is not a wide agreement on a single definition of what racism is and what it is not. Today, some scholars of racism prefer to use the concept in the plural racisms in order to emphasize its many different forms that do not easily fall under a single definition and they also argue that different forms of racism have characterized different historical periods and geographical areas.[17] Garner (2009: p. 11) summarizes different existing definitions of racism and identifies three common elements contained in those definitions of racism. First, a historical, hierarchical power relationship between groups; second, a set of ideas (an ideology) about racial differences; and, third, discriminatory actions (practices).[1]
Legal
Though many countries around the globe have passed laws related to race and discrimination, the first significant international human rights instrument developed by the United Nations (UN) was the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).[18] The UDHR was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948. The UDHR recognizes that if people are to be treated with dignity, they require economic rights, social rights including education, and the rights to cultural and political participation and civil liberty. It further states that everyone is entitled to these rights "without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status."
The UN does not define "racism"; however, it does define "racial discrimination": According to the 1965 UN International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,[19]

the term "racial discrimination" shall mean any distinction, exclusion, restriction, or preference based on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin that has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life.

In their 1978 United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice (Article 1), the UN states, "All human beings belong to a single species and are descended from a common stock. They are born equal in dignity and rights and all form an integral part of humanity."[20]
The UN definition of racial discrimination does not make any distinction between discrimination based on ethnicity and race, in part because the distinction between the two has been a matter of debate among academics, including anthropologists.[21] Similarly, in British law the phrase racial group means "any group of people who are defined by reference to their race, colour, nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origin".[22]
In Norway, the word "race" has been removed from national laws concerning discrimination because the use of the phrase is considered problematic and unethical.[23][24] The Norwegian Anti-Discrimination Act bans discrimination based on ethnicity, national origin, descent and skin color.[25]
Social and behavioral science
Main article: Sociology of race and ethnic relations
Sociologists, in general, recognize "race" as a social construct. This means that, although the concepts of race and racism are based on observable biological characteristics, any conclusions drawn about race on the basis of those observations are heavily influenced by cultural ideologies. Racism, as an ideology, exists in a society at both the individual and institutional level.
While much of the research and work on racism during the last half-century or so has concentrated on "white racism" in the Western world, historical accounts of race-based social practices can be found across the globe.[26] Thus, racism can be broadly defined to encompass individual and group prejudices and acts of discrimination that result in material and cultural advantages conferred on a majority or a dominant social group.[27] So-called "white racism" focuses on societies in which white populations are the majority or the dominant social group. In studies of these majority white societies, the aggregate of material and cultural advantages is usually termed "white privilege".
Race and race relations are prominent areas of study in sociology and economics. Much of the sociological literature focuses on white racism. Some of the earliest sociological works on racism were penned by sociologist W. E. B. Du Bois, the first African American to earn a doctoral degree from Harvard University. Du Bois wrote, "The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line."[28] Wellman (1993) defines racism as "culturally sanctioned beliefs, which, regardless of intentions involved, defend the advantages whites have because of the subordinated position of racial minorities".[29] In both sociology and economics, the outcomes of racist actions are often measured by the inequality in income, wealth, net worth, and access to other cultural resources, such as education, between racial groups.[30]
In sociology and social psychology, racial identity and the acquisition of that identity, is often used as a variable in racism studies. Racial ideologies and racial identity affect individuals' perception of race and discrimination. Cazenave and Maddern (1999) define racism as "a highly organized system of 'race'-based group privilege that operates at every level of society and is held together by a sophisticated ideology of color/'race' supremacy. Racial centrality (the extent to which a culture recognizes individuals' racial identity) appears to affect the degree of discrimination African American young adults perceive whereas racial ideology may buffer the detrimental emotional effects of that discrimination.[31] Sellers and Shelton (2003) found that a relationship between racial discrimination and emotional distress was moderated by racial ideology and social beliefs.[32]
Some sociologists also argue that, particularly in the West where racism is often negatively sanctioned in society, racism has changed from being a blatant to a more covert expression of racial prejudice. The "newer" (more hidden and less easily detectable) forms of racism—which can be considered embedded in social processes and structures—are more difficult to explore as well as challenge. It has been suggested that, while in many countries overt or explicit racism has become increasingly taboo, even among those who display egalitarian explicit attitudes, an implicit or aversive racism is still maintained subconsciously.[33]
This process has been studied extensively in social psychology as implicit associations and implicit attitudes, a component of implicit cognition. Implicit attitudes are evaluations that occur without conscious awareness towards an attitude object or the self. These evaluations are generally either favorable or unfavorable. They come about from various influences in the individual experience.[34] Implicit attitudes are not consciously identified (or they are inaccurately identified) traces of past experience that mediate favorable or unfavorable feeling, thought, or action towards social objects.[33] These thoughts, feelings or actions have an influence on behavior of which the individual may not be aware.[35]
Therefore, subconscious racism can influence our visual processing and how our minds work when we are subliminally exposed to faces of different colors. In thinking about crime, for example, social psychologist Jennifer L. Eberhardt (2004) of Stanford University holds that, "blackness is so associated with crime you're ready to pick out these crime objects."[36] Such exposures influence our minds and they can cause subconscious racism in our behavior towards other people or even towards objects. Thus, racist thoughts and actions can arise from stereotypes and fears of which we are not aware.[37]
Humanities
Language, linguistics and discourse are active areas of study in the humanities, along with literature and the arts. Discourse analysis seeks to reveal the meaning of race and the actions of racists through careful study of the ways in which these factors of human society are described and discussed in various written and oral works. Van Dijk (1992), for example, examines the different ways in which descriptions of racism and racist actions are depicted by the perpetrators of such actions as well as by their victims.[38] He notes that when descriptions of actions have negative implications for the majority, and especially for white elites, they are often seen as controversial and such controversial interpretations are typically marked with quotation marks or they are greeted with expressions of distance or doubt. The previously cited book, The Souls of Black Folk by W.E.B. Du Bois, represents early African-American literature that describes the author's experiences with racism when he was traveling in the South as an African American.
Much American fictional literature has focused on issues of racism and the black "racial experience" in the US, including works written by whites such as Uncle Tom's Cabin, To Kill a Mockingbird, and Imitation of Life, or even the non-fiction work Black Like Me. These books, and others like them, feed into what has been called the "white savior narrative in film", in which the heroes and heroines are white even though the story is about things that happen to black characters. Textual analysis of such writings can contrast sharply with black authors' descriptions of African Americans and their experiences in US society. African American writers have sometimes been portrayed in African-American studies as retreating from racial issues when they write about "whiteness", while others identify this as an African American literary tradition called "the literature of white estrangement", part of a multipronged effort to challenge and dismantle white supremacy in the US.[39]
Popular usage
According to dictionaries, the word is commonly used to describe racial prejudice and discrimination.[40][41]
Racism can also be said to describe a condition in society in which a dominant racial group benefits from the oppression of others, whether that group wants such benefits or not.[42] Foucauldian scholar Ladelle McWhorter in her 2009 book Racism and Sexual Oppression in Anglo-America: A Genealogy posits modern racism similarly, focusing on the notion of a dominant group, usually whites, vying for racial purity and progress, rather than an overt or obvious ideology focused on the oppression of nonwhites.[43]
In popular usage, as in some academic usage, little distinction is made between "racism" and "ethnocentrism". Often, the two are listed together as "racial and ethnic" in describing some action or outcome that is associated with prejudice within a majority or dominant group in society. Furthermore, the meaning of the term racism is often conflated with the terms prejudice, bigotry, and discrimination. Racism is a complex concept that can involve each of those, but it cannot be equated with nor is it synonymous with these other terms.
Also, the term is often used in relation to what is seen as prejudice within a minority or subjugated group, as in the concept of "reverse racism". Reverse racism describes discriminatory actions by members of a minority group against a dominant or formerly dominant racial or other group representative of the majority in a particular society.[44] Those who campaign for the interests of ethnic minorities commonly reject the term "reverse racism". From their perspective, "racism" is defined not only in terms of individual prejudice, but also in terms of a power structure which protects the interests of the dominant culture and actively discriminates against ethnic minorities. From this perspective, they claim that while members of ethnic minorities may be prejudiced against members of the dominant culture, they lack the political and economic power to actively oppress them, and they are therefore incapable of "racism".[45]
Specifically, the word "racism" appears to have been coined by Magnus Hirschfeld, a German-Jewish medical researcher who specialized in the field of sexology, or the scientific study of sex. The second edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (1989) lists the first known use of the word in English as appearing in the 1936 book The Coming American Fascism by Lawrence Dennis, a self-described fascist and advocate of fascism in America. However, Hirschfeld, who died in 1935, used the word in the title of his book Racism, written in German a year before the first known use of the word by Dennis, and the word "racism" is used throughout the text. The word is a pejorative and was always intended as such; Hirschfeld himself denounced those he viewed as racist, and very few if any people use the word to describe themselves or their ideas, only those ideas they disagree with or find reprehensible.
Aspects
The ideology underlying racism can become manifest in many aspects of social life. Such aspects are described in this section, although the list is not exhaustive.
Aversive racism
Main article: Aversive racism
Aversive racism is a form of implicit racism in which a person's unconscious negative evaluations of racial or ethnic minorities are realized by a persistent avoidance of interaction with other racial and ethnic groups. As opposed to traditional, overt racism, which is characterized by overt hatred for and explicit discrimination against racial/ethnic minorities, aversive racism is characterized by more complex, ambivalent expressions and attitudes.[46] Aversive racism is similar in implications to the concept of symbolic or modern racism (described below), which is also a form of implicit, unconscious, or covert attitude which results in unconscious forms of discrimination.
The term was coined by Joel Kovel to describe the subtle racial behaviors of any ethnic or racial group who rationalize their aversion to a particular group by appeal to rules or stereotypes.[46] People who behave in an aversively racial way may profess egalitarian beliefs, and will often deny their racially motivated behavior; nevertheless they change their behavior when dealing with a member of another race or ethnic group than the one they belong to. The motivation for the change is thought to be implicit or subconscious. Experiments have provided empirical support for the existence of aversive racism. Aversive racism has been shown to have potentially serious implications for decision making in employment, in legal decisions and in helping behavior.[47][48]
Color blindness
Main article: Racial color blindness
In relation to racism, Color blindness is the disregard of racial characteristics in social interaction, for example in the rejection of affirmative action, as way to address the results of past patterns of discrimination. Critics of this attitude argue that by refusing to attend to racial disparities, racial color blindness in fact unconsciously perpetuates the patterns that produce racial inequality.
Eduardo Bonilla-Silva argues that color blind racism arises from an "abstract liberalism, biologization of culture, naturalization of racial matters, and minimization of racism".[49] Color blind practices are "subtle, institutional, and apparently nonracial"[50] because race is explicitly ignored in decision making. If race is disregarded in predominately white populations, for example, whiteness becomes the normative standard, whereas people of color are othered, and the racism these individuals experience may be minimized or erased.[51][52] At an individual level, people with "color blind prejudice" reject racist ideology, but also reject systemic policies intended to fix institutional racism.[52]
Cultural
See also: Xenophobia
Cultural racism is a term used to describe and explain new racial ideologies and practices that have emerged since World War II. It can be defined as societal beliefs and customs that promote the assumption that the products of a given culture, including the language and traditions of that culture are superior to those of other cultures. It shares a great deal with xenophobia, which is often characterised by fear of, or aggression toward, members of an outgroup by members of an ingroup.
Cultural racism exists when there is a widespread acceptance of stereotypes concerning different ethnic or population groups.[53] Where racism can be characterised by the belief that one race is inherently superior to another, cultural racism can be characterised by the belief that one culture is inherently superior to another.[54]
Economic
Further information: Racial wage gap in the United States and Racial wealth gap in the United States




Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses, Germany, 1933


Historical economic or social disparity is alleged to be a form of discrimination caused by past racism and historical reasons, affecting the present generation through deficits in the formal education and kinds of preparation in previous generations, and through primarily unconscious racist attitudes and actions on members of the general population.
In 2011, Bank of America agreed to pay $335 million to settle a federal government claim that its mortgage division, Countrywide Financial, discriminated against black and Hispanic homebuyers.[55]
During the Spanish colonial period, Spaniards developed a complex caste system based on race, which was used for social control and which also determined a person's importance in society.[56] While many Latin American countries have long since rendered the system officially illegal through legislation, usually at the time of their independence, prejudice based on degrees of perceived racial distance from European ancestry combined with one's socioeconomic status remain, an echo of the colonial caste system.[57]
Institutional
Further information: Institutional racism, State racism, Affirmative action, Racial profiling, and Racism by country
Institutional racism (also known as structural racism, state racism or systemic racism) is racial discrimination by governments, corporations, religions, or educational institutions or other large organizations with the power to influence the lives of many individuals. Stokely Carmichael is credited for coining the phrase institutional racism in the late 1960s. He defined the term as "the collective failure of an organization to provide an appropriate and professional service to people because of their colour, culture or ethnic origin".[58]
Maulana Karenga argued that racism constituted the destruction of culture, language, religion, and human possibility and that the effects of racism were "the morally monstrous destruction of human possibility involved redefining African humanity to the world, poisoning past, present and future relations with others who only know us through this stereotyping and thus damaging the truly human relations among peoples".[59]
Othering
Main article: Othering
Othering is the term used by some to describe a system of discrimination whereby the characteristics of a group are used to distinguish them as separate from the norm.[60]
Othering plays a fundamental role in the history and continuation of racism. To objectify a culture as something different, exotic or underdeveloped is to generalize that it is not like 'normal' society. Europe's colonial attitude towards the Orient exemplifies this as it was thought that the East was the opposite of the West; feminine where the West was masculine, weak where the West was strong and traditional where the West was progressive.[61] By making these generalizations and othering the East, Europe was simultaneously defining herself as the norm, further entrenching the gap.[62]
Much of the process of othering relies on imagined difference, or the expectation of difference. Spatial difference can be enough to conclude that "we" are "here" and the "others" are over "there".[61] Imagined differences serve to categorize people into groups and assign them characteristics that suit the imaginer's expectations.[63]
Racial discrimination
Main article: Racial discrimination
Racial discrimination refers to discrimination against someone on the basis of their race.
Racial segregation
Main article: Racial segregation

External video

 James A. White Sr.: The little problem I had renting a house, TED Talks, 14:20, February 20, 2015


Racial segregation is the separation of humans into socially-constructed racial groups in daily life. It may apply to activities such as eating in a restaurant, drinking from a water fountain, using a bath room, attending school, going to the movies, or in the rental or purchase of a home.[64] Segregation is generally outlawed, but may exist through social norms, even when there is no strong individual preference for it, as suggested by Thomas Schelling's models of segregation and subsequent work.
Supremacism
Main article: Supremacism




In 1899 Uncle Sam (a personification of the United States) balances his new possessions which are depicted as savage children. The figures are Puerto Rico, Hawaii, Cuba, Philippines and "Lad robes" (the Mariana Islands).


Centuries of European colonialism in the Americas, Africa and Asia were often justified by white supremacist attitudes.[65] During the early 20th century, the phrase "The White Man's Burden" was widely used to justify an imperialist policy as a noble enterprise.[66][67] A justification for the policy of conquest and subjugation of Native Americans emanated from the stereotyped perceptions of the indigenous people as "merciless Indian savages" (as described in the United States Declaration of Independence).[68] In an 1890 article about colonial expansion onto Native American land, author L. Frank Baum wrote: "The Whites, by law of conquest, by justice of civilization, are masters of the American continent, and the best safety of the frontier settlements will be secured by the total annihilation of the few remaining Indians."[69] Attitudes of black supremacy, Arab supremacy, and East Asian supremacy also exist.
Symbolic/modern
Main article: Symbolic racism




A rally against school integration in 1959.


Some scholars argue that in the US earlier violent and aggressive forms of racism have evolved into a more subtle form of prejudice in the late 20th century. This new form of racism is sometimes referred to as "modern racism" and it is characterized by outwardly acting unprejudiced while inwardly maintaining prejudiced attitudes, displaying subtle prejudiced behaviors such as actions informed by attributing qualities to others based on racial stereotypes, and evaluating the same behavior differently based on the race of the person being evaluated.[70] This view is based on studies of prejudice and discriminatory behavior, where some people will act ambivalently towards black people, with positive reactions in certain, more public contexts, but more negative views and expressions in more private contexts. This ambivalence may also be visible for example in hiring decisions where job candidates that are otherwise positively evaluated may be unconsciously disfavored by employers in the final decision because of their race.[71][72][73] Some scholars consider modern racism to be characterized by an explicit rejection of stereotypes, combined with resistance to changing structures of discrimination for reasons that are ostensibly non-racial, an ideology that considers opportunity at a purely individual basis denying the relevance of race in determining individual opportunities and the exhibition of indirect forms of micro-aggression toward and/or avoidance of people of other races.[74]
Subconscious biases
Recent research has shown that individuals who consciously claim to reject racism may still exhibit race-based subconscious biases in their decision-making processes. While such "subconscious racial biases" do not fully fit the definition of racism, their impact can be similar, though typically less pronounced, not being explicit, conscious or deliberate.[75]
International law and racial discrimination
In 1919, a proposal to include a racial equality provision in the Covenant of the League of Nations was supported by a majority, but not adopted in the Paris Peace Conference, 1919. In 1943, Japan and its allies declared work for the abolition of racial discrimination to be their aim at the Greater East Asia Conference.[76] Article 1 of the 1945 UN Charter includes "promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race" as UN purpose.
In 1950, UNESCO suggested in The Race Question—a statement signed by 21 scholars such as Ashley Montagu, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Gunnar Myrdal, Julian Huxley, etc.—to "drop the term race altogether and instead speak of ethnic groups". The statement condemned scientific racism theories that had played a role in the Holocaust. It aimed both at debunking scientific racist theories, by popularizing modern knowledge concerning "the race question," and morally condemned racism as contrary to the philosophy of the Enlightenment and its assumption of equal rights for all. Along with Myrdal's An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy (1944), The Race Question influenced the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court desegregation decision in "Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka".[77] Also in 1950, the European Convention on Human Rights was adopted, widely used on racial discrimination issues.[78]
The United Nations use the definition of racial discrimination laid out in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, adopted in 1966:

... any distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, color, descent, or national or ethnic origin that has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal footing, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or any other field of public life. (Part 1 of Article 1 of the U.N. International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination)[79]

In 2001, the European Union explicitly banned racism, along with many other forms of social discrimination, in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, the legal effect of which, if any, would necessarily be limited to Institutions of the European Union: "Article 21 of the charter prohibits discrimination on any ground such as race, color, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, disability, age or sexual orientation and also discrimination on the grounds of nationality."[80]
Ideology




A racist political campaign poster from the 1866 Pennsylvania gubernatorial election






A sign on a racially segregated beach during the era of Apartheid in South Africa


Racism existed during the 19th century as "scientific racism", which attempted to provide a racial classification of humanity.[81] In 1775 Johann Blumenbach divided the world's population into five groups according to skin color (Caucasians, Mongols, etc.), positing the view that the non-caucasians had arisen through a process of degeneration. Another early view in scientific racism was the polygenist view, which held that the different races had been separately created. Polygenist Christoph Meiners for example, split mankind into two divisions which he labeled the "beautiful White race" and the "ugly Black race". In Meiners' book, The Outline of History of Mankind, he claimed that a main characteristic of race is either beauty or ugliness. He viewed only the white race as beautiful. He considered ugly races to be inferior, immoral and animal-like.
Anders Retzius demonstrated that neither Europeans nor others are one "pure race", but of mixed origins. While discredited, derivations of Blumenbach's taxonomy are still widely used for the classification of the population in the United States. H. P. Steensby, while strongly emphasizing that all humans today are of mixed origins, in 1907 claimed that the origins of human differences must be traced extraordinarily far back in time, and conjectured that the "purest race" today would be the Australian Aboriginals.[82]
Scientific racism fell strongly out of favor in the early 20th Century, but the origins of fundamental human and societal differences are still researched within academia, in fields such as human genetics including paleogenetics, social anthropology, comparative politics, history of religions, history of ideas, prehistory, history, ethics, and psychiatry. There is widespread rejection of any methodology based on anything similar to Blumenbach's races. It is more unclear to which extent and when ethnic and national stereotypes are accepted.
Although after World War II and the Holocaust, racist ideologies were discredited on ethical, political and scientific grounds, racism and racial discrimination have remained widespread around the world. From time to time when there is a revival of social and political tensions, new works are published which repeat past and discredited racial views such as J R Baker's 'Race'.[83] Because of the social disapproval of explicit expressions of racism, contemporary authors may achieve a similar effect by insinuating subtle unstated stereotypes in their work as in Gladwell's 'The Tipping Point',[84] a tactic President Obama called 'dog whistle racism'.
Du Bois observed that it is not so much "race" that we think about, but culture: "... a common history, common laws and religion, similar habits of thought and a conscious striving together for certain ideals of life".[85] Late 19th century nationalists were the first to embrace contemporary discourses on "race", ethnicity, and "survival of the fittest" to shape new nationalist doctrines. Ultimately, race came to represent not only the most important traits of the human body, but was also regarded as decisively shaping the character and personality of the nation.[86] According to this view, culture is the physical manifestation created by ethnic groupings, as such fully determined by racial characteristics. Culture and race became considered intertwined and dependent upon each other, sometimes even to the extent of including nationality or language to the set of definition. Pureness of race tended to be related to rather superficial characteristics that were easily addressed and advertised, such as blondness. Racial qualities tended to be related to nationality and language rather than the actual geographic distribution of racial characteristics. In the case of Nordicism, the denomination "Germanic" was equivalent to superiority of race.
Bolstered by some nationalist and ethnocentric values and achievements of choice, this concept of racial superiority evolved to distinguish from other cultures that were considered inferior or impure. This emphasis on culture corresponds to the modern mainstream definition of racism: "Racism does not originate from the existence of 'races'. It creates them through a process of social division into categories: anybody can be racialised, independently of their somatic, cultural, religious differences."[87]
This definition explicitly ignores the biological concept of race, still subject to scientific debate. In the words of David C. Rowe "A racial concept, although sometimes in the guise of another name, will remain in use in biology and in other fields because scientists, as well as lay persons, are fascinated by human diversity, some of which is captured by race."[88]
Racial prejudice became subject to international legislation. For instance, the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on November 20, 1963, address racial prejudice explicitly next to discrimination for reasons of race, colour or ethnic origin (Article I).[89]
Ethnicity and ethnic conflicts
Further information: Ethnicity
Debates over the origins of racism often suffer from a lack of clarity over the term. Many use the term "racism" to refer to more general phenomena, such as xenophobia and ethnocentrism, although scholars attempt to clearly distinguish those phenomena from racism as an ideology or from scientific racism, which has little to do with ordinary xenophobia. Others conflate recent forms of racism with earlier forms of ethnic and national conflict. In most cases, ethno-national conflict seems to owe itself to conflict over land and strategic resources. In some cases, ethnicity and nationalism were harnessed in order to rally combatants in wars between great religious empires (for example, the Muslim Turks and the Catholic Austro-Hungarians).




A mass grave being dug for frozen bodies from the 1890 Wounded Knee Massacre, in which the U.S. Army killed 150 Lakota people, marking the end of the American Indian Wars.


Notions of race and racism have often played central roles in ethnic conflicts. Throughout history, when an adversary is identified as "other" based on notions of race or ethnicity (in particular when "other" is construed to mean "inferior"), the means employed by the self-presumed "superior" party to appropriate territory, human chattel, or material wealth often have been more ruthless, more brutal, and less constrained by moral or ethical considerations. According to historian Daniel Richter, Pontiac's Rebellion saw the emergence on both sides of the conflict of "the novel idea that all Native people were 'Indians,' that all Euro-Americans were 'Whites,' and that all on one side must unite to destroy the other."[90] Basil Davidson states in his documentary, Africa: Different but Equal, that racism, in fact, only just recently surfaced—as late as the 19th century, due to the need for a justification for slavery in the Americas.
Historically, racism was a major driving force behind the Transatlantic slave trade.[91] It was also a major force behind racial segregation, especially in the United States in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and South Africa under apartheid; 19th and 20th century racism in Western world is particularly well documented and constitutes a reference point in studies and discourses about racism.[92] Racism has played a role in genocides such as the Armenian genocide, and The Holocaust, and colonial projects like the European colonization of the Americas, Africa, and Asia. Indigenous peoples have been –and are– often subject to racist attitudes. Practices and ideologies of racism are condemned by the United Nations in the Declaration of Human Rights.[93]
Ethnic nationalism
Further information: Ethnic nationalism and Romantic nationalism




Eugène Delacroix's Scene of the massacre at Chios (1824); Greek families awaiting death or slavery


After the Napoleonic Wars, Europe was confronted with the new "nationalities question," leading to reconfigurations of the European map, on which the frontiers between the states had been delineated during the 1648 Peace of Westphalia. Nationalism had made its first appearance with the invention of the levée en masse by the French Revolutionaries, thus inventing mass conscription in order to be able to defend the newly founded Republic against the Ancien Régime order represented by the European monarchies. This led to the French Revolutionary Wars (1792–1802) and then to the conquests of Napoleon, and to the subsequent European-wide debates on the concepts and realities of nations, and in particular of nation-states. The Westphalia Treaty had divided Europe into various empires and kingdoms (Ottoman Empire, Holy Roman Empire, Swedish Empire, Kingdom of France, etc.), and for centuries wars were waged between princes (Kabinettskriege in German).
Modern nation-states appeared in the wake of the French Revolution, with the formation of patriotic sentiments for the first time in Spain during the Peninsula War (1808–1813, known in Spain as the Independence War). Despite the restoration of the previous order with the 1815 Congress of Vienna, the "nationalities question" became the main problem of Europe during the Industrial Era, leading in particular to the 1848 Revolutions, the Italian unification completed during the 1871 Franco-Prussian War, which itself culminated in the proclamation of the German Empire in the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles, thus achieving the German unification.
Meanwhile, the Ottoman Empire, the "sick man of Europe", was confronted with endless nationalist movements, which, along with the dissolving of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire, would lead to the creation after World War I of the various nation-states of the Balkans, with "national minorities" in their borders.[94] Ethnic nationalism, which advocated the belief in a hereditary membership of the nation, made its appearance in the historical context surrounding the creation of the modern nation-states.
One of its main influences was the Romantic nationalist movement at the turn of the 19th century, represented by figures such as Johann Herder (1744–1803), Johan Fichte (1762–1814) in the Addresses to the German Nation (1808), Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831), or also, in France, Jules Michelet (1798–1874). It was opposed to liberal nationalism, represented by authors such as Ernest Renan (1823–1892), who conceived of the nation as a community, which, instead of being based on the Volk ethnic group and on a specific, common language, was founded on the subjective will to live together ("the nation is a daily plebiscite", 1882) or also John Stuart Mill (1806–1873).[95] Ethnic nationalism blended with scientific racist discourses, as well as with "continental imperialist" (Hannah Arendt, 1951[96]) discourses, for example in the pan-Germanism discourses, which postulated the racial superiority of the German Volk (people/folk). The Pan-German League (Alldeutscher Verband), created in 1891, promoted German imperialism, "racial hygiene" and was opposed to intermarriage with Jews. Another popular current, the Völkisch movement, was also an important proponent of the German ethnic nationalist discourse, and it combined Pan-Germanism with modern racial antisemitism. Members of the Völkisch movement, in particular the Thule Society, would participate in the founding of the German Workers' Party (DAP) in Munich in 1918, the predecessor of the National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP; commonly known in English as the Nazi party). Pan-Germanism played a decisive role in the interwar period of the 1920s–1930s.[96]
These currents began to associate the idea of the nation with the biological concept of a "master race" (often the "Aryan race" or the "Nordic race") issued from the scientific racist discourse. They conflated nationalities with ethnic groups, called "races", in a radical distinction from previous racial discourses that posited the existence of a "race struggle" inside the nation and the state itself. Furthermore, they believed that political boundaries should mirror these alleged racial and ethnic groups, thus justifying ethnic cleansing in order to achieve "racial purity" and also to achieve ethnic homogeneity in the nation-state.
Such racist discourses, combined with nationalism, were not, however, limited to pan-Germanism. In France, the transition from Republican, liberal nationalism, to ethnic nationalism, which made nationalism a characteristic of far-right movements in France, took place during the Dreyfus Affair at the end of the 19th century. During several years, a nationwide crisis affected French society, concerning the alleged treason of Alfred Dreyfus, a French Jewish military officer. The country polarized itself into two opposite camps, one represented by Émile Zola, who wrote J'accuse in defense of Alfred Dreyfus, and the other represented by the nationalist poet, Maurice Barrès (1862–1923), one of the founders of the ethnic nationalist discourse in France.[97] At the same time, Charles Maurras (1868–1952), founder of the monarchist Action française movement, theorized the "anti-France," composed of the "four confederate states of Protestants, Jews, Freemasons and foreigners" (his actual word for the latter being the pejorative métèques). Indeed, to him the first three were all "internal foreigners", who threatened the ethnic unity of the French people.
History
Ethnocentrism and proto-racism




The Book of Genesis's biblical curse on Canaan, which was often misinterpreted as a curse on his father Ham, was used to justify slavery in 19th century America.[98]


Bernard Lewis has cited the Greek philosopher Aristotle who, in his discussion of slavery, stated that while Greeks are free by nature, 'barbarians' (non-Greeks) are slaves by nature, in that it is in their nature to be more willing to submit to despotic government.[99] Though Aristotle does not specify any particular races, he argues that people from outside Greece are more prone to the burden of slavery than those from Greece.[100] While Aristotle makes remarks about the most natural slaves being those with strong bodies and slave souls (unfit for rule, unintelligent) which would seem to imply a physical basis for discrimination, he also explicitly states that the right kind of souls and bodies don't always go together, implying that the greatest determinate for inferiority and natural slaves versus natural masters is the soul, not the body.[101] This proto-racism is seen as an important precursor to modern racism by classicist Benjamin Isaac.
Such proto-racism and ethnocentrism must be looked at within context, because a modern understanding of racism based on hereditary inferiority (modern racism based on: eugenics and scientific racism) was not yet developed and it is unclear whether Aristotle believed the natural inferiority of Barbarians was caused by environment and climate (like many of his contemporaries) or by birth.[102]
Historian Dante A. Puzzo, in his discussion of Aristotle, racism, and the ancient world writes that:

Racism rests on two basic assumptions: that a correlation exists between physical characteristics and moral qualities; that mankind is divisible into superior and inferior stocks. Racism, thus defined, is a modern conception, for prior to the XVIth century there was virtually nothing in the life and thought of the West that can be described as racist. To prevent misunderstanding a clear distinction must be made between racism and ethnocentrism ... The Ancient Hebrews, in referring to all who were not Hebrews as Gentiles, were indulging in ethnocentrism, not in racism. ... So it was with the Hellenes who denominated all non-Hellenes—whether the wild Scythians or the Egyptians whom they acknowledged as their mentors in the arts of civilization—Barbarians, the term denoting that which was strange or foreign.[103]





13th-century slave market in Yemen. Yemen officially abolished slavery in 1962.[104]


Bernard Lewis has also cited historians and geographers of the Middle East and North Africa region,[105] including Al-Muqaddasi, Al-Jahiz, Al-Masudi, Abu Rayhan Biruni, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, and Ibn Qutaybah.[105] Though the Qur'an expresses no racial prejudice, Lewis argues that ethnocentric prejudice later developed among Arabs, for a variety of reasons:[105] their extensive conquests and slave trade; the influence of Aristotelian ideas regarding slavery, which some Muslim philosophers directed towards Zanj (Bantu[106]) and Turkic peoples;[99] and the influence of Judeo-Christian ideas regarding divisions among humankind.[107] The Afro-Arab author Al-Jahiz, himself having a Zanj grandfather, wrote a book entitled Superiority of the Blacks to the Whites,[108] and explained why the Zanj were black in terms of environmental determinism in the "On the Zanj" chapter of The Essays.[109] By the 14th century, a significant number of slaves came from sub-Saharan Africa; Lewis argues that this led to the likes of Egyptian historian Al-Abshibi (1388–1446) writing: "It is said that when the [black] slave is sated, he fornicates, when he is hungry, he steals."[110] According to Lewis, the 14th-century Tunisian scholar Ibn Khaldun also wrote:

...beyond [known peoples of black West Africa] to the south there is no civilization in the proper sense. There are only humans who are closer to dumb animals than to rational beings. They live in thickets and caves, and eat herbs and unprepared grain. They frequently eat each other. They cannot be considered human beings. Therefore, the Negro nations are, as a rule, submissive to slavery, because (Negroes) have little that is (essentially) human and possess attributes that are quite similar to those of dumb animals, as we have stated.[105][111]

However, according to Wesleyan University professor Abdelmajid Hannoum, the view that Arab scholars and geographers from this time period held racist attitudes are the result of mistranslations, stating that such attitudes were not prevalent until the 18th and 19th centuries. He argues that the mistranslations are the result of French Orientalists projecting racist and colonialist views of the 19th century into their translations of medieval Arabic writings.[112] James E. Lindsay also argues that the concept of an Arab identity itself did not exist until modern times.[113]
Limpieza de sangre
Further information: Limpieza de sangre
The Umayyad Caliphate invaded Hispania, with Muslim Berber invaders overthrowing the previous Visigothic rulers and creating Al-Andalus,[114] which contributed to the Golden age of Jewish culture, lasting for six centuries.[115] It was followed by the centuries-long Reconquista,[116] terminated under the Catholic monarchs Ferdinand V and Isabella I. The legacy Catholic Spaniards then formulated the Cleanliness of blood doctrine. It was during this time in history that the Western concept of aristocratic "blue blood" emerged in a racialized, religious and feudal context,[117] so as to stem the upward social mobility of the converted New Christians. Robert Lacey explains:

It was the Spaniards who gave the world the notion that an aristocrat's blood is not red but blue. The Spanish nobility started taking shape around the ninth century in classic military fashion, occupying land as warriors on horseback. They were to continue the process for more than five hundred years, clawing back sections of the peninsula from its Moorish occupiers, and a nobleman demonstrated his pedigree by holding up his sword arm to display the filigree of blue-blooded veins beneath his pale skin—proof that his birth had not been contaminated by the dark-skinned enemy. Sangre azul, blue blood, was thus a euphemism for being a white man—Spain's own particular reminder that the refined footsteps of the aristocracy through history carry the rather less refined spoor of racism.[118]

Following the expulsion of the Arabic Moors and most of the Sephardic Jews from the Iberian peninsula, the remaining Jews and Muslims were forced to convert to Roman Catholicism, becoming "New Christians", who were sometimes discriminated by the "Old Christians" in some cities (e.g. Toledo), despite condemnations by the Church and the State, who were welcoming the new flock.[117] Inquisition was carried out by members of the Dominican Order in order to weed out the converts that still practiced Judaism and Islam in secret. The system and ideology of the limpieza de sangre ostracized false Christian converts from society to protect it against treason.[119] The remnants of such legislation persevered into the 19th century in military contexts.[120]
In Portugal, the legal distinction between New and Old Christian was only ended through a legal decree issued by the Marquis of Pombal in 1772, almost three centuries after the implementation of the racist discrimination. The limpieza de sangre legislation was common also during the colonization of the Americas, where it led to the racial and feudal separation of peoples and social strata in the colonies. It was however often ignored in practice, as the new colonies needed skilled people.[121]




A 16th-century illustration by Flemish Protestant Theodor de Bry for Las Casas's Brevisima relación de la destrucción de las Indias, depicting Spanish atrocities during the conquest of Cuba.


At the end of the Renaissance, the Valladolid debate (1550–1551) concerning the treatment of natives of the "New World" opposed the Dominican friar and Bishop of Chiapas Bartolomé de Las Casas to another Dominican and Humanist philosopher Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda. The latter argued that the Indians practiced human sacrifice of innocents, cannibalism, and other such "crimes against nature" were unacceptable and should be suppressed by any means possible including war,[122] thus reducing them to slavery or serfdom was in accordance with Catholic theology and natural law. To the contrary, Bartolomé de Las Casas argued that the Amerindians were free men in the natural order and deserved the same treatment as others, according to Catholic theology. It was one of the many controversies concerning racism, slavery, religion, and European morality that would arise in the following centuries and which resulted in the legislation protecting the natives.[123]
Although antisemitism has a long history, related to Christianity and e.g. native Egyptian or Greek religions[124] (anti-Judaism), racism itself is sometimes described as a modern phenomenon. In the view of the French philosopher and historian Michel Foucault, the first formulation of racism emerged in the Early Modern period as the "discourse of race struggle", a historical and political discourse, which Foucault opposed to the philosophical and juridical discourse of sovereignty.[125] On the other hand, e.g. Chinese self-identification as a "yellow race" predated such European racial concepts.[126]
This European analysis, which first appeared in Great Britain, was then carried on in France by people such as Boulainvilliers, Nicolas Fréret, and then, during the 1789 French Revolution, Sieyès, and afterward Augustin Thierry and Cournot. Boulainvilliers, who created the matrix of such racist discourse in medieval France, conceived of the "race" as being something closer to the sense of a "nation", that is, in his time, the "race" meant the "people".
He conceived of France as being divided between various nations—the unified nation-state is, of course, here an anachronism—which themselves formed different "races". Boulainvilliers opposed the absolute monarchy, which tried to bypass the aristocracy by establishing a direct relationship to the Third Estate. Thus, he developed the theory that the French aristocrats were the descendants of foreign invaders, whom he called the "Franks", while according to him, the Third Estate constituted the autochthonous, vanquished Gallo-Romans, who were dominated by the Frankish aristocracy as a consequence of the right of conquest. Early modern racism was opposed to nationalism and the nation-state: the Comte de Montlosier, in exile during the French Revolution, who borrowed Boulainvilliers' discourse on the "Nordic race" as being the French aristocracy that invaded the plebeian "Gauls", thus showed his contempt for the Third Estate, calling it "this new people born of slaves ... mixture of all races and of all times".
19th century




Advertisement for Pears' Soap Caption reads, "Matchless for the complexion..." Illustration of 'before and after' use of soap by black child in the bath. Showing soap washes off his dark complexion.


While 19th century racism became closely intertwined with nationalism,[127] leading to the ethnic nationalist discourse that identified the "race" with the "folk", leading to such movements as pan-Germanism, pan-Turkism, pan-Arabism, and pan-Slavism, medieval racism precisely divided the nation into various non-biological "races", which were thought to be the consequence of historical conquests and social conflicts. Michel Foucault traced the genealogy of modern racism to this medieval "historical and political discourse of race struggle". According to him, it divided itself in the 19th century according to two rival lines: on one hand, it was incorporated by racists, biologists and eugenicists, who gave it the modern sense of "race" and, even more, transformed this popular discourse into a "state racism" (e.g., Nazism). On the other hand, Marxism also seized this discourse founded on the assumption of a political struggle that provided the real engine of history and continued to act underneath the apparent peace. Thus, Marxists transformed the essentialist notion of "race" into the historical notion of "class struggle", defined by socially structured positions: capitalist or proletarian. In The Will to Knowledge (1976), Foucault analyzed another opponent of the "race struggle" discourse: Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis, which opposed the concept of "blood heredity", prevalent in the 19th century racist discourse.
Authors such as Hannah Arendt, in her 1951 book The Origins of Totalitarianism, have said that the racist ideology (popular racism) which developed at the end of the 19th century helped legitimize the imperialist conquests of foreign territories and the atrocities that sometimes accompanied them (such as the Herero and Namaqua Genocide of 1904–1907 or the Armenian Genocide of 1915–1917). Rudyard Kipling's poem The White Man's Burden (1899) is one of the more famous illustrations of the belief in the inherent superiority of the European culture over the rest of the world, though it is also thought to be a satirical appraisal of such imperialism. Racist ideology thus helped legitimize the conquest and incorporation of foreign territories into an empire, which were regarded as a humanitarian obligation partially as a result of these racist beliefs.




A late-19th-century illustration from Ireland from One or Two Neglected Points of View by H. Strickland Constable shows an alleged similarity between "Irish Iberian" and "Negro" features in contrast to the "higher" "Anglo-Teutonic."


However, during the 19th century, Western European colonial powers were involved in the suppression of the Arab slave trade in Africa,[128] as well as in the suppression of the slave trade in West Africa.[129] Some Europeans during the time period objected to injustices that occurred in some colonies and lobbied on behalf of aboriginal peoples. Thus, when the Hottentot Venus was displayed in England in the beginning of the 19th century, the African Association publicly opposed itself to the exhibition. The same year that Kipling published his poem, Joseph Conrad published Heart of Darkness (1899), a clear criticism of the Congo Free State owned by Leopold II of Belgium.
Examples of racial theories used include the creation of the Hamitic ethno-linguistic group during the European exploration of Africa. It was then restricted by Karl Friedrich Lepsius (1810–1877) to non-Semitic Afro-Asiatic languages.[130]
The term Hamite was applied to different populations within North Africa, mainly comprising Ethiopians, Eritreans, Somalis, Berbers, and the ancient Egyptians. Hamites were regarded as Caucasoid peoples who probably originated in either Arabia or Asia on the basis of their cultural, physical and linguistic similarities with the peoples of those areas.[131][132][133] Europeans considered Hamites to be more civilized than Sub-Saharan Africans, and more akin to themselves and Semitic peoples.[134] In the first two-thirds of the 20th century, the Hamitic race was, in fact, considered one of the branches of the Caucasian race, along with the Indo-Europeans, Semites, and the Mediterranean race.
However, the Hamitic peoples themselves were often deemed to have failed as rulers, which was usually ascribed to interbreeding with Negroes. In the mid-20th century, the German scholar Carl Meinhof (1857–1944) claimed that the Bantu race was formed by a merger of Hamitic and Negro races. The Hottentots (Nama or Khoi) were formed by the merger of Hamitic and Bushmen (San) races—both being termed nowadays as Khoisan peoples.




One in a series of posters attacking Radical Republicans on the issue of black suffrage, issued during the Pennsylvania gubernatorial election of 1866.


In the United States in the early 19th century, the American Colonization Society was established as the primary vehicle for proposals to return black Americans to greater freedom and equality in Africa.[135] The colonization effort resulted from a mixture of motives with its founder Henry Clay stating; "unconquerable prejudice resulting from their color, they never could amalgamate with the free whites of this country. It was desirable, therefore, as it respected them, and the residue of the population of the country, to drain them off".[136] Racism spread throughout the New World in the late 19th century and early 20th century. Whitecapping, which started in Indiana in the late 19th century, soon spread throughout all of North America, causing many African laborers to flee from the land they worked on. In the US during the 1860s, racist posters were used during election campaigns. In one of these racist posters (see above), a black man is depicted lounging idly in the foreground as one white man ploughs his field and another chops wood. Accompanying labels are: "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread," and "The white man must work to keep his children and pay his taxes." The black man wonders, "Whar is de use for me to work as long as dey make dese appropriations." Above in a cloud is an image of the "Freedman's Bureau! Negro Estimate of Freedom!" The bureau is pictured as a large domed building resembling the U.S. Capitol and is inscribed "Freedom and No Work." Its columns and walls are labeled, "Candy," "Rum, Gin, Whiskey," "Sugar Plums," "Indolence," "White Women," "Apathy," "White Sugar," "Idleness," and so on.
On June 5, 1873, Sir Francis Galton, distinguished English explorer and cousin of Charles Darwin, wrote in a letter to The Times:

My proposal is to make the encouragement of Chinese settlements of Africa a part of our national policy, in the belief that the Chinese immigrants would not only maintain their position, but that they would multiply and their descendants supplant the inferior Negro race ... I should expect that the African seaboard, now sparsely occupied by lazy, palavering savages, might in a few years be tenanted by industrious, order-loving Chinese, living either as a semidetached dependency of China, or else in perfect freedom under their own law.[137]

20th century
Further information: Racial policy of Nazi Germany, Holocaust, Racial segregation in the United States, Rwandan Genocide, and Racial stereotyping in advertising




Eichmann's list of the Jewish population in Europe, drafted for the Wannsee Conference, held to ensure the cooperation of various levels of the Nazi government in the Final Solution.






Naked Soviet POWs in Mauthausen concentration camp






A drinking fountain from the mid-20th century labelled "Colored" with a picture of an African-American man drinking


The Nazi party, which seized power in the 1933 German elections and maintained a dictatorship over much of Europe until the End of World War II on the European continent, deemed the Germans to be part of an Aryan "master race" (Herrenvolk), who therefore had the right to expand their territory and enslave or kill members of other races deemed inferior.[138]
The racial ideology conceived by the Nazis graded humans on a scale of pure Aryan to non-Aryan, with the latter viewed as subhuman. At the top of the scale of pure Aryans were Germans and other Germanic peoples including the Dutch, Scandinavians, and the English as well as other peoples such as some northern Italians and the French who were said to have a suitable admixture of Germanic blood.[139] Nazi policies labeled Romani people, people of color and Slavs (mainly Poles, Serbs, Russians, Belarusians, Ukrainians and Czechs) as inferior non-Aryan subhumans.[140][141] Jews were at the bottom of the hierarchy, considered inhuman and thus unworthy of life.[141][142][143][144][145][146][147] In accordance with Nazi racial ideology, approximately six million Jews were killed in the Holocaust. 2.5 million ethnic Poles, 0.5 million ethnic Serbs and 0.22–0.5 million Romani were killed by the regime and its collaborators.[148]
The Nazis considered most Slavs to be Non-Aryan Untermenschen. The Nazi Party's chief racial theorist Alfred Rosenberg adopted the term from Klansman Lothrop Stoddard's 1922 book The Revolt Against Civilization: The Menace of the Under-man.[149] Slavic nations such as the Slovaks, Bulgarians and Croats who collaborated with Nazi Germany were perceived as ethnically superior to other Slavs, mostly due to pseudoscientific theories about these nations having a considerable admixture of Germanic blood.[150] In the secret plan Generalplan Ost ("Master Plan East") the Nazis resolved to expel, enslave, or exterminate most Slavic people to provide "living space" for Germans, however Nazi policy towards Slavs changed during World War II due to manpower shortages which necessitated limited Slavic participation in the Waffen-SS.[151] Significant war crimes were committed against Slavs, particularly Poles, and Soviet POWs had a far higher mortality rate than their American and British counterparts due to deliberate neglect and mistreatment. Between June 1941 and January 1942, the Nazis killed an estimated 2.8 million Red Army POWs, whom they viewed as "subhuman".[152]
German praise for America's institutional racism was continuous throughout the early 1930s, and Nazi lawyers were advocates of the use of American models.[153] Race based U.S. citizenship laws and anti-miscegenation laws (no race mixing) directly inspired the Nazi's two principal Nuremberg racial laws—the Citizenship Law and the Blood Law.[153] Hitler's 1925 memoir Mein Kampf was full of admiration for America's treatment of "coloreds".[154] Nazi expansion eastward was accompanied with invocation of America's colonial expansion westward, with the accompanying actions toward the Native Americans.[155] In 1928, Hitler praised Americans for having "gunned down the millions of Redskins to a few hundred thousand, and now keeps the modest remnant under observation in a cage".[156] On Nazi Germany's expansion eastward, in 1941 Hitler stated, "Our Mississippi [the line beyond which Thomas Jefferson wanted all Indians expelled] must be the Volga."[155]
White supremacy was dominant in the U.S. up to the civil rights movement.[157] On the U.S. immigration laws prior to 1965, sociologist Stephen Klineberg cited the law as clearly declaring "that Northern Europeans are a superior subspecies of the white race."[158] While anti-Asian racism was embedded in U.S. politics and culture in the early 20th century, Indians were also racialized for their anticolonialism, with U.S. officials, casting them as a "Hindu" menace, pushing for Western imperial expansion abroad.[159] The Naturalization Act of 1790 limited U.S. citizenship to whites only, and in the 1923 case, United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind, the Supreme Court ruled that high caste Hindus were not "white persons" and were therefore racially ineligible for naturalized citizenship.[160][161] It was after the Luce–Celler Act of 1946 that a quota of 100 Indians per year could immigrate to the U.S. and become citizens.[162] The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 dramatically opened entry to the U.S. to immigrants other than traditional Northern European and Germanic groups, and as a result would significantly alter the demographic mix in the U.S.[158]




A sign posted above a bar that reads "No beer sold to Indians [Native Americans]". Birney, Montana, 1941.


Serious race riots in Durban between Indians and Zulus erupted in 1949.[163] Ne Win's rise to power in Burma in 1962 and his relentless persecution of "resident aliens" led to an exodus of some 300,000 Burmese Indians.[164] They migrated to escape racial discrimination and wholesale nationalisation of private enterprise a few years later in 1964.[165] The Zanzibar Revolution of January 12, 1964 put an end to the local Arab dynasty.[166] Thousands of Arabs and Indians in Zanzibar were massacred in riots, and thousands more were detained or fled the island.[167] In August 1972, Ugandan President Idi Amin started the expropriation of properties owned by Asians and Europeans.[168][169] In the same year, Amin ethnically cleansed Uganda's Asians giving them 90 days to leave the country.[170] Shortly after World War II the South African National Party took control of the government in South Africa. Between 1948 and 1994, the Apartheid regime took place. This regime based its ideology on the racial separation of whites and non-whites including the unequal rights of non-whites. Several protests and violence occurred during the struggle against Apartheid, the most famous of these include the Sharpeville Massacre in 1960, the Soweto uprising in 1976, the Church Street bombing of 1983 and the Cape Town peace march of 1989.[171]
Contemporary




On 12 September 2011, Julius Malema, the youth leader of South Africa's ruling ANC, was found guilty of hate speech for singing 'Shoot the Boer' at a number of public events.[172]


During the Congo Civil War (1998–2003), pygmies were hunted down like game animals and eaten. Both sides in the war regarded them as "subhuman" and some say their flesh can confer magical powers. UN human rights activists reported in 2003 that rebels had carried out acts of cannibalism. Sinafasi Makelo, a representative of the Mbuti pygmies, has asked the UN Security Council to recognise cannibalism as both a crime against humanity and an act of genocide.[173] A report released by the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination condemns Botswana's treatment of the 'Bushmen' as racist.[174] In 2008, the tribunal of the 15-nation Southern African Development Community (SADC) accused Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe of having a racist attitude towards white people.[175][176]
The mass demonstrations and riots against African students in Nanjing, China, lasted from December 1988 to January 1989.[177] Bar owners in central Beijing had been forced by the police "not to serve black people or Mongolians" during the 2008 Summer Olympics, as the police associated these ethnic groups with illegal prostitution and drug trafficking.[178] In November 2009, British newspaper The Guardian reported that Lou Jing, of mixed Chinese and African parentage, had emerged as the most famous talent show contestant in China and has become the subject of intense debate because of her skin color.[179] Her attention in the media opened serious debates about racism in China and racial prejudice.[180]
Some 70,000 black African Mauritanians were expelled from Mauritania in the late 1980s.[181] In the Sudan, black African captives in the civil war were often enslaved, and female prisoners were often sexually abused.[182] The Darfur conflict has been described by some as a racial matter.[183] In October 2006, Niger announced that it would deport the Arabs living in the Diffa region of eastern Niger to Chad.[184] This population numbered about 150,000.[185] While the Government collected Arabs in preparation for the deportation, two girls died, reportedly after fleeing Government forces, and three women suffered miscarriages.[186]




The burnt out remains of Govinda's Indian Restaurant in Fiji, May 2000


The Jakarta riots of May 1998 targeted many Chinese Indonesians.[187] The anti-Chinese legislation was in the Indonesian constitution until 1998. Resentment against Chinese workers has led to violent confrontations in Africa[188][189][190] and Oceania.[191][192] Anti-Chinese rioting, involving tens of thousands of people,[193] broke out in Papua New Guinea in May 2009.[194] Indo-Fijians suffered violent attacks after the Fiji coup of 2000.[195] Non-indigenous citizens of Fiji are subject to discrimination.[196][197] Racial divisions also exist in Guyana,[198] Malaysia,[199] Trinidad and Tobago,[200] Madagascar,[201] or South Africa.[202]
Peter Bouckaert, Human Rights Watch's emergencies director, said in an interview that "racist hatred" is the chief motivation behind the violence against Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar.[203]
With the aim of preserving the demographic makeup of the Zionist state, elements within Israeli society have been accused of discriminatory behavior against the Arab population and toward other Jews of a darker complexion. These communities disproportionately occupy laborer positions with the workforce.[204] Accusations of racism have also included birth control policies,[205][206] education, and housing discrimination.[207]
One form of racism in the United States was enforced racial segregation which existed until the 1960s when it was outlawed in the Civil Rights Act of 1964. It has been argued that this separation of races continues to exist de facto today. The causes of segregation vary from lack of access to loans and resources to discrimination in realty.[208][209]
The 2016 Pew Research poll found that Italians, in particular, hold strong anti-Roma views, with 82% of Italians expressing negative opinions about Roma. In Greece 67%, in Hungary 64%, in France 61%, in Spain 49%, in Poland 47%, in the UK 45%, in Sweden 42%, in Germany 40%, and in the Netherlands 37% have an unfavourable view of Roma.[210]
Scientific racism
Main article: Scientific racism




Drawings from Josiah C. Nott and George Gliddon's Indigenous races of the earth (1857), which suggested black people ranked between white people and chimpanzees in terms of intelligence.


Scottish philosopher and economist David Hume said, "I am apt to suspect the Negroes to be naturally inferior to the Whites. There scarcely ever was a civilised nation of that complexion, nor even any individual, eminent either in action or in speculation. No ingenious manufacture among them, no arts, no sciences."[211] German philosopher Immanuel Kant stated: "The yellow Indians do have a meagre talent. The Negroes are far below them, and at the lowest point are a part of the American people."[212]
In the 19th century, the German philosopher, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, declared that "Africa is no historical part of the world." Hegel further claimed that blacks had no "sense of personality; their spirit sleeps, remains sunk in itself, makes no advance, and thus parallels the compact, undifferentiated mass of the African continent."[213]
While opposed to slavery in the U.S, in 1858 President Abraham Lincoln stated, "I am not, nor ever have been in favor of bringing about in any way the social and political equality of the white and black races, that I am not, nor ever have been in favor of making voters or jurors of negroes, nor of qualifying them to hold office, nor to intermarry with white people. I as much as any man am in favor of the superior position assigned to the white race".[214]
Austrian philosopher Otto Weininger, claimed: "A genius has perhaps scarcely ever appeared amongst the negroes, and the standard of their morality is almost universally so low that it is beginning to be acknowledged in America that their emancipation was an act of imprudence."[215]
The German conservative, Oswald Spengler, remarked on what he perceived as the culturally degrading influence of Africans in modern Western culture: in The Hour of Decision Spengler denounced "the 'happy ending' of an empty existence, the boredom of which has brought to jazz music and Negro dancing to perform the Death March for a great Culture."[216] During the Nazi era, German scientists rearranged academia to support claims of a grand "Aryan" agent behind the splendors of all human civilizations, including India and Ancient Egypt.[212]
Scientific variants
Further information: Unilineal evolution
The modern biological definition of race developed in the 19th century with scientific racist theories. The term scientific racism refers to the use of science to justify and support racist beliefs, which goes back to the early 18th century, though it gained most of its influence in the mid-19th century, during the New Imperialism period. Also known as academic racism, such theories first needed to overcome the Church's resistance to positivist accounts of history and its support of monogenism, the concept that all human beings were originated from the same ancestors, in accordance with creationist accounts of history.
These racist theories put forth on scientific hypothesis were combined with unilineal theories of social progress, which postulated the superiority of the European civilization over the rest of the world. Furthermore, they frequently made use of the idea of "survival of the fittest", a term coined by Herbert Spencer in 1864, associated with ideas of competition, which were named social Darwinism in the 1940s. Charles Darwin himself opposed the idea of rigid racial differences in The Descent of Man (1871) in which he argued that humans were all of one species, sharing common descent. He recognised racial differences as varieties of humanity, and emphasised the close similarities between people of all races in mental faculties, tastes, dispositions and habits, while still contrasting the culture of the "lowest savages" with European civilization.[217][218]
At the end of the 19th century, proponents of scientific racism intertwined themselves with eugenics discourses of "degeneration of the race" and "blood heredity."[citation needed] Henceforth, scientific racist discourses could be defined as the combination of polygenism, unilinealism, social Darwinism and eugenism. They found their scientific legitimacy on physical anthropology, anthropometry, craniometry, phrenology, physiognomy, and others now discredited disciplines in order to formulate racist prejudices.
Before being disqualified in the 20th century by the American school of cultural anthropology (Franz Boas, etc.), the British school of social anthropology (Bronisław Malinowski, Alfred Radcliffe-Brown, etc.), the French school of ethnology (Claude Lévi-Strauss, etc.), as well as the discovery of the neo-Darwinian synthesis, such sciences, in particular anthropometry, were used to deduce behaviours and psychological characteristics from outward, physical appearances.
The neo-Darwinian synthesis, first developed in the 1930s, eventually led to a gene-centered view of evolution in the 1960s. According to the Human Genome Project, the most complete mapping of human DNA to date indicates that there is no clear genetic basis to racial groups. While some genes are more common in certain populations, there are no genes that exist in all members of one population and no members of any other.[219]
Heredity and eugenics
Further information: Eugenics
The first theory of eugenics was developed in 1869 by Francis Galton (1822–1911), who used the then popular concept of degeneration. He applied statistics to study human differences and the alleged "inheritance of intelligence", foreshadowing future uses of "intelligence testing" by the anthropometry school. Such theories were vividly described by the writer Émile Zola (1840–1902), who started publishing in 1871 a twenty-novel cycle, Les Rougon-Macquart, where he linked heredity to behavior. Thus, Zola described the high-born Rougons as those involved in politics (Son Excellence Eugène Rougon) and medicine (Le Docteur Pascal) and the low-born Macquarts as those fatally falling into alcoholism (L'Assommoir), prostitution (Nana), and homicide (La Bête humaine).
During the rise of Nazism in Germany, some scientists in Western nations worked to debunk the regime's racial theories. A few argued against racist ideologies and discrimination, even if they believed in the alleged existence of biological races. However, in the fields of anthropology and biology, these were minority positions until the mid-20th century.[220] According to the 1950 UNESCO statement, The Race Question, an international project to debunk racist theories had been attempted in the mid-1930s. However, this project had been abandoned. Thus, in 1950, UNESCO declared that it had resumed:

...up again, after a lapse of fifteen years, a project that the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation has wished to carry through but that it had to abandon in deference to the appeasement policy of the pre-war period. The race question had become one of the pivots of Nazi ideology and policy. Masaryk and Beneš took the initiative of calling for a conference to re-establish in the minds and consciences of men everywhere the truth about race ... Nazi propaganda was able to continue its baleful work unopposed by the authority of an international organisation.

The Third Reich's racial policies, its eugenics programs and the extermination of Jews in the Holocaust, as well as Romani people in the Porrajmos (the Romani Holocaust) and others minorities led to a change in opinions about scientific research into race after the war.[citation needed] Changes within scientific disciplines, such as the rise of the Boasian school of anthropology in the United States contributed to this shift. These theories were strongly denounced in the 1950 UNESCO statement, signed by internationally renowned scholars, and titled The Race Question.
Polygenism and racial typologies
Further information: Polygenism and Typology (anthropology)




Madison Grant's map, from 1916, charting the "present distribution of European races", with the Nordics in red, the Alpines in green, and the Mediterraneans in yellow.


Works such as Arthur de Gobineau's An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races (1853–1855) may be considered as one of the first theorizations of this new racism, founded on an essentialist notion of race, which opposed the former racial discourse, of Boulainvilliers for example, which saw in races a fundamentally historical reality, which changed over time. Gobineau, thus, attempted to frame racism within the terms of biological differences among humans, giving it the legitimacy of biology.
Gobineau's theories would be expanded, in France, by Georges Vacher de Lapouge (1854–1936)'s typology of races, who published in 1899 The Aryan and his Social Role, in which he claimed that the white, "Aryan race", "dolichocephalic", was opposed to the "brachycephalic" race, of whom the "Jew" was the archetype. Vacher de Lapouge thus created a hierarchical classification of races, in which he identified the "Homo europaeus (Teutonic, Protestant, etc.), the "Homo alpinus" (Auvergnat, Turkish, etc.), and finally the "Homo mediterraneus" (Neapolitan, Andalus, etc.) He assimilated races and social classes, considering that the French upper class was a representation of the Homo europaeus, while the lower class represented the Homo alpinus. Applying Galton's eugenics to his theory of races, Vacher de Lapouge's "selectionism" aimed first at achieving the annihilation of trade unionists, considered to be a "degenerate"; second, creating types of man each destined to one end, in order to prevent any contestation of labour conditions. His "anthroposociology" thus aimed at blocking social conflict by establishing a fixed, hierarchical social order.[221]
The same year, William Z. Ripley used identical racial classification in The Races of Europe (1899), which would have a great influence in the United States. Other scientific authors include H.S. Chamberlain at the end of the 19th century (a British citizen who naturalized himself as German because of his admiration for the "Aryan race") and Madison Grant, a eugenicist and author of The Passing of the Great Race (1916). Madison Grant provided statistics for the Immigration Act of 1924, which severely restricted immigration of Jews, Slavs, and southern Europeans, who were subsequently hindered in seeking to escape Nazi Germany.[222]
Human zoos




A human zoo (Völkerschau, "People Show") in Stuttgart (Germany) in 1928


Human zoos (called "People Shows"), were an important means of bolstering popular racism by connecting it to scientific racism: they were both objects of public curiosity and of anthropology and anthropometry.[223][224] Joice Heth, an African American slave, was displayed by P.T. Barnum in 1836, a few years after the exhibition of Saartjie Baartman, the "Hottentot Venus", in England. Such exhibitions became common in the New Imperialism period, and remained so until World War II. Carl Hagenbeck, inventor of the modern zoos, exhibited animals beside humans who were considered "savages".[225][226]
Congolese pygmy Ota Benga was displayed in 1906 by eugenicist Madison Grant, head of the Bronx Zoo, as an attempt to illustrate the "missing link" between humans and orangutans: thus, racism was tied to Darwinism, creating a social Darwinist ideology that tried to ground itself in Darwin's scientific discoveries. The 1931 Paris Colonial Exhibition displayed Kanaks from New Caledonia.[227] A "Congolese village" was on display as late as 1958 at the Brussels' World Fair.
Theories about the origins of racism
See also: Ethnocentrism and Tribalism




Sociological model of ethnic and racial conflict.


Evolutionary psychologists John Tooby and Leda Cosmides were puzzled by the fact that in the US race is one of the three characteristics most often used in brief descriptions of individuals (the others are age and sex). They reasoned that natural selection would not have favoured the evolution of an instinct for using race as a classification, because for most of human history, humans almost never encountered members of other races. Tooby and Cosmides hypothesized that modern people use race as a proxy (rough-and-ready indicator) for coalition membership, since a better-than-random guess about "which side" another person is on will be helpful if one does not actually know in advance.
Their colleague Robert Kurzban designed an experiment whose results appeared to support this hypothesis. Using the Memory confusion protocol, they presented subjects with pictures of individuals and sentences, allegedly spoken by these individuals, which presented two sides of a debate. The errors that the subjects made in recalling who said what indicated that they sometimes misattributed a statement to a speaker of the same race as the "correct" speaker, although they also sometimes misattributed a statement to a speaker "on the same side" as the "correct" speaker. In a second run of the experiment, the team also distinguished the "sides" in the debate by clothing of similar colors; and in this case the effect of racial similarity in causing mistakes almost vanished, being replaced by the color of their clothing. In other words, the first group of subjects, with no clues from clothing, used race as a visual guide to guessing who was on which side of the debate; the second group of subjects used the clothing color as their main visual clue, and the effect of race became very small.[228]
Some research suggests that ethnocentric thinking may have actually contributed to the development of cooperation. Political scientists Ross Hammond and Robert Axelrod created a computer simulation wherein virtual individuals were randomly assigned one of a variety of skin colors, and then one of a variety of trading strategies: be color-blind, favor those of your own color, or favor those of other colors. They found that the ethnocentric individuals clustered together, then grew until all the non-ethnocentric individuals were wiped out.[229]
In The Selfish Gene, evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins writes that "Blood-feuds and inter-clan warfare are easily interpretable in terms of Hamilton's genetic theory." Dawkins writes that racial prejudice, while not evolutionarily adaptive, "could be interpreted as an irrational generalization of a kin-selected tendency to identify with individuals physically resembling oneself, and to be nasty to individuals different in appearance".[230] Simulation-based experiments in evolutionary game theory have attempted to provide an explanation for the selection of ethnocentric-strategy phenotypes.[231]
Despite support for evolutionary theories relating to an innate origin of racism, various studies have suggested racism is associated with lower intelligence and less diverse peer groups during childhood. A neuroimaging study on amygdala activity during racial matching activities found increased activity to be associated with adolescent age as well as less racially diverse peer groups which the author conclude suggest an learned aspect of racism.[232] A meta analysis of neuroimaging studies found amygdala activity correlated to increased scores on implicit measures of racial bias. It was also argued amygdala activity in response to racial stimuli represents increased threat perception rather than the traditional theory of the amygdala activity represented ingroup-outgroup processing.[233] Racism has also been associated with lower childhood IQ in an analysis of 15,000 people in the UK.[234]
State-sponsored racism
Main articles: Nazism and race, Racial policy of Nazi Germany, Racial antisemitism, Eugenics in Showa Japan, Apartheid in South Africa, Racial segregation in the United States, Ketuanan Melayu, Anti-Chinese legislation in Indonesia, and White Australia policy




Separate "white" and "colored" entrances to a café in North Carolina, 1940






1935 Chart from Nazi Germany used to explain the Nuremberg Laws, defining which Germans were to be considered Jews and stripped of their citizenship. Germans with three or more Jewish grandparents were defined as Jews, Germans with one or two Jewish grandparents were deemed Mischling (mixed-blood).


State racism—that is, the institutions and practices of a nation-state that are grounded in racist ideology—has played a major role in all instances of settler colonialism, from the United States to Australia. It also played a prominent role in the Nazi German regime, in fascist regimes throughout Europe, and during the early years of Japan's Shōwa period. These governments advocated and implemented ideologies and policies that were racist, xenophobic and, in the case of Nazism, genocidal.[235][236] The politics of Zimbabwe promote discrimination against whites, in an effort to ethnically cleanse the country.[237]
The Nuremberg Race Laws of 1935 prohibited sexual relations between any Aryan and Jew, considering it Rassenschande, "racial pollution". The Nuremberg Laws stripped all Jews, even quarter- and half-Jews (second and first degree Mischlings), of their German citizenship. This meant that they had no basic citizens' rights, e.g., the right to vote. In 1936, Jews were banned from all professional jobs, effectively preventing them from having any influence in education, politics, higher education and industry. On 15 November 1938, Jewish children were banned from going to normal schools. By April 1939, nearly all Jewish companies had either collapsed under financial pressure and declining profits, or had been persuaded to sell out to the Nazi government. This further reduced their rights as human beings; they were in many ways officially separated from the German populace. Similar laws existed in Bulgaria – The Law for protection of the nation, Hungary, Romania, and Austria.




19th century political cartoon: Uncle Sam kicks out the Chinaman, referring to the Chinese Exclusion Act.


Legislative state racism is known to have been enforced by the National Party of South Africa during its Apartheid regime between 1948 and 1994. Here a series of Apartheid legislation was passed through the legal systems to make it legal for white South Africans to have rights which were superior to those of non-white South Africans. Non-white South Africans were not allowed involvement in any governing matters, including voting; access to quality healthcare; the provision of basic services, including clean water; electricity; as well as access to adequate schooling. Non-white South Africans were also prevented from accessing certain public areas, from using certain public transportation and were required to live only in certain designated areas. Non-white South Africans were taxed differently than white South Africans and they were also required to carry on them at all times additional documentation, which later became known as "dom passes", to certify their non-white South African citizenship. All of these legislative racial laws were abolished through a series of equal human rights laws which were passed at the end of the Apartheid era in the early 1990s.
The current constitution of Liberia, as enacted in 1984, is racist[238] in its Article 27, because it does not allow non-blacks to become Liberian citizens:[239] "only persons who are Negroes or of Negro descent shall qualify by birth or by naturalization to be citizens of Liberia".[240]
Anti-racism
Main article: Anti-racism




An anti-racism rally held outside Sydney Town Hall, December 2005.


Anti-racism includes beliefs, actions, movements, and policies which are adopted or developed in order to oppose racism. In general, it promotes an egalitarian society in which people are not discriminated against on the basis of race. Movements such as the Civil Rights Movement and the Anti-Apartheid Movement were examples of anti-racist movements. Nonviolent resistance is sometimes embraced as an element of anti-racist movements, although this was not always the case. Hate crime laws, affirmative action, and bans on racist speech are also examples of government policy which is intended to suppress racism.
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
UNESCO marks March 21 as the yearly International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, in memory of the events that occurred on March 21, 1960 in Sharpeville, South Africa, where police killed demonstrators protesting against the apartheid regime.
Teaching about racism
The Museum of Tolerance offers children and adults an opportunity to interact with authentic artifacts from the Holocaust. The Southern Poverty Law Center disseminates materials to teachers to help them educate their students about the causes and effects of racism.
See also


Afrophobia
Allport's Scale
Anti-racism
Christian Identity
Creativity (religion)
Curse and mark of Cain
Curse of Ham
Discrimination based on skin color
Environmental racism
Environmental racism in Europe
Ethnic hatred
Ethnocentrism
Holocaust
Index of racism-related articles
In-group favoritism
Labeling theory
Objectification of people
Pre-Adamite
Racial bias in criminal news
Racial fetishism
Racialism
Racial literacy
Racial segregation
Racialization
Raciolinguistics
Racism in horror films
Racism in the LGBT community
Reverse discrimination
Reverse racism
Romantic racism
Scientific racism
Structural racism
Social interpretations of race
Sociology of race and ethnic relations
Stereotype threat
Tragic mulatto
Tribalism
Yellow Peril


References and notes


^ a b c Garner, Steve (2009). Racisms: An Introduction. Sage. 
^ Newman, D. M. (2012). Sociology: exploring the architecture of everyday life (9th ed.). Los Angeles: SAGE. p. 405. ISBN 978-1-4129-8729-5. racism: Belief that humans are subdivided into distinct groups that are different in their social behavior and innate capacities and that can be ranked as superior or inferior. 
^ "International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination". Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Retrieved December 23, 2011. 
^ "race (n2)". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 21 February 2016. 
^ "Racism". The Canadian Encyclopedia. 2013. Retrieved 21 February 2016. 
^ "Framework decision on combating racism and xenophobia". Council Framework Decision 2008/913/JHA of 28 November 2008. European Union. Retrieved 3 February 2011. 
^ "International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination". UN Treaty Series. United Nations. Archived from the original on 26 August 2011. Retrieved 3 February 2011. 
^ Bamshad, Michael; Steve E. Olson (December 2003). "Does Race Exist?". Scientific American. 289 (6): 78–85. Bibcode:2003SciAm.289f..78B. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1203-78. PMID 14631734. If races are defined as genetically discrete groups, no. But researchers can use some genetic information to group individuals into clusters with medical relevance. 
^ Patrinos, Ari (2004). "'Race' and the human genome". Nature Genetics. 36 (S1–S2): S1–S2. doi:10.1038/ng2150. PMID 15510100. 
^ Keita, Shomarka O.Y. & Rick A. Kittles (1997). "The persistence of racial thinking and the myth of racial divergence" (PDF). American Anthropologist. 99 (3): 534–44. doi:10.1525/aa.1997.99.3.534. 
^ Smedley, Audrey & Brian D. Smedley (2005). "Race as biology is fiction, racism as a social problem is real: Anthropological and historical perspectives on the social construction of race". American Psychologist. 60 (1): 16–26. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.694.7956 . doi:10.1037/0003-066x.60.1.16. PMID 15641918. 
^ "racialism, n." OED Online. September 2013. Oxford University Press. (Accessed December 03, 2013).
^ "racism, n." OED Online. September 2013. Oxford University Press. (Accessed December 03, 2013).
^ Miles, Robert (1989). Racism. Routledge. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-415-01809-8. 
^ The term "racism" was used as the title of a 1930s book, and possibly coined, by sexologist and homosexual activist Magnus Hirschfeld.
^ Fredrickson, George M. (2002). Racism: A Short History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. p. 5. ISBN 9780691116525. Archived from the original on 2016-03-08. 
^ Bethencourt, Francisco (2014). Racisms: From the Crusades to the Twentieth Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". United Nations. Retrieved 22 February 2016. 
^ "International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination". United Nations. Adopted December 1965, entered into force January 1969. Retrieved 22 February 2016. 
^ "Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice". United Nations. 1978. Retrieved 22 February 2016. 
^ Metraux, A. (1950). "United nations Economic and Security Council Statement by Experts on Problems of Race". American Anthropologist. 53 (1): 142–45. doi:10.1525/aa.1951.53.1.02a00370. 
^ "Racist and Religious Crime – CPS Prosecution Policy". The CPS. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ Jon Dagsland Holgersen (23 July 2010) Rasebegrepet på vei ut av loven Aftenposten. Retrieved 6 March 2017 (in Norwegian)
^ Rase: Et ubrukelig ord Aftenposten. Retrieved 10 December 2013 (in Norwegian)
^ Ministry of Labour The Act on prohibition of discrimination based on ethnicity, religion, etc. Regjeringen.no. Retrieved 10 December 2013
^ Gossett, Thomas F. Race: The History of an Idea in America. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997. ISBN 0195097785
^ Feagin, Joe R. (2000). Racist America: Roots, Current Realities, and Future Reparations. Routledge. ISBN 9780415925310. 
^ Du Bois; W. E. B. (1903). The Souls of Black Folk. New York: Bantam Classic. 
^ Wellman, David T. (1993). Portraits of White Racism. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. p. x. 
^ Massey, D. & N. Denton (1989). "Hypersegregation in U.S. Metropolitan areas: Black and Hispanic Segregation Along Five Dimensions". Demography. 26 (3): 378–79. doi:10.2307/2061599. JSTOR 2061599. 
^ Cazenave, Noel A & Darlene Alvarez Maddern (1999). "Defending the White Race: White Male Faculty Opposition to a White Racism Course". Race and Society. 2 (1): 25–50. doi:10.1016/s1090-9524(00)00003-6. 
^ Sellers RM & JN Shelton (2003). "The role of racial identity in perceived racial discrimination". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 84 (5): 1079–92. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.5.1079. PMID 12757150. 
^ a b Greenwald, A.G.; Banaji, M.R. (1995). "Implicit social cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes". Psychological Review. 102 (1): 4–27. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.304.6161 . doi:10.1037/0033-295x.102.1.4. PMID 7878162. 
^ Devos, T. (2008). "Attitudes and attitude change". Implicit attitudes 101: Theoretical and empirical Insights. New York, NY: Psychology Press. pp. 61–84. 
^ Gawronski, B; Payne, B.K. (2010). "Handbook of Implicit Social Cognition: Measurement, Theory and Application". 
^ Eberhardt, Jennifer L.; et al. (2004). "Seeing Black: Race, Crime, and Visual Processing". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 87 (6): 876–93. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.408.3542 . doi:10.1037/0022-3514.87.6.876. PMID 15598112. 
^ Belenko, Steven and Cassia Spohn (2014). "Drugs, Crime, and Justice". Sage. 
^ Van Dijk, Tuen (1992). Analyzing Racism Through Discourse Analysis Some Methodological Reflections in Race and Ethnicity in Research Methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. pp. 92–134. ISBN 978-0803950078. 
^ Watson, Veronica T. (2013). The Souls of White Folk: African American Writers Theorize Whiteness. Jackson, MS: The University Press of Mississippi. p. 137. ISBN 9781496802453. 
^ "Definition of racism in English". Oxford University Press. Retrieved January 3, 2018. 
^ "Definition of racism". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved January 3, 2018. 
^ Blay, Zeba (26 August 2015). "'Reverse Racism': 4 Myths That Need To Stop". Huffpost Black Voices. Retrieved 28 February 2016. 
^ McWhorter, Ladelle (2009). Racism and sexual oppression in Anglo-America: a genealogy. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253352965. OCLC 406565635. 
^ Norton, Michael I. & Samuel R. Sommers (2011). "Whites See Racism as a Zero-Sum Game That They Are Now Losing". Perspectives on Psychological Science. 6 (3): 215–18. doi:10.1177/1745691611406922. PMID 26168512. Lay summary – TuftsNow (May 23, 2011). 
^ Emily Torbett (August 21, 2015). "Reverse racism: Can't exist by definition, insulting to minority groups". The Daily Athenaeum. Retrieved February 3, 2017. 
^ a b Dovidio, John F.; Gaertner, Samuel L., eds. (1986). "The aversive form of racism". Prejudice, Discrimination and Racism. Academic Press. pp. 61–89. ISBN 978-0-12-221425-7. 
^ Dovidio, John F.; Gaertner, Samuel L. (2004). "Aversive Racism". In Olson, James M.; Zanna, Mark P. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. 36. pp. 1–52. doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(04)36001-6. ISBN 978-0-12-015236-0. 
^ Saucier, Donald A.; Miller, Carol T.; Doucet, Nicole (2005). "Differences in Helping Whites and Blacks: A Meta-Analysis". Personality and Social Psychology Review. 9 (1): 2–16. doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr0901_1. PMID 15745861. 
^ Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (2001). White Supremacy and Racism in the Post-Civil Rights Era. Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc. pp. 137–66. ISBN 978-1-58826-032-1. 
^ Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (2003). Racism without Racists: Color-blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in the United States. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 2–29. ISBN 978-0-7425-1633-5. 
^ Parker, Laurence (1999). Race Is – Race Isn't: Critical Race Theory and Qualitative Studies in Education. Westview Press. p. 184. ISBN 0-8133-9069-9. 
^ a b Ballantine, Jeanne H.; Roberts, Keith A. (2015). Our Social World: Introduction to Sociology (Condensed Version) (3rd ed.). Los Angeles: SAGE. ISBN 9781452275758. 
^ Wren, Karen (2001). "Cultural racism: Something rotten in the state of Denmark?". Social & Cultural Geography. 2 (2): 141–62. doi:10.1080/14649360120047788. 
^ Blaut, James M. (1992). "The Theory of Cultural Racism". Antipode: A Radical Journal of Geography. 24 (4): 289–99. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8330.1992.tb00448.x. 
^ Savage, Charlie (December 21, 2011). "Countrywide Will Settle a Bias Suit". The New York Times. Retrieved December 24, 2011. 
^ Acuña, Rodolfo F. (2010-01-21). Occupied America: A History of Chicanos (7th ed.). Boston: Longman. pp. 23–24. ISBN 978-0-205-78618-3 
^ "The World; Racism? Mexico's in Denial.", The New York Times, June 11, 1995.
^ Richard W. Race, Analysing ethnic education policy-making in England and Wales, Sheffield Online Papers in Social Research, University of Sheffield, p. 12. Retrieved 20 June 2006. Archived September 23, 2006, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Karenga, Maulana (22–23 June 2001). "The Ethics of Reparations: Engaging the Holocaust of Enslavement" (PDF). The National Coalition of Blacks for Reparations in America (N'COBRA). Retrieved 31 January 2017. 
^ Mountz, Alison. (2009) Key Concepts in Political Geography. SAGE. p. 328
^ a b Said, Edward. (1978) Orientalism. New York: Pantheon Books. p. 357
^ Gregory, Derek. (2004). The Colonial Present. Blackwell publishers. p. 4
^ Said, Edward. (1978) Orientalism. New York: Pantheon Books. p. 360
^ Principles to Guide Housing Policy at the Beginning of the Millennium, Michael Schill & Susan Wachter, Cityscape
^ Takashi Fujitani; Geoffrey Miles White; Lisa Yoneyama (2001). Perilous memories: the Asia-Pacific War(s). Duke University Press. p. 303. ISBN 978-0-8223-2564-2. 
^ Miller, Stuart Creighton (1984-09-10). Benevolent Assimilation: The American Conquest of the Philippines, 1899–1903. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03081-5.  p. 5: "... imperialist editors came out in favor of retaining the entire archipelago (using) higher-sounding justifications related to the "white man's burden."
^ Opinion archive, International Herald Tribune (February 4, 1999). "In Our Pages: 100, 75 and 50 Years Ago; 1899: Kipling's Plea". International Herald Tribune: 6. : Notes that Rudyard Kipling's new poem, "The White Man's Burden," "is regarded as the strongest argument yet published in favor of expansion."
^ Out West. University of Nebraska Press. 2000. p. 96. 
^ "L. Frank Baum's Editorials on the Sioux Nation". Archived from the original on December 9, 2007. Retrieved 2007-12-09.  Full text of both, with commentary by professor A. Waller Hastings
^ Aronson, E., Wilson, T. D., & Akert, R. M. (2010). Social Psychology (7th edition). New York: Pearson.
^ McConahay, J. B. (1983). "Modern Racism and Modern Discrimination The Effects of Race, Racial Attitudes, and Context on Simulated Hiring Decisions". Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 9 (4): 551–58. doi:10.1177/0146167283094004. 
^ Brief, A. P.; Dietz, J.; Cohen, R. R.; Pugh, S. D.; Vaslow, J. B. (2000). "Just doing business: Modern racism and obedience to authority as explanations for employment discrimination". Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 81 (1): 72–97. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.201.4044 . doi:10.1006/obhd.1999.2867. PMID 10631069. 
^ McConahay, J. B. (1986). Modern racism, ambivalence, and the modern racism scale.
^ Pettigrew, T. F. (1989). "The nature of modern racism in the United States". Revue Internationale de Psychologie Sociale. Chicago
^ Staff (March 30, 2015) "How the biases in the back of your mind affect how you feel about race" PBS Newshour Accessed: October 9, 2017
^ C. Peter Chen (1945-02-23). "Joint Declaration of the Greater East Asia Conference (below)". Ww2db.com. Retrieved 2011-01-26. 
^ "Toward a World without Evil: Alfred Métraux as UNESCO Anthropologist (1946–1962)", by Harald E.L. Prins, UNESCO
^ "European Court of Human Rights case law factsheet on racial discrimination" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-06-14. Retrieved 2011-01-26. 
^ Text of the Convention Archived July 26, 2011, at the Wayback Machine., International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 1966
^ [1] Archived January 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Pierre-André Taguieff, La force du préjugé, 1987 (in French)
^ "Race Studies in Denmark" (PDF). Geografisk Tidsskrift (in Danish). 19. 1907. Retrieved 2013-11-14. 
^ Ladimeji, O.A. (1974). "Science, Racism and Social Darwinism – a review of Race by J R Baker". 
^ Ladimeji, O.A. (2015). "Racism and homophobia in Gladwell's Tipping Point". 
^ DuBois, W. E. B. (1897). "The Conservation of Races". p. 21. 
^ Marius Turda (2004). The idea of national superiority in Central Europe, 1880–1918. Edwin Mellen Press. ISBN 978-0-7734-6180-2. 
^ National Analytical Study on Racist Violence and Crime, RAXEN Focal Point for ITALY – Annamaria Rivera FRA. "Helping to make fundamental rights a reality for everyone in the European Union" (PDF). European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 16, 2008. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ Joseph L. Graves (2001). The Emperor's new clothes: biological theories of race at the millennium. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-2847-2. 
^ Inter-American Convention against Racism and all forms of Discrimination and Intolerance – Study prepared by the Inter-American Juridical Committee 2002
^ Richter, Facing East from Indian Country, p. 208
^ Fredrickson, George M. 1988. The arrogance of race: historical perspectives on slavery, racism, and social inequality. Middletown, Conn: Wesleyan University Press
^ Reilly, Kevin; Kaufman, Stephen; Bodino, Angela (2003). Racism : a global reader. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe. pp. 45–52. ISBN 978-0-7656-1060-7. 
^ UN General Assembly, Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 10 December 1948, 217 A (III), available at: [2] [accessed 18 July 2012]
^ On this "nationalities question" and the problem of nationalism, see the relevant articles for a non-exhaustive account of the state of contemporary historical researches; famous works include: Ernest Gellner, Nations and Nationalism (1983); Eric Hobsbawm,The Age of Revolution : Europe 1789–1848 (1962), Nations and Nationalism since 1780 : programme, myth, reality (1990); Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities (1991); Charles Tilly, Coercion, Capital and European States AD 990–1992 (1990); Anthony D. Smith, Theories of Nationalism (1971), etc.
^ John Stuart Mill, Considerations on Representative Government, 1861
^ a b Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951)
^ Maurice Barrès, Le Roman de l'énergie nationale (The Novel of National Energy, a trilogy started in 1897)
^ Hess, Richard S. (2016). The Old Testament: A Historical, Theological, and Critical Introduction. Baker Academic. p. 59. ISBN 149340573X. Retrieved 4 October 2017. 
^ a b Kevin Reilly; Stephen Kaufman; Angela Bodino (2002-09-30). Racism: A Global Reader. M.E. Sharpe. pp. 52–58. ISBN 978-0-7656-1060-7. 
^ Bernard Lewis (1992). Race and slavery in the Middle East: an historical enquiry. Oxford University Press. pp. 54–55. ISBN 978-0-19-505326-5. 
^ "Aristotle on Slavery". Oregonstate.edu. Archived from the original on September 6, 2013. Retrieved 2013-11-14. 
^ Isaac, Benjamin H. (2006). The Invention of Racism in Classical Antiquity. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0-691-12598-8. Retrieved 2013-11-14. 
^ Puzzo, Dante A. (1964). "Racism and the Western Tradition". Journal of the History of Ideas. 25 (4): 579–586. doi:10.2307/2708188. JSTOR 2708188. 
^ "Slaves in Saudi". Naeem Mohaiemen. The Daily Star. July 27, 2004.
^ a b c d Bernard Lewis (1992). Race and slavery in the Middle East: an historical enquiry. Oxford University Press. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-19-505326-5. 
^ Khalid, Abdallah (1977). The Liberation of Swahili from European Appropriation. East African Literature Bureau. p. 38. Retrieved 10 June 2014. 
^ El Hamel, Chouki (2002). "'Race', slavery and Islam in Maghribi Mediterranean thought: the question of the Haratin in Morocco". The Journal of North African Studies. 7 (3): 29–52 [39–40]. doi:10.1080/13629380208718472. Neither in the Qur'an nor in the Hadith is there any indication of racial difference among humankind. But as a consequence of the Arab conquests, a mutual assimilation between Islam and the cultural and the scriptural traditions of Christian and Jewish populations occurred. Racial distinctions between humankind with reference to the sons of Noah is found in the Babylonian Talmud, a collection of rabbinic writings which dates back to the sixth century. 
^ Yosef Ben-Jochannan (December 1991). African origins of the major "Western religions". Black Classic Press. p. 231. ISBN 978-0-933121-29-4. 
^ "Medieval Sourcebook: Abû Ûthmân al-Jâhiz: From The Essays, c. 860 CE". Medieval Sourcebook. July 1998. Retrieved 2008-12-07. 
^ Lewis, Bernard (2002). Race and Slavery in the Middle East. Oxford University Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-0-19-505326-5. 
^ "West Asian views on black Africans during the medieval era". Colorq.org. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ Hannoum, Abdelmajid (1 January 2003). "Translation and the Colonial Imaginary: Ibn Khaldûn Orientalist". History and Theory. 42 (1): 61–81. JSTOR 3590803. 
^ Lindsay, James E. (2005), Daily Life in the Medieval Islamic World, Greenwood Publishing Group, pp. 12–5, ISBN 0-313-32270-8 
^ Andalusí, Fundación El Legado (2005-01-01). Maroc et Espagne : une histoire commune = Marruecos y España : una historia común (in French). Fundación El legado andalusì. ISBN 9788496395046. 
^ Sephardim. Jewish Virtual Library. Last accessed 27 December 2011.
^ O'Callaghan, Joseph F. (2013-09-10). Reconquest and Crusade in Medieval Spain. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 0812203062. 
^ a b A. Chami, Pablo. "Limpieza de Sangre". Retrieved 2016-08-01. 
^ Robert Lacey, Aristocrats. Little, Brown and Company, 1983, p. 67
^ Sicroff, Albert A. Los estatutos de Limpieza de Sangre. p. 121. 
^ Colección Legislativa de España (1870), p. 364
^ Avrum Ehrlich, Mark (2009). Encyclopedia of the Jewish diaspora: origins, experiences, and culture. ABC-CLIO. p. 689. ISBN 1-85109-873-9. 
^ Ginés de Sepúlveda, Juan (trans. Marcelino Menendez y Pelayo and Manuel Garcia-Pelayo) (1941). Tratado sobre las Justas Causas de la Guerra contra los Indios. Mexico D.F.: Fondo de Cultura Económica. p. 155. 
^ Bonar Ludwig Hernandez (2001). "The Las Casas-Sepúlveda Controversy: 1550–1551" (PDF). Ex Post Facto. San Francisco State University. 10: 95–104. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 April 2015. 
^ Flannery, Edward (2004-11-02). The Anguish of the Jews: Twenty-Three Centuries of Antisemitism (2nd ed.). New York: Paulist Press. ASIN 0809143240. ISBN 9780809143245. CS1 maint: ASIN uses ISBN (link)
^ Michel Foucault, Society Must Be Defended (1976–77)
^ "Race and Racism in Asia – Race And Racism in China". science.jrank.org. Retrieved 2016-08-01. Chinese descriptions of themselves as a "yellow" race predated European use of such terms. 
^ Academic Press (2000). " Encyclopedia of Nationalism, Two-Volume Set, Volume 2".
^ "Royal Navy and the Slave Trade : Battles : History". Royal-navy.mod.uk. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ "Chasing Freedom Exhibition: the Royal Navy and the Suppression of the Transatlantic Slave Trade". Royalnavalmuseum.org. 2006-11-21. Archived from the original on December 10, 2009. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ Merriam Webster (editor), Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 10 Rev Ed edition, (Merriam-Webster: 1998), p. 563
^ Ronald James Harrison, Africa and the Islands, (Wiley: 1965), p. 58
^ Dorothy Dodge, African Politics in Perspective, (Van Nostrand: 1966), p. 11
^ Michael Senior, Tropical Lands: a human geography, (Longman: 1979), p. 59
^ A. H. M. Jones, Elizabeth Monroe, History of Abyssinia, (Kessinger Publishing: 2003), p. 25
^ "Background on conflict in Liberia". Fcnl.org. 2003-07-30. Archived from the original on January 8, 2011. Retrieved 2011-01-26. 
^ Maggie Montesinos Sale (1997). The Slumbering Volcano: American Slave Ship Revolts and the Production of Rebellious Masculinity. p. 264. Duke University Press, 1997
^ Galton, Francis (9 June 1873). "Africa for the Chinese". The London and China Telegraph. 15 (510). London. 
^ Gumkowski, Janusz; Leszczynski, Kazimierz. "Hitler's Plans for Eastern Europe". Poland under Nazi Occupation. Archived from the original on 27 July 2007. 
^ Davies, Norman (2006). Europe at War 1939–1945: No Simple Victory. Macmillian Pubs (pp. 167, 4).
^ Operation Barbarossa: Ideology and Ethics against Human Dignity, by André Mineau, (Rodopi, 2004) p. 180
^ a b The Czechs under Nazi Rule: The Failure of National Resistance, 1939–1942, Vojtěch Mastný, Columbia University Press[page needed]
^ Historical Dictionary of the Holocaust, p. 175 Jack R. Fischel. 2010. The policy of Lebensraum was also the product of Nazi racial ideology, which held that the Slavic peoples of the east were inferior to the Aryan race.
^ Hitler's Home Front: Wurttemberg Under the Nazis, Jill Stephenson p. 135, Other non-'Aryans' included Slavs, Blacks and Roma.
^ Race Relations Within Western Expansion, p. 98 Alan J. Levine. 1996. Preposterously, Central European Aryan theorists, and later the Nazis, would insist that the Slavic-speaking peoples were not really Aryans
^ The Politics of Fertility in Twentieth-Century Berlin, p. 118 Annette F. Timm. 2010. The Nazis' singleminded desire to "purify" the German race through the elimination of non-Aryans (particularly Jews, Gypsies, and Slavs)
^ Curta 2001, p. 9, 26–30.
^ Jerry Bergman, "Eugenics and the Development of Nazi Race Policy", Perspectives on Science and Christian Faith PSCF 44 (June 1992):109–24
^ "Holocaust Encyclopedia – Genocide of European Roma (Gypsies), 1939–1945". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (USHMM). Retrieved 9 August 2011. 
^ Pauwels, Jacques R. The Great Class War 1914–1918. Formac Publishing Company Limited. p. 88. 
^ Gumkowski, Janusz; Leszczynski, Kazimierz; Robert, Edward (translator) (1961). Hitler's Plans for Eastern Europe. Poland Under Nazi Occupation (First ed.). Polonia Pub. House. p. 219. ASIN B0006BXJZ6. Archived from the original (Paperback) on 2011-04-09. Retrieved March 12, 2014. 
^ Norman Davies. Europe at War 1939–1945: No Simple Victory. pp. 167, 209.
^ Daniel Goldhagen, Hitler's Willing Executioners (p. 290) – "2.8 million young, healthy Soviet POWs" killed by the Germans, "mainly by starvation ... in less than eight months" of 1941–42, before "the decimation of Soviet POWs ... was stopped" and the Germans "began to use them as laborers".
^ a b Whitman, James Q. (2017). Hitler's American Model: The United States and the Making of Nazi Race Law. Princeton University Press. pp. 37–43. 
^ "American laws against 'coloreds' influenced Nazi racial planners". Times of Israel. Retrieved September 23, 2017
^ a b Westermann, Edward. B. (2016). Hitler's Ostkrieg and the Indian Wars: Comparing Genocide and Conquest. University of Oklahoma Press. p. 3. 
^ Whitman, James Q. (2017). Hitler's American Model: The United States and the Making of Nazi Race Law. Princeton University Press. p. 47. 
^ Fredrickson, George (1981). White Supremacy. Oxford Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press. p. 162. ISBN 0-19-503042-7. 
^ a b Jennifer Ludden. "1965 immigration law changed face of America". NPR. Retrieved December 7, 2016. 
^ Seema Sohi (2014). Echoes of Mutiny: Race, Surveillance, and Indian Anticolonialism in North America. Oxford University Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-19-937625-4. During the early decades of the twentieth century, US Immigration, Justice, and State Department officials cast Indian anticolonialists as a "Hindu" menace 
^ Zhao, X. & Park, E.J.W. (2013). Asian Americans: An Encyclopedia of Social, Cultural, Economic, and Political History. Greenwood. p. 1142. ISBN 978-1-59884-239-5
^ Schultz, Jeffrey D. (2002). Encyclopedia of Minorities in American Politics: African Americans and Asian Americans. p. 284. 
^ "Roots in the Sand – the Archives". PBS. Retrieved 2016-12-06. 
^ Current race riots like 1949 anti-Indian riots: South African minister. Thaindian News. May 25, 2008.
^ Martin Smith (1991). Burma – Insurgency and the Politics of Ethnicity. London, New Jersey: Zed Books. pp. 43–44, 56–57, 98, 176. 
^ Burma: Asians v. Asians. Time. 17 July 1964.
^ Conley, Robert (13 January 1964). "African Revolt Overturns Arab Regime in Zanzibar". The New York Times. Retrieved 16 November 2008. 
^ Plekhanov, Sergey (2004). A Reformer on the Throne: Sultan Qaboos Bin Said Al Said. Trident Press. p. 91. ISBN 1-900724-70-7. 
^ Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa And The Legacy Of Late Colonialism: Contemporary Africa And The Legacy Of Late Colonialism, p.12, Meike de Goede, CRC Press, 2017
^ Where In the World Should I Invest: An Insider's Guide to Making Money Around the Globe, p.156, John Wiley & Sons
^ 1972: Asians given 90 days to leave Uganda. BBC.
^ "The birth and death of apartheid". BBC News. June 17, 2002.
^ Staff reporters (11 September 2011). "ANC's youth leader found guilty of hate speech for Shoot the Boer song". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 September 2011.
^ "DR Congo Pygmies appeal to UN". BBC News. 2003-05-23. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ UN Condems [sic] Botswana's Racism. Survival International. August 31, 2002.
^ "Stop your racist land grab, tribunal tells Robert Mugabe". The Times. March 5, 2009
^ "The end of an era for Zimbabwe's last white farmers?". Telegraph.co.uk. 26 June 2011. 
^ Black Africa Leaves China In Quandary. The New York Times. December 30, 1988.
^ Fears of a 'no-fun' Olympics in Beijing. The Age. July 19, 2008. Archived March 16, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Stephen Vines (2009-11-01). "China's black pop idol exposes her nation's racism". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2009-11-03. 
^ "TV talent show exposes China's race issue". CNN. 2009-12-22. Retrieved 2010-05-11. 
^ "Mauritania: Fair elections haunted by racial imbalance". IRIN Africa. 5 March 2007. 
^ Arab militia use 'rape camps' for ethnic cleansing of Sudan. Telegraph. May 30, 2004.
^ Racism at root of Sudan's Darfur crisis. Csmonitor.com. July 14, 2004.
^ "Africa | Niger starts mass Arab expulsions". BBC News. 2006-10-26. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ "Reuters AlertNet – Niger's Arabs say expulsions will fuel race hate". Alertnet.org. 2006-10-25. Archived from the original on 10 November 2008. 
^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (2007-07-11). "Refworld – The Leader in Refugee Decision Support". UNHCR. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ "Analysis | Indonesia: Why ethnic Chinese are afraid". BBC News. 1998-02-12. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ Algeria: Xenophobia against Chinese on the rise in Africa. Afrik.com. August 5, 2009.
^ "Rioters attack Chinese after Zambian poll". Telegraph. October 3, 2006.
^ "Lesotho: Anti-Chinese resentment flares". IRIN Africa. 24 January 2008. 
^ Spiller, Penny: "Riots highlight Chinese tensions", BBC News, Friday, 21 April 2006, 18:57 GMT
^ "Editorial: Racist moves will rebound on Tonga". The New Zealand Herald. November 23, 2001. Retrieved November 4, 2011. 
^ "Looters shot dead amid chaos of Papua New Guinea's anti-Chinese riots". Archived 9 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine. The Australian. May 23, 2009.
^ "Overseas and under siege". The Economist. August 11, 2009.
^ Future bleak for Fiji's Indians. BBC News. July, 2000.
^ "Dealing with the dictator". The Australian. April 16, 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2009. 
^ Fiji Islands: From Immigration to Emigration. Brij V. Lal. The Australian National University.
^ "Guyana turns attention to racism". BBC News. September 20, 2005.
^ "Racism alive and well in Malaysia". Asia Times. March 24, 2006.
^ "Trouble in paradise". BBC News. May 1, 2002
^ "Ethnic strife rocks Madagascar". BBC News. May 14, 2002.
^ "Race war rocks Grabouw". Cape Times. March 20, 2012.
^ "Rohingya refugees share stories of sexual violence". Al Jazeera. 29 September 2017.
^ The Middle East, Abstracts and Index, Volume 19, Part 4. Northumberland Press. 1996. p. 128. Retrieved 4 October 2017. 
^ "Ethiopian birth control?". The Jerusalem Post. 
^ Elise Knutsen (28 January 2013). "Israel Forcibly Injected African Immigrants with Birth Control, Report Claims". Forbes. 
^ Smith, Amelia (4 May 2014). "Israel: promised land for Jews ... as long as they're not black?". Middle East Monitor – The Latest from the Middle East. Retrieved 6 March 2017. 
^ Thomas J. Sugrue, Sweet Land of Liberty: the Forgotten Struggle for Civil Rights in the North (Random House: New York, 2008), pp. 533–43.
^ Massey, Douglas S.; Denton, Nancy A. (1993). American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
^ "Negative opinions about Roma, Muslims in several European nations". Pew Research Center. 11 July 2016.
^ Eric Morton. "Race nad Racism in the works of David Hume". Archived from the original on August 27, 2009. 
^ a b Race and Racism (O. R. P.) (Oxford Readings in Philosophy) (Paperback) by Bernard Boxill[full citation needed]
^ On Blackness Without Blacks: Essays on the Image of the Black in Germany, Boston: C.W. Hall, 1982, p. 94.
^ Abraham Lincoln, "Speeches and Writings 1832–1858: Speeches, Letters, and Miscellaneous Writings : the Lincoln-Douglas Debates, Volume 1". p. 638. Library of America, 1989
^ Sex and Character, New York: G.P. Putnam, 1906, p. 302.
^ The Hour of Decision, pp. 227–28
^ Charles Darwin (1871). "The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex". John Murray. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved 2007-12-02. 
^ Desmond, Adrian; James Richard Moore (1991). Darwin. Michael Joseph, Penguin Group. ISBN 978-0-7181-3430-3. OCLC 185764721.  pp. 28, 147, 580.
^ "Minorities, Race, and Genomics". Retrieved 2009-05-12. 
^ UNESCO, The Race Question, 1950
^ Matsuo Takeshi (University of Shimane, Japan). L'Anthropologie de Georges Vacher de Lapouge: Race, classe et eugénisme (Georges Vacher de Lapouge anthropology) in Études de langue et littérature françaises 2001, n°79, pp. 47–57. ISSN 0425-4929; INIST-CNRS, Cote INIST : 25320, 35400010021625.0050 (Abstract resume on the INIST-CNRS)
^ Tucker, William H. (2007). The funding of scientific racism: Wickliffe Draper and the Pioneer Fund. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-07463-9. Lay summary (4 September 2010). 
^ On A Neglected Aspect Of Western Racism, Kurt Jonassohn, December 2000
^ Pascal Blanchard, Sandrine Lemaire & Nicolas Bancel (August 2000). "Human zoos – Racist theme parks for Europe's colonialists". Le Monde diplomatique.  ; "Ces zoos humains de la République coloniale". Le Monde diplomatique (in French). August 2000.  (available to everyone)
^ Human Zoos, by Nicolas Bancel, Pascal Blanchard and Sandrine Lemaire, in Le Monde diplomatique, August 2000 French – free
^ Savages and Beasts – The Birth of the Modern Zoo, Nigel Rothfels, Johns Hopkins University Press
^ "The Colonial Exhibition of May 1931" (PDF).  (96.6 KB) by Michael G. Vann, History Dept., Santa Clara University
^ Robert Kurzban; John Tooby & Leda Cosmides (December 18, 2001). "Can race be erased? Coalitional computation and social categorization" (PDF). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 98 (26): 15387–92. Bibcode:2001PNAS...9815387K. doi:10.1073/pnas.251541498. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 65039 . PMID 11742078. Retrieved 2008-06-11. . The authors provide a summary and other comments at "(untitled)". 
^ New Scientist. Issue 2595, 17 March 2007.
^ Richard Dawkins (2006). The selfish gene. Oxford University Press. p. 99. ISBN 978-0-19-929115-1. 
^ Hammond, R. A.; Axelrod, R. (2006). "The Evolution of Ethnocentrism". Journal of Conflict Resolution. 50 (6): 926–36. doi:10.1177/0022002706293470. 
^ Telzer, Eva; Humphreys, Kathryn; Mor, Shapiro; Tottenham, Nim (2013). "Amygdala Sensitivity to Race Is Not Present in Childhood but Emerges over Adolescence". Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 25 (2): 234–44. doi:10.1162/jocn_a_00311. PMC 3628780 . PMID 23066731. 
^ Chekroud, Adam M.; Everett, Jim A. C.; Bridge, Holly; Hewstone, Miles (27 March 2014). "A review of neuroimaging studies of race-related prejudice: does amygdala response reflect threat?". Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 8: 179. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.00179. ISSN 1662-5161. PMC 3973920 . PMID 24734016. 
^ Hodson, G.; Busseri, M. A. (5 January 2012). "Bright Minds and Dark Attitudes: Lower Cognitive Ability Predicts Greater Prejudice Through Right-Wing Ideology and Low Intergroup Contact". Psychological Science. 23 (2): 187–95. doi:10.1177/0956797611421206. PMID 22222219. 
^ Edward Russel of Liverpool, The Knights of Bushido, 2002, p. 238, Herbert Bix, Hirohito and the making of modern Japan, 2001, pp. 313–14, 326, 359–60; Karel van Wolferen, The Enigma of Japanese power, 1989, pp. 263–72
^ Paulino, Edward (December 2006). "Anti-Haitianism, Historical Memory, and the Potential for Genocidal Violence in the Dominican Republic". Genocide Studies International. University of Toronto Press. 1 (3): 265. doi:10.3138/7864-3362-3R24-6231. eISSN 2291-1855. ISSN 2291-1847. 
^ "Tale of two farms in Zimbabwe – March 30, 2005". CNN. 2005-03-30. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ "'The Face of America in Africa' Must End Constitutional Racism". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 2015-06-06. 
^ Tannenbaum, Jessie; Valcke, Anthony; McPherson, Andrew (2009-05-01). "Analysis of the Aliens and Nationality Law of the Republic of Liberia". Rochester, NY. SSRN 1795122 . 
^ "1984 Liberian Constitution". www.onliberia.org. Retrieved 2015-06-06. 


Further reading


Allen, Theodore. (1994). 'The Invention of the White Race: Volume 1 London, UK: Verso.
Allen, Theodore. (1997). The Invention of the White Race: Volume 2 London, UK: Verso.
Barkan, Elazar (1992), The Retreat of Scientific Racism : Changing Concepts of Race in Britain and the United States between the World Wars, Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.
Barth, Boris: nbn:de:0159-2010092173 Racism , European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: November 16, 2011.
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2003. Racism without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in the United States. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Curta, Florin (2001). The Making of the Slavs: History and Archaeology of the Lower Danube Region, c. 500–700. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139428880. 
Dain, Bruce (2002), A Hideous Monster of the Mind : American Race Theory in the Early Republic, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. (18th century US racial theory)
Daniels, Jessie (1997), White Lies: Race, Class, Gender and Sexuality in White Supremacist Discourse, Routledge, New York, NY.
Daniels, Jessie (2009), Cyber Racism: White Supremacy Online and the New Attack on Civil Rights, Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, MD.
Ehrenreich, Eric (2007), The Nazi Ancestral Proof: Genealogy, Racial Science, and the Final Solution, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN.
Ewen & Ewen (2006), "Typecasting: On the Arts and Sciences of Human Inequality", Seven Stories Press, New York, NY.
Feagin, Joe R. (2006). Systemic Racism: A Theory of Oppression, Routledge: New York, NY.
Feagin, Joe R. (2009). Racist America: Roots, Current Realities, and Future Reparations, 2nd Edition.Routledge: New York, NY.
Eliav-Feldon, Miriam, Isaac, Benjamin & Ziegler, Joseph. 2009. The Origins of Racism in the West, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge
Gibson, Rich (2005) Against Racism and Irrationalism
Graves, Joseph. (2004) The Race Myth NY: Dutton.
Ignatiev, Noel. 1995. How the Irish Became White NY: Routledge.
Isaac, Benjamin. 1995 The Invention of Racism in Classical Antiquity Princeton: Princeton University Press
Lentin, Alana. (2008) Racism: A Beginner's Guide Oxford: One World.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude (1952), Race and History, (UNESCO).
Memmi, Albert (2000). Racism. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 9780816631650. 
Moody-Adams, Michele (2005), "Racism", in Frey, R.G.; Heath Wellman, Christopher, A companion to applied ethics, Blackwell Companions to Philosophy, Oxford, UK Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 89–101, doi:10.1002/9780470996621.ch7, ISBN 9781405133456. 
Rocchio, Vincent F. (2000), Reel Racism : Confronting Hollywood's Construction of Afro-American Culture, Westview Press.
Smedley, Audrey; Smedley, Brian D. (2005). "Race as Biology if Fiction, Racism as a Social Problem is Real". American Psychologist. 60 (1): 16–26. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.694.7956 . doi:10.1037/0003-066x.60.1.16. PMID 15641918. 
Smedley, Audrey. 2007. Race in North America: Origins and Evolution of a World View. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Stoler, Ann Laura (1997). "Racial Histories and Their Regimes of Truth". Political Power and Social Theory. 11: 183–206.  (historiography of race and racism)
Taguieff, Pierre-André (1987), La Force du préjugé : Essai sur le racisme et ses doubles, Tel Gallimard, La Découverte.
Poliakov, Leon. The Aryan Myth: A History of Racist and Nationalistic Ideas In Europe (Barnes & Noble Books (1996)) ISBN 0-7607-0034-6.
Trepagnier, Barbara. 2006. Silent Racism: How Well-Meaning White People Perpetuate the Racial Divide. Paradigm Publishers.
Twine, France Winddance (1997), Racism in a Racial Democracy: The Maintenance of White Supremacy in Brazil, Rutgers University Press.
UNESCO, The Race Question, 1950
Tali Farkash, "Racists among us" in Y-Net (Yediot Aharonot), "Jewish Scene" section, April 20, 2007
Winant, Howard The New Politics of Race (2004)
Winant, Howard and Omi, Michael Racial Formation in the United States Routeledge (1986); Second Edition (1994).
Bettina Wohlgemuth (May 2007). Racism in the 21st century: how everybody can make a difference. ISBN 978-3-8364-1033-5. 
Wright W. D. (1998) "Racism Matters", Westport, CT: Praeger.


External links



Look up racism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Racism.



Being a Black Male in Cuba By Lucia Lopez, Havana Times May 5, 2009
Race, history and culture – Ethics – March 1996 – Extract of two articles by Claude Lévi-Strauss
Race, Racism and the Law – Information about race, racism and racial distinctions in the law.
RacismReview, – created and maintained by American sociologists Joe Feagin, PhD and Jessie Daniels, PhD, provides a research-based analysis of racism.



Library resources about
Racism





Resources in your library








Links to related articles











v
t
e


Racism



Types of racism



Against Jews
Aversive
Among White people
Among LGBT people
Among US minorities

Colorism


Among hipsters
Consumer
Covert
Cultural
Environmental
Gendered
Institutional
Internalized
Islamophobia
Nationalist
New racism

Neo-racism


Reverse
Romantic
Sexual
Scientific
Societal
Symbolic





Manifestations
of racism



Anti-miscegenation laws
Expression

in the media
in Charles Dickens' works
in music
in early US films

Censored Eleven


in horror films
in porn
online

on Wikipedia


in sport

baseball
martial arts
soccer


in school curricula
in US politics
Jokes
Slurs


Racial antagonism
Racial determinism
Racial hatred
Racial hierarchy

Casta


Racial polarization
Racial quota
Racial vilification
Racial violence

Race war







Racism by region



Africa
Arab world
Asia
Australia
Europe
Middle East
North America
South America





Related topics



Anti-racism
Psychological impact

Psychoanalysis


Racial transformation
Passing
Racial democracy
Racial fetishism
Race traitor
List of racism-related articles
List of anti-ethnic terms






 Category










v
t
e


Segregation in countries by type



Geographical
(religious)



Bosnia and Herzegovina
Partition of India
Northern Ireland
Greece and Turkey
Partition of Bengal
Saudi Arabia
Bahrain
Myanmar





Racial



Australia
Argentina
Canada
Bahrain
Brazil
Dominican Republic
Fiji
France
Malaysia
Nazi Germany
Poland
Portugal
Rhodesia
South Africa
Spain
Saudization
Emiratisation
United States

schools
Anti-miscegenation laws in the United States







Gender



Islam (in Iran)
Taliban
Saudi Arabia
Judaism
Separatist feminism





Dynamics



Auto-segregation
Balkanization
Ethnic cleansing
Exclusionary zoning
Forced migration
Internment

labor camps


Residential segregation in the United States
Social exclusion





Related
topics



Apartheid

laws


Anti-miscegenation laws
Black Codes
Corporative federalism
Discrimination
Hafrada
Jim Crow laws
Nativism
Nuremberg Laws
Racism
Rankism
Religious intolerance
Reservation in India
Second-class citizen
Separate but equal
Separate school (Canada)
Shunning
Social apartheid
Xenophobia








See also: Desegregation

busing


Pillarisation
 Category

caste
gender
racial


 Commons












v
t
e


Discrimination



General forms



Age
Caste
Class
Color
Disability
Gender
Genotype
Hair
Height
Language
Looks
Mental condition
Race / Ethnicity / Nationality
Rank
Religion
Sex
Sexuality
Size
Species





Social



AIDS stigma
Adultism
Anti-albinism
Anti-autism
Anti-homelessness
Anti-intellectualism
Anti-intersex
Anti-left handedness
Anti-Masonry
Antisemitism
Audism
Binarism
Biphobia
Cronyism
Drug use
Elitism
Ephebiphobia
Ethnopluralism
Fatism
Genderism
Gerontophobia
Heteronormativity
Heterosexism
Homophobia
Islamophobia
Leprosy stigma
Lesbophobia
Mentalism
Misandry
Misogyny
Nepotism
Pedophobia
Pregnancy
Reverse
Sectarianism
Shadism
Supremacism

Arab
Black
White


Transmisogyny
Transphobia
Vegaphobia
Xenophobia





Manifestations



Animal cruelty
Animal testing
Blood libel
Blood sport
Carnism
Compulsory sterilization
Counter-jihad
Cultural genocide
Democide
Disability hate crime
Educational
Economic
Eliminationism
Employment
Enemy of the people
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnocide
Forced conversion
Freak show
Gay bashing
Gendercide
Genital mutilation
Genocide

examples


Glass ceiling
Group libel
Hate crime
Hate group
Hate speech
Homeless dumping
Housing
Indian rolling
LGBT hate crime
Lavender scare
Lynching
Meat eating
Mortgage
Murder music
Occupational segregation
Persecution
Pogrom
Purge
Race war
Red Scare
Religious persecution
Scapegoating
Segregation academy
Sex-selective abortion
Slavery
Slut-shaming
Trans bashing
Victimisation
Violence against women
White flight
White power music
Wife selling
Witch-hunt





Discriminatory
policies



Segregation

age
racial
religious
sex


Age of candidacy
Blood quantum
Cleanliness of blood
Crime of apartheid
Disabilities

Jewish
Catholic


Ethnocracy
Gender pay gap
Gender roles
Gerontocracy
Gerrymandering
Ghetto benches
Internment
Jewish quota
Jim Crow laws
Law for Protection of the Nation
McCarthyism
MSM blood donor controversy
Nonpersons
Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota)
Nuremberg Laws
One-drop rule
Racial quota
Racial steering
Redlining
Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting)
Sodomy law
Ugly law
Voter suppression





Countermeasures



Affirmative action
Ahimsa
Animal rights
Anti-discrimination law
Cultural assimilation
Cultural pluralism
Desegregation
Diversity training
Empowerment
Feminism
Fighting Discrimination
Human rights
Intersex rights
Multiculturalism
Nonviolence
Racial integration
Self-determination
Social integration
Toleration
Vegetarianism
Veganism





Related topics



Allophilia
Anti-cultural sentiment
Anthropocentrism
Assimilation
Bias
Christian privilege
Data discrimination
Dehumanization
Diversity
Ethnic penalty
Eugenics
Intersectionality
Male privilege
Masculism
Multiculturalism
Neurodiversity
Oppression
Police brutality
Political correctness
Power distance
Prejudice
Racial bias in criminal news
Racism by country
Regressive left
Religious intolerance
Second-generation gender bias
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social stigma
Stereotype

threat


White privilege








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Indigenous and minority rights



Rights



Ancestral domain
Free, prior and informed consent
Intellectual property
Land rights
Language
Self-determination

in Australia
in Canada
in the United States


Traditional knowledge
Treaty rights





Governmental
organizations



African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
Arctic Council
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Council of Indigenous Peoples(Taiwan)
Fundação Nacional do Índio
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada
National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples
National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (Philippines)
United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues





Non-governmental and
political organizations



Amazon Watch
Assembly of First Nations
Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador
Congress of Aboriginal Peoples
Coordinator of Indigenous Organizations of the Amazon River Basin
Cultural Survival
Indigenous Environmental Network
Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism
International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs
National Indigenous Organization of Colombia
Native American Rights Fund
Survival International
Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization
Zapatista Army of National Liberation
(more ...)





Issues



Civilizing mission
Colonialism

Internal colonialism
Settler colonialism


Cultural appropriation

Sports mascots
Redface


Dakota Access Pipeline protests
Discovery doctrine
Homeland
Lands inhabited by indigenous peoples

Bantustan
American Indian reservation
Indian reserve
Ranchería


Manifest destiny
Plastic shaman
Rainbow Warriors
Two-Spirit





Legal representation



Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, 2007





Historical cases



2009 Peruvian political crisis
Alta controversy
Chiapas conflict
Depopulation of Diego Garcia
High Arctic relocation
Indian removal
Mapuche conflict
Oka Crisis
Residential Schools

Canada
New Zealand
South Africa
United States


Rubber boom
San controversy
Stolen Generations








 Human Rights
 Indigenous rights • Minority rights












v
t
e


Racism in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)













v
t
e


Racism in the Americas






North America
South America





Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela









Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands
US Virgin Islands












v
t
e


Racism in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Racism in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard












v
t
e


Racism in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna














Authority control



GND: 4076527-1
BNF: cb11940470z (data)
NDL: 00574821











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Racism&oldid=818496500"					Categories: RacismDiscriminationHatredPolitics and raceHidden categories: Articles with Norwegian-language external linksArticles with inconsistent citation formatsWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with French-language external linksCS1 Danish-language sources (da)CS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 maint: ASIN uses ISBNWikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2013Articles needing more detailed referencesWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles needing cleanup from July 2016All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from July 2016Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from July 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2015Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers