"Segregationist" redirects here. For the short story by Isaac Asimov, see Segregationist (short story).


Part of a series of articles on
Racial segregation





South Africa




Apartheid legislation
Bantustan
Bantu Education Act
Group Areas Acts
Pass laws




United States




Separate but equal
Sundown town
Black Codes
Jim Crow laws
Auto-segregation
Residential segregation
Housing segregation
Blockbusting
Racial steering
Redlining
School segregation


Segregation academy
Black school







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Discrimination




General forms


Age
Caste
Class
Color
Disability
Gender
Genotype
Hair
Height
Language
Looks
Mental condition
Race / Ethnicity / Nationality
Rank
Religion
Sex
Sexuality
Size
Species






Specific forms


 




Social


AIDS stigma
Adultism
Anti-albinism
Anti-autism
Anti-homelessness
Anti-intellectualism
Anti-intersex
Anti-left handedness
Anti-Masonry
Audism
Binarism
Biphobia
Cronyism
Drug use
Elitism
Ephebiphobia
Ethnopluralism
Fatism
Genderism
Gerontophobia
Heteronormativity
Heterosexism
Homophobia
Leprosy stigma
Lesbophobia
Mentalism
Misandry
Misogyny
Nepotism
Pedophobia
Pregnancy
Reverse
Sectarianism
Shadism
Supremacism

Arab
Black
White


Transmisogyny
Transphobia
Vegaphobia
Xenophobia








Manifestations


Animal cruelty
Animal testing
Blood libel
Blood sport
Carnism
Class conflict
Compulsory sterilization
Counter-jihad
Cultural genocide
Democide
Disability hate crime
Economic
Eliminationism
Employment
Enemy of the people
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnocide
Forced conversion
Freak show
Gay bashing
Gendercide
Genital mutilation
Genocide

examples


Glass ceiling
Group libel
Hate crime
Hate group
Hate speech
Homeless dumping
Housing
Indian rolling
LGBT hate crime
Lavender scare
Lynching
Meat eating
Mortgage
Persecution
Murder music
Occupational segregation
Persecution
Pogrom
Purge
Race war
Red Scare
Religious persecution
Scapegoating
Segregation academy
Sex-selective abortion
Slavery
Slut-shaming
Trans bashing
Victimisation
Violence against women
White flight
White power music
Wife selling
Witch-hunt








Policies


Segregation

age
racial
religious
sex


Age of candidacy
Blood quantum
Cleanliness of blood
Crime of apartheid
Disabilities

Jewish
Catholic


Ethnocracy
Gender pay gap
Gender roles
Gerontocracy
Gerrymandering
Ghetto benches
Internment
Jewish quota
Jim Crow laws
Law for Protection of the Nation
McCarthyism
MSM blood donor controversy
Nonpersons
Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota)
Nuremberg Laws
One-drop rule
Racial quota
Racial steering
Redlining
Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting)
Sodomy law
Ugly law
Voter suppression








Countermeasures


Affirmative action
Animal rights
Anti-discrimination law
Classism
Cultural assimilation
Cultural pluralism
Desegregation
Diversity training
Empowerment
Feminism
Fighting Discrimination
Human rights
Intersex rights
Multiculturalism
Racial integration
Religious persecution
Self-determination
Social integration
Toleration
Vegetarianism
Veganism








Related topics


Allophilia
Anti-cultural sentiment
Assimilation
Bias
Christian privilege
Diversity
Ethnic penalty
Eugenics
Intersectionality
Male privilege
Masculism
Multiculturalism
Neurodiversity
Oppression
Police brutality
Political correctness
Power distance
Prejudice
Racial bias in criminal news
Racism by country
Regressive left
Religious intolerance
Second-generation gender bias
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social stigma
Stereotype

threat


White privilege






 Discrimination portal





v
t
e





Racial segregation is the separation of humans into racial or other ethnic groups in daily life. It may apply to activities such as eating in a restaurant, drinking from a water fountain, using a public toilet, attending school, going to the movies, riding on a bus, or in the rental or purchase of a home[1] or of hotel rooms. Segregation is defined by the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance as "the act by which a (natural or legal) person separates other persons on the basis of one of the enumerated grounds without an objective and reasonable justification, in conformity with the proposed definition of discrimination. As a result, the voluntary act of separating oneself from other people on the basis of one of the enumerated grounds does not constitute segregation".[2] According to the UN Forum on Minority Issues, "The creation and development of classes and schools providing education in minority languages should not be considered impermissible segregation, if the assignment to such classes and schools is of a voluntary nature".[3]
Racial segregation is generally outlawed, but may exist de facto through social norms, even when there is no strong individual preference for it, as suggested by Thomas Schelling's models of segregation and subsequent work.[4] Segregation may be maintained by means ranging from discrimination in hiring and in the rental and sale of housing to certain races to vigilante violence (such as lynchings). Generally, a situation that arises when members of different races mutually prefer to associate and do business with members of their own race would usually be described as separation or de facto separation of the races rather than segregation. In the United States, segregation was mandated by law in some states and came with anti-miscegenation laws (prohibitions against interracial marriage).[5] Segregation, however, often allowed close contact in hierarchical situations, such as allowing a person of one race to work as a servant for a member of another race. Segregation can involve spatial separation of the races, and mandatory use of different institutions, such as schools and hospitals by people of different races.



Contents


1 History

1.1 French Algeria
1.2 Germany
1.3 Imperial China

1.3.1 Tang dynasty
1.3.2 Qing dynasty


1.4 Italy
1.5 Jewish segregation
1.6 Latin America
1.7 Norway
1.8 Rhodesia
1.9 South Africa
1.10 United States


2 Contemporary segregation

2.1 Bahrain
2.2 Canada
2.3 Fiji
2.4 Israel
2.5 Kenya
2.6 Liberia
2.7 Malaysia
2.8 Mauritania
2.9 United Kingdom
2.10 United States
2.11 Yemen


3 See also
4 Notes
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



History[edit]
Wherever there have been multiracial communities, there has been racial segregation. Only areas with extensive miscegenation, or mixing, such as Hawaii and Brazil, despite some social stratification, seem to be exempt.[6]
French Algeria[edit]
Following its conquest of Ottoman controlled Algeria in 1830, for well over a century France maintained colonial rule in the territory which has been described as "quasi-apartheid".[7] The colonial law of 1865 allowed Arab and Berber Algerians to apply for French citizenship only if they abandoned their Muslim identity; Azzedine Haddour argues that this established "the formal structures of a political apartheid".[8] Camille Bonora-Waisman writes that, "[i]n contrast with the Moroccan and Tunisian protectorates", this "colonial apartheid society" was unique to Algeria.[9]
This "internal system of apartheid" met with considerable resistance from the Muslims affected by it, and is cited as one of the causes of the 1954 insurrection and ensuing independence war.[10]
Germany[edit]
See also: Nur für Deutsche




"Nur für deutsche Fahrgäste" ("Only for German passengers") on the tram number 8 in German-occupied Kraków, Poland.






German warning in occupied Poland 1939 – "No entrance for Poles!"


In fifteenth-century north-east Germany, people of Wendish, i.e. Slavic, origin were not allowed to join some guilds.[11] According to Wilhelm Raabe, "down into the eighteenth century no German guild accepted a Wend."[12]
German praise for America's institutional racism, previously found in Hitler's Mein Kampf, was continuous throughout the early 1930s, and radical Nazi lawyers were advocates of the use of American models.[13] Race based U.S. citizenship laws and anti-miscegenation laws directly inspired the two principal Nuremberg Laws—the Citizenship Law and the Blood Law.[13] The ban on interracial marriage (anti-miscegenation) prohibited sexual relations and marriages between people classified as "Aryan" and "non-Aryan." Such relationships were called Rassenschande (race defilement). At first the laws were aimed primarily at Jews but were later extended to "Gypsies, Negroes and their bastard offspring".[14][15][16] Aryans found guilty could face incarceration in a concentration camp, while non-Aryans could face the death penalty.[17] To preserve the so-called purity of the German blood, after the war began, the Nazis extended the race defilement law to include all foreigners (non-Germans).[18]
Under the General Government of occupied Poland in 1940, the Nazis divided the population into different groups, each with different rights, food rations, allowed housing strips in the cities, public transportation, etc. In an effort to split Polish identity they attempted to establish ethnic divisions of Kashubians and Gorals (Goralenvolk), based on these groups' alleged "Germanic component."
During the 1930s and 1940s, Jews in Nazi-controlled states were made to wear yellow ribbons or stars of David, and were, along with Romas (Gypsies), discriminated against by the racial laws. Jewish doctors were not allowed to treat Aryan patients nor were Jewish professors permitted to teach Aryan pupils. In addition, Jews were not allowed to use any public transportation, besides the ferry, and were able to shop only from 3–5 pm in Jewish stores. After Kristallnacht ("The Night of Broken Glass"), the Jews were fined 1,000,000 marks for damages done by the Nazi troops and SS members.




Women behind the barbed wire fence of the Lvov Ghetto in occupied Poland. Spring 1942


Jews and Roma were subjected to genocide as "undesirable" racial groups in the Holocaust. The Nazis established ghettos to confine Jews and sometimes Romas into tightly packed areas of the cities of Eastern Europe, turning them into de facto concentration camps. The Warsaw Ghetto was the largest of these ghettos, with 400,000 people. The Łódź Ghetto was the second largest, holding about 160,000.[19]




Young Polish girl wearing Letter "P" patch.


Between 1939 and 1945, at least 1.5 million Polish citizens were transported to the Reich for forced labour (in all, about 12 million forced laborers were employed in the German war economy inside Nazi Germany).[20][21] Although Nazi Germany also used forced laborers from Western Europe, Poles, along with other Eastern Europeans viewed as racially inferior,[22] were subject to deeper discriminatory measures. They were forced to wear a yellow with purple border and letter "P" (for Polen/Polish) cloth identifying tag sewn to their clothing, subjected to a curfew, and banned from public transportation.
While the treatment of factory workers or farm hands often varied depending on the individual employer, Polish laborers as a rule were compelled to work longer hours for lower wages than Western Europeans – in many cities, they were forced to live in segregated barracks behind barbed wire. Social relations with Germans outside work were forbidden, and sexual relations (Rassenschande or "racial defilement") were punishable by death.[23]
Imperial China[edit]
Tang dynasty[edit]
Several laws enforcing racial segregation of foreigners from Chinese were passed by the Han chinese during the Tang dynasty. In 779 the Tang dynasty issued an edict which forced Uighurs to wear their ethnic dress, stopped them from marrying Chinese females, and banned them from pretending to be Chinese. Chinese disliked Uighurs because they practiced usury. The magistrate who issued the orders may have wanted to protect "purity" in Chinese custom. In 836, when Lu Chun was appointed as governor of Canton, he was disgusted to find Chinese living with foreigners and intermarriage between Chinese and foreigners. Lu enforced separation, banning interracial marriages, and made it illegal for foreigners to own property. Lu Chun believed his principles were just and upright.[24] The 836 law specifically banned Chinese from forming relationships with "Dark peoples" or "People of colour", which was used to describe foreigners, such as "Iranians, Sogdians, Arabs, Indians, Malays, Sumatrans", among others.[25][26]
Qing dynasty[edit]
Main article: Eight Banners
The Qing Dynasty was founded not by the Han Chinese who form the majority of the Chinese population, but the Manchus, who are today an ethnic minority of China. The Manchus were keenly aware of their minority status, however, it was only later in the dynasty that they banned intermarriage.
Han defectors played a massive role in the Qing conquest of China. Han Chinese Generals who defected to the Manchu were often given women from the Imperial Aisin Gioro family in marriage while the ordinary soldiers who defected were given non-royal Manchu women as wives. The Manchu leader Nurhaci married one of his granddaughters to the Ming General Li Yongfang after he surrendered Fushun in Liaoning to the Manchu in 1618.[27][28] Jurchen (Manchu) women married most the Han Chinese defectors in Liaodong.[29] Aisin Gioro women were married to the sons of the Han Chinese Generals Sun Sike (Sun Ssu-k'o), Geng Jimao (Keng Chi-mao), Shang Kexi (Shang K'o-hsi), and Wu Sangui (Wu San-kuei).[30]
A mass marriage of Han Chinese officers and officials to Manchu women numbering 1,000 couples was arranged by Prince Yoto and Hongtaiji in 1632 to promote harmony between the two ethnic groups.[27]
Geng Zhongming, a Han bannerman, was awarded the title of Prince Jingnan, and his son Geng Jingmao managed to have both his sons Geng Jingzhong and Geng Zhaozhong become court attendants under Shunzhi and get married to Aisin Gioro women, with Haoge's (a son of Hong Taiji) daughter marrying Geng Jingzhong and Prince Abatai's (Hong Taiji) granddaughter marrying Geng Zhaozhong.[31]
The Qing differentiated between Han Bannermen and ordinary Han civilians. Han Bannermen were made out of Han Chinese who defected to the Qing up to 1644 and joined the Eight Banners, giving them social and legal privileges in addition to being acculturated to Manchu culture. So many Han defected to the Qing and swelled up the ranks of the Eight Banners that ethnic Manchus became a minority within the Banners, making up only 16% in 1648, with Han Bannermen dominating at 75%.[32][33][34] It was this multi-ethnic force in which Manchus were only a minority, which conquered China for the Qing.[35]
It was Han Chinese Bannermen who were responsible for the successful Qing conquest of China, they made up the majority of governors in the early Qing and were the ones who governed and administered China after the conquest, stabilizing Qing rule.[36] Han Bannermen dominated the post of governor-general in the time of the Shunzhi and Kangxi Emperors, and also the post of governors, largely excluding ordinary Han civilians from the posts.[37]
To promote ethnic harmony, a 1648 decree from the Manchu Shunzhi Emperor allowed Han Chinese civilian men to marry Manchu women from the Banners with the permission of the Board of Revenue if they were registered daughters of officials or commoners or the permission of their banner company captain if they were unregistered commoners, it was only later in the dynasty that these policies allowing intermarriage were done away with.[38][39]
The Qing implemented a policy of segregation between the Bannermen of the Eight Banners (Manchu Bannermen, Mongol Bannermen, Han Bannermen) and Han Chinese civilians[when?]. This ethnic segregation had cultural and economic reasons: intermarriage was forbidden to keep up the Manchu heritage and minimize sinicization. Han Chinese civilians and Mongol civilians were banned from settling in Manchuria.[40] Han civilians and Mongol civilians were banned from crossing into each other's lands. Ordinary Mongol civilians in Inner Mongolia were banned from even crossing into other Mongol Banners. (A banner in Inner Mongolia was an administrative division and not related to the Mongol Bannermen in the Eight Banners)
These restrictions did not apply Han Bannermen, who were settled in Manchuria by the Qing. Han bannermen were differentiated from Han civilians by the Qing and treated differently.
The Qing Dynasty started colonizing Manchuria with Han Chinese later on in the dynasty's rule, but the Manchu area was still separated from modern-day Inner Mongolia by the Outer Willow Palisade, which kept the Manchu and the Mongols in the area separate.
The policy of segregation applied directly to the banner garrisons, most of which occupied a separate walled zone within the cities in which they were stationed. Manchu Bannermen, Han Bannermen, and Mongol Bannermen were separated from the Han civilian population. While the Manchus followed the governmental structure of the preceding Ming dynasty, their ethnic policy dictated that appointments were split between Manchu noblemen and Han Chinese civilian officials who had passed the highest levels of the state examinations, and because of the small number of Manchus, this insured that a large fraction of them would be government officials.
Italy[edit]
In 1938, the fascist regime led by Benito Mussolini, under pressure from the Nazis, introduced a series of laws instituting an official segregationist policy in the Italian Empire, especially aimed against Jews. This policy enforced various segregationist norms, like the prohibition for Jews to teach or study in ordinary schools and universities, to own industries reputed of major national interest, to work as journalists, to enter the military, and to wed non-Jews. Some of the immediate consequences of the introduction of the 'provvedimenti per la difesa della razza' (norms for the defence of the race) included many of the best Italian scientists leaving their job, or even Italy. Amongst these, world-renowned physicists Emilio Segrè, Enrico Fermi (whose wife was Jewish), Bruno Pontecorvo, Bruno Rossi, Tullio Levi-Civita, mathematicians Federigo Enriques and Guido Fubini and even the fascist propaganda director, art critic and journalist Margherita Sarfatti, who was one of Mussolini's mistresses. Rita Levi-Montalcini, who would successively win the Nobel Prize for Medicine, was forbidden to work at the university. Albert Einstein, upon approval of the racial law, resigned from honorary membership of the Accademia dei Lincei.
After 1943, when Northern Italy was occupied by the Nazis, Italian Jews were rounded up for the Holocaust.
Jewish segregation[edit]
Jews in Europe generally were forced, by decree or by informal pressure, to live in highly segregated ghettos and shtetls.[41] In 1204 the papacy required Jews to segregate themselves from Christians and to wear distinctive clothing.[42] Forced segregation of Jews spread throughout Europe during the 14th and 15th centuries.[43] In the Russian Empire, Jews were restricted to the so-called Pale of Settlement, the Western frontier of the Russian Empire corresponding roughly to the modern-day countries of Poland, Lithuania, Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine.[44] By the early 20th century, the majority of European Jews lived in the Pale of Settlement.
Jewish population were confined to mellahs in Morocco beginning from the 15th century. In cities, a mellah was surrounded by a wall with a fortified gateway. In contrast, rural mellahs were separate villages inhabited solely by the Jews.[45]
In the middle of the 19th century, J. J. Benjamin wrote about the life of Persian Jews:

…they are obliged to live in a separate part of town…; for they are considered as unclean creatures… Under the pretext of their being unclean, they are treated with the greatest severity and should they enter a street, inhabited by Mussulmans, they are pelted by the boys and mobs with stones and dirt… For the same reason, they are prohibited to go out when it rains; for it is said the rain would wash dirt off them, which would sully the feet of the Mussulmans… If a Jew is recognized as such in the streets, he is subjected to the greatest insults. The passers-by spit in his face, and sometimes beat him… unmercifully… If a Jew enters a shop for anything, he is forbidden to inspect the goods… Should his hand incautiously touch the goods, he must take them at any price the seller chooses to ask for them... Sometimes the Persians intrude into the dwellings of the Jews and take possession of whatever please them. Should the owner make the least opposition in defense of his property, he incurs the danger of atoning for it with his life... If... a Jew shows himself in the street during the three days of the Katel (Muharram)…, he is sure to be murdered.[46]

Latin America[edit]
Spanish colonists created caste systems in Latin American countries based on classification by race and race mixture. An extensive nomenclature developed, including the familiar terms "mulatto", "mestizo", and "zambo" (the latter the origin of "sambo"). The Spanish had practiced a form of caste system in Hispania before their expulsion of the Jews and Muslims. While many Latin American countries have long since rendered the system officially illegal through legislation, usually at the time of independence, prejudice based on degrees of perceived racial distance from European ancestry combined with one's socioeconomic status remain, an echo of the colonial caste system.[47][48]
Norway[edit]
On 16 May 1940 the Administrasjonsrådet asked Rikskommisariatet why radio receivers had been confiscated from Jews in Norway.[49] That Administrasjonsrådet thereafter "quietly" accepted[49] racial segregation between Norwegian citizens, has been claimed by Tor Bomann-Larsen. Furthermore, he claimed that this segregation "created a precedent. 2 years later (with NS-styret in the ministries of Norway) Norwegian police arrested citizens at the addresses where radios had previously been confiscated from Jews.[49]
Rhodesia[edit]
Following a dispute over the terms for the granting of full independence, the British self-governing colony of Rhodesia, governed by a predominantly white minority government, unilaterally declared independence in 1965. Led by Prime Minister Ian Smith, it endured as an unrecognized state under white rule for the next 14 years, with majority rule coming in 1979 with the Internal Settlement between Smith's government and moderate black nationalists, the associated multiracial elections and the reconstitution of the country as Zimbabwe Rhodesia, with Bishop Abel Muzorewa at the helm of a coalition cabinet comprising 12 blacks and five whites. This new order also failed to win legitimacy in the eyes of the world, and British control returned to the country in December 1979, following the Lancaster House Agreement. New elections were held in 1980, and Zimbabwe gained recognized independence in April 1980, with Robert Mugabe as prime minister.
Laws enforcing segregation had been around before 1965, although many institutions simply ignored them. One highly publicized legal battle occurred in 1960 involving the opening of a new theatre that was to be open to all races; the proposed unsegregated public toilets at the newly built Reps Theatre in 1959 caused an argument called "The Battle of the Toilets".
South Africa[edit]
Main article: Apartheid




"Apartheid": sign on Durban beach in English, Afrikaans and Zulu


The apartheid system carried out by Afrikaner minority rule enacted a nationwide social policy "separate development" with the National Party victory in 1948, following the "colour bar"-discriminatory legislation dating back to the beginning of the Union of South Africa and the Boer republics before which, while repressive to black South Africans along with other minorities, had not gone nearly so far.
Apartheid laws can be generally divided into following acts. Firstly, the Population Registration Act in 1950 classified residents in South Africa into four racial groups: "black", "white", "Coloured", and "Indian" and noted their racial identities on their identifications. Secondly, the Group Areas Act in 1950 assigned different regions according to different races. People were forced to live in their corresponding regions and the action of passing the boundaries without a permit was made illegal, extending pass laws that had already curtailed black movement. Thirdly, under the Reservation of Separate Amenities Act in 1953, amenities in public areas, like hospitals, universities and parks, were labeled separately according to particular races. In addition, the Bantu Education Act in 1953 segregated national education in South Africa as well. Additionally, the government of the time enforced the pass laws, which deprived black South Africans of their right to travel freely within their own country. Under this system black people were severely restricted from urban areas, requiring authorisation from a white employer to enter.
Uprisings and protests against apartheid appeared immediately when apartheid arose. As early as 1949, the youth wing of the African National Congress (ANC) advocated the ending of apartheid and suggested fighting against racial segregation by various methods. During the following decades, hundreds of anti-apartheid actions occurred, including those of the Black Consciousness Movement, students' protests, labor strikes, and church group activism etc. In 1991, the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act was passed, repealing laws enforcing racial segregation, including the Group Areas Act.[50] In 1994, Nelson Mandela won in the first multiracial democratic election in South Africa. His success fulfilled the ending of apartheid in South African history.
United States[edit]
Main article: Racial segregation in the United States




An African-American youth at a segregated drinking fountain in Halifax, North Carolina, in 1938.


After Jim Crow laws were passed that segregated African Americans and Whites, the lives of those who were negatively affected saw no progress in their quest for equality. Racial segregation was not a new phenomenon, as almost four million blacks had been slaves before the Civil War.[51][52] The laws passed segregated African Americans from Whites. Signs were used to show non whites where they could legally walk, talk, drink, rest, or eat.[52] For those places that were racially mixed, blacks had to wait until all White customers were dealt with.[52] Rules were also enforced that restricted African Americans from entering white stores.[52] Segregated facilities extended from white only schools to white only graveyards.[53]
After the Thirteenth Amendment abolished slavery in America, racial discrimination became regulated by the so-called Jim Crow laws, which mandated strict segregation of the races. Though many such laws were instituted shortly after fighting ended, they only became formalized after the 1877 end of the Reconstruction period. The period that followed is known as the nadir of American race relations. The legislation (or in some states, such as Florida, the state constitutions) that mandated segregation lasted at least until Brown v. Board of Education (1954).




An African-American man goes into the "colored" entrance of a movie theater in Belzoni, Mississippi, 1939.[54]


While the U.S. Supreme Court majority in the 1896 Plessy v. Ferguson case explicitly permitted "separate but equal" facilities (specifically, transportation facilities), Justice John Marshall Harlan, in his dissent, protested that the decision was an expression of white supremacy; he predicted that segregation would "stimulate aggressions … upon the admitted rights of colored citizens," "arouse race hate," and "perpetuate a feeling of distrust between [the] races. Feelings between whites and blacks were so tense, even the jails were segregated."[55]




Colored Sailors room in World War I


Elected in 1912, President Woodrow Wilson ordered segregration throughout the federal government.[56] In World War I, blacks served in the United States Armed Forces in segregated units. Black soldiers were often poorly trained and equipped, and were often put on the frontlines in suicide missions. The U.S. military was still heavily segregated in World War II. The air force and the marines had no blacks enlisted in their ranks. There were blacks in the Navy Seabees. The army had only five African-American officers.[57] In addition, no African-American would receive the Medal of Honor during the war, and their tasks in the war were largely reserved to noncombat units. Black soldiers had to sometimes give up their seats in trains to the Nazi prisoners of war.[57]




"We Cater to White Trade Only" sign on a restaurant window in Lancaster, Ohio, in 1938. In 1964 Martin Luther King Jr. was arrested and spent a night in jail for attempting to eat at a white-only restaurant in St. Augustine, Florida


American sports were racially segregated until the mid-twentieth century. In baseball, the "Negro leagues" were established by Rube Foster for non-white players, such as Negro league baseball, which ran through the early 1950s.[58] In basketball, the Black Fives (all-black teams) were established in 1904, and emerged in New York City, Washington, D.C., Chicago, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, and other cities. Racial segregation in basketball lasted until 1950, when the NBA became racially integrated.[59] On September 11, 1964, John Lennon announced The Beatles would not play to a segregated audience in Jacksonville, Florida.[60] City officials relented following this announcement.[60] A contract for a 1965 Beatles concert at the Cow Palace in California specifies that the band "not be required to perform in front of a segregated audience".[60]




White tenants seeking to prevent blacks from moving into the housing project erected this sign. Detroit, 1942


In the reception to honor his Olympic success Jesse Owens was not permitted to enter through the main doors of the Waldorf Astoria New York and instead forced to travel up to the event in a freight elevator.[61] The first black Oscar recipient Hattie McDaniel was not permitted to attend the premiere of Gone with the Wind with Georgia being racially segregated, and at the Oscars ceremony in Los Angeles she was required to sit at a segregated table at the far wall of the room; the hotel had a no-blacks policy, but allowed McDaniel in as a favor.[62]




Rosa Parks being fingerprinted by Deputy Sheriff D.H. Lackey after being arrested for not giving up her seat on the bus to a white person


Many U.S. states banned interracial marriage. While opposed to slavery in the U.S, in a speech in Charleston, Illinois in 1858, Abraham Lincoln stated, "I am not, nor ever have been in favor of bringing about in any way the social and political equality of the white and black races, that I am not, nor ever have been in favor of making voters or jurors of negroes, nor of qualifying them to hold office, nor to intermarry with white people. I as much as any man am in favor of the superior position assigned to the white race".[63] In 1967, Mildred Loving, a black woman, and Richard Loving, a white man, were sentenced to a year in prison in Virginia for marrying each other.[64] Their marriage violated the state's anti-miscegenation statute, the Racial Integrity Act of 1924, which prohibited marriage between people classified as white and people classified as "colored" (persons of non-white ancestry).[65] In the Loving v. Virginia case in 1967, the Supreme Court invalidated laws prohibiting interracial marriage in the U.S.[66]
Institutionalized racial segregation was ended as an official practice during the Civil Rights Movement by the efforts of such civil rights activists as Clarence M. Mitchell Jr., Rosa Parks, and Martin Luther King Jr., working for social and political freedom during the period from the end of World War II through the passage of the Civil Rights Act in 1964 and the Voting Rights Act in 1965 supported by President Lyndon B. Johnson. Many of their efforts were acts of non-violent civil disobedience aimed at disrupting the enforcement of racial segregation rules and laws, such as refusing to give up a seat in the black part of the bus to a white person (Rosa Parks), or holding sit-ins at all-white diners.
By 1968 all forms of segregation had been declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court, and by 1970 support for formal legal segregation had dissolved. Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas in 1954 outlawed segregation in public schools. The Fair Housing Act of 1968, administered and enforced by the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, prohibited discrimination in the sale and rental of housing on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, familial status, and disability. Formal racial discrimination became illegal in school systems, businesses, the American military, other civil services and the government.
Contemporary segregation[edit]
Bahrain[edit]
See also: Human rights in Bahrain and Bandargate scandal
On 28 April 2007, the lower house of Bahraini Parliament passed a law banning unmarried migrant workers from living in residential areas. To justify the law MP Nasser Fadhala, a close ally of the government said "bachelors also use these houses to make alcohol, run prostitute rings or to rape children and housemaids".[67]
Sadiq Rahma, technical committee head, who is a member of Al Wefaq said: "The rules we are drawing up are designed to protect the rights of both the families and the Asian bachelors (..) these labourers often have habits which are difficult for families living nearby to tolerate (..) they come out of their homes half dressed, brew alcohol illegally in their homes, use prostitutes and make the neighbourhood dirty (..) these are poor people who often live in groups of 50 or more, crammed into one house or apartment," said Mr Rahma. "The rules also state that there must be at least one bathroom for every five people (..) there have also been cases in which young children have been sexually molested."[68]
Bahrain Centre for Human Rights issued a press release condemning this decision as discriminatory and promoting negative racist attitudes towards migrant workers.[67][69] Nabeel Rajab, then BCHR vice president, said: "It is appalling that Bahrain is willing to rest on the benefits of these people's hard work, and often their suffering, but that they refuse to live with them in equality and dignity. The solution is not to force migrant workers into ghettos, but to urge companies to improve living conditions for workers – and not to accommodate large numbers of workers in inadequate space, and to improve the standard of living for them."[67][69]
Canada[edit]
Parts of Canada, particularly British Columbia were highly racialized and featured segregation. Ending in the 1950s and 60s, First Nations were segregated; denied entry to restaurants, made to use separate bathrooms, use different train cars and ride steerage on steamships[citation needed].
Since the 1970s, there has been a concern expressed by some academics that major Canadian cities are becoming more segregated on income and ethnic lines. Reports have indicated that the inner suburbs of post-merger Toronto[70] and the southern bedroom communities of Greater Vancouver[70] have become steadily more immigrant and visible minority dominated communities and have lagged behind other neighbourhoods in average income. A CBC panel in Vancouver in 2012 discussed the growing public fear that the proliferation of ethnic enclaves in Greater Vancouver (such as Han Chinese in Richmond and Punjabis in Surrey) amounted to a type of self-segregation. In response to these fears, many minority activists have pointed out that most Canadian neighbourhoods remain predominately White, and yet Whites are never accused of "self-segregation".
The Mohawk tribe of Kahnawake has been criticized for evicting non-Mohawks from the Mohawk reserve.[71] Mohawks who marry outside of their race lose their right to live in their homelands.[72][73] The Mohawk government claims that its policy of racially exclusive membership is for the preservation of its identity,[74] but there is no exemption for those who adopt Mohawk language or culture.[72] The policy is based on a 1981 moratorium which was made law in 1984.[75] All interracial couples are sent eviction notices regardless of how long they have lived on the reserve.[73] The only exemption is for interracial couples married before the 1981 moratorium.
Although some concerned Mohawk citizens contested the racially exclusive membership policy, the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal ruled that the Mohawk government may adopt policies it deems necessary to ensure the survival of its people.[74]
A long-standing practice of segregation has also been imposed upon the commercial salmon fishery in British Columbia since 1992 when separate commercial fisheries were created for select aboriginal groups on three B.C. river systems. Canadians of other races who fish in the separate fisheries have been arrested, jailed and prosecuted. Although the fishermen who were prosecuted were successful at trial (see the decision in R. v. Kapp),[76] the decision was overturned on appeal.[77] On final appeal, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled in favour of the program on the grounds that segregation of this workplace is a step towards equality in Canada.[citation needed] Affirmative action programs in Canada are protected from equality rights challenges by s. 15(2) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Segregation continues today, but more than 35%of the fishermen in the BC commercial fishery are of aboriginal ancestry, yet Canadians of aboriginal ancestry comprise less than 4% of BC's population.[citation needed]
Fiji[edit]
Two military coups in Fiji in 1987 removed a democratically elected government led by an Indo Fijian.[78] The coup was supported principally by the ethnic Fijian population. A new constitution was promulgated in 1990, establishing Fiji as a republic, with the offices of President, Prime Minister, two-thirds of the Senate, and a clear majority of the House of Representatives reserved for ethnic Fijians; ethnic Fijian ownership of the land was also entrenched in the constitution.[79] Most of these provisions were ended with the promulgation of the 1997 Constitution, although the President, and 14 of the 32 Senators were still selected by the all-indigenous Great Council of Chiefs. The last of these distinctions were removed by the 2013 Constitution.[80]
Fiji's case is a situation of de facto ethnic segregation.[81] Fiji has a long complex history with more than 3500 years as a divided tribal nation. Unification under the British rule as a colony for 96 years brought other racial groups, particularly immigrants from the Indian subcontinent.
Israel[edit]
See also: Racism in Israel




A barrier gate at Bil'in, West Bank, 2006


Israeli Declaration of Independence proclaims equal rights to all citizens regardless of ethnicity, denomination or race. Israel has a substantial list of laws that demand racial equality (such as prohibition of discrimination, equality in Employment, libel based on race or ethnicity.[82]). There is however, in practice, significant institutional, legal, and societal discrimination against the country's Arab citizens.[83]
In 2010, the Israeli supreme court sent a message against racial segregation in a case involving the Slonim Hassidic sect of the Ashkenazi Jews, ruling that segregation between Ashkenazi and Sephardi students in a school is illegal.[84] They argue that they seek "to maintain an equal level of religiosity, not from racism."[85] Responding to the charges, the Slonim Haredim invited Sephardi girls to school, and added in a statement: "All along, we said it's not about race, but the High Court went out against our rabbis, and therefore we went to prison."[86]
Due to many cultural differences, and animosity towards a minority perceived to wish to annihilate Israel, a system of passively co-existing communities, segregated along ethnic lines has emerged in Israel, with Arab-Israeli minority communities being left "marooned outside the mainstream". This de facto segregation also exists between different Jewish ethnic groups ("edot") such as Sepharadim, Ashkenazim and Beta Israel (Jews of Ethiopian descent),[87] which leads to de facto segregated schools, housing and public policy. The government has embarked on a program to shut down such schools, in order to force integration, but some in the Ethiopian community complained that not all such schools have been closed.[88] In a 2007 poll commissioned by the Center Against Racism and conducted by the GeoCartographia Institute, 75% of Israeli Jews would not agree to live in a building with Arab residents, 60% would not accept any Arab visitors at their homes, 40% believed that Arabs should be stripped of their right to vote, and 59% believe that the culture of Arabs is primitive.[89] In 2012, a public opinion poll showed that 53% of the polled Israeli Jews said they would not object to an Arab living in their building, while 42% said they would. Asked whether they would object to Arab children being in their child's class in school, 49% said they would not, 42% said they would.[90][91] The secular Israeli public was found to be the most tolerant, while the religious and Haredi respondents were the most discriminatory.
Kenya[edit]
The end of British colonial rule in Kenya in 1964 led to an inadvertent increase in ethnic segregation. Through private purchases and government schemes, farm land previously held by European farmers was transferred to African owners. These farms were further sub-divided into smaller localities, and, due to joint migration, many adjacent localities were occupied by members of different ethnic groups.[92][pages needed] This separation along these boundaries persists today. Kimuli Kasara, in a study of recent ethnic violence in the wake of the disputed 2007/2008 Kenyan elections, used these post-colonial boundaries as an instrument for the degree of ethnic segregation.[93][unreliable source?] Through a 2 Stage Least Squares Regression analysis, Kasara showed that increased ethnic segregation in Kenya's Rift Valley Province is associated with an increase in ethnic violence.[93][unreliable source?]
Liberia[edit]
Liberian Constitution limits Liberian nationality to Negro people[94] (see also Liberian nationality law).
For example, Lebanese and Indian nationals are active in trading, as well as in the retail and service sectors. Europeans and Americans work in the mining and agricultural sectors. These minority groups have long tenured residence in the Republic, but are precluded from becoming citizens as a result of their race.[95]
Malaysia[edit]
Main articles: Bumiputra and Ketuanan Melayu
Malaysia has an article in its constitution which distinguishes the ethnic Malays and indigenous peoples of Malaysia—i.e. bumiputra—from the non-Bumiputra such as ethnic Chinese and Indians under the social contract, of which by law would guarantee the former certain special rights and privileges. To question these rights and privileges however is strictly prohibited under the Internal Security Act, legalised by the 10th Article(IV) of the Constitution of Malaysia.[96] The privileges mentioned herein covers—few of which—the economical and education aspects of Malaysians, e.g. the Malaysian New Economic Policy; an economic policy recently criticised by Thierry Rommel—who headed a European Commission's delegation to Malaysia—as an excuse for "significant protectionism"[97][98] and a quota maintaining higher access of Malays into public universities.
While legal racial segregation in daily life is not practiced, self-segregation does exist.
Mauritania[edit]
Slavery in Mauritania was finally criminalized in August 2007.[99] It was already abolished in 1980 though it was still affecting the descendants of black Africans abducted into slavery before generations, who live now in Mauritania as "black Moors" or haratin and who partially still serve the "white Moors", or bidhan (the name means literally white-skinned people), as slaves. The number of slaves in the country was not known exactly, but it was estimated to be up to 600,000 men, women and children, or 20% of the population.[100][101]
For centuries, the so-called Haratin lower class, mostly poor black Africans living in rural areas, have been considered natural slaves by white Moors of Arab/Berber ancestry. Many descendants of the Arab and Berber tribes today still adhere to the supremacist ideology of their ancestors. This ideology has led to oppression, discrimination and even enslavement of other groups in the region of Sudan and Western Sahara.[102][103] In certain villages in Mauritania there are mosques for lighter-skinned nobles and mosques for black slaves, who are still buried in separate cemeteries.[104]
United Kingdom[edit]
The United Kingdom has no legally sanctioned system of racial segregation and has a substantial list of laws that demand racial equality.[105] However, due to many cultural differences between the pre-existing system of passively co-existing communities, segregation along racial lines has emerged in parts of the United Kingdom, with minority communities being left "marooned outside the mainstream".[106]
The affected and 'ghettoised' communities are often largely representative of Pakistanis, Indians and other Sub-Continentals, and has been thought to be the basis of ethnic tensions, and a deterioration of the standard of living and levels of education and employment among ethnic minorities in poorer areas. These factors are considered by some to have been a cause of the 2001 race riots in Bradford, Oldham and Burnley in the north of England which have large Asian communities.[107][108] Most British commentators claim it is false that the riots were due to a breakdown of multiculturalism alone, and instead claim that it is more likely to have been caused by other factors such as disillusioned youth, high unemployment by a sizeable proportion of the youth, across all ethnicities, of the United Kingdom.[citation needed]
There may be some indication that such segregation, particularly in residential terms, seems to be the result of the unilateral 'steering' of ethnic groups into particular areas as well as a culture of vendor discrimination and distrust of ethnic minority clients by some estate agents and other property professionals.[109] This may be indicative of a market preference amongst the more wealthy to reside in areas of less ethnic mixture; less ethnic mixture being perceived as increasing the value and desirability of a residential area. This is likely as other theories such as "ethnic self segregation" have sometimes been shown to be baseless, and a majority of ethnic respondents to a few surveys on the matter have been in favour of wider social and residential integration.[108]
United States[edit]
De facto segregation in the United States has increased since the Civil Rights Movement.[110] The Supreme Court ruled in Milliken v. Bradley (1974) that de facto racial segregation was acceptable, as long as schools were not actively making policies for racial exclusion; since then, schools have been segregated due to myriad indirect factors.[110]
Redlining is the practice of denying or increasing the cost of services, such as banking, insurance, access to jobs,[111] access to health care,[112] or even supermarkets[113] to residents in certain, often racially determined,[114] areas. The most devastating form of redlining, and the most common use of the term, refers to mortgage discrimination. Over the next twenty years, a succession of further court decisions and federal laws, including the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act and measure to end mortgage discrimination in 1975, would completely invalidate de jure racial segregation and discrimination in the U.S., although de facto segregation and discrimination have proven more resilient. According to the Civil Rights Project at Harvard University, the actual de facto desegregation of U.S. public schools peaked in the late 1980s; since that time, the schools have, in fact, become more segregated mainly due to the ethnic segregation of the nation with whites dominating the suburbs and minorities the urban centers. According to Rajiv Sethi, an economist at Columbia University, black-white segregation in housing is slowly declining for most metropolitan areas in the US[115] Racial segregation or separation can lead to social, economic and political tensions.[116] Thirty years (the year 2000) after the civil rights era, the United States remained in many areas a residentially segregated society, in which blacks, whites and Hispanics inhabit different neighborhoods of vastly different quality.[117][118][119]
Dan Immergluck writes that in 2002 small businesses in black neighborhoods still received fewer loans, even after accounting for businesses density, businesses size, industrial mix, neighborhood income, and the credit quality of local businesses.[120] Gregory D. Squires wrote in 2003 that it is clear that race has long affected and continues to affect the policies and practices of the insurance industry.[121] Workers living in American inner cities have a harder time finding jobs than suburban workers.[122]
The desire of many whites to avoid having their children attend integrated schools has been a factor in white flight to the suburbs.[123] A 2007 study in San Francisco showed that groups of homeowners of all races tended to self-segregate in order to be with people of the same education level and race.[124] By 1990, the legal barriers enforcing segregation had been mostly replaced by decentralized racism, where whites pay more than blacks to live in predominantly white areas.[125] Today, many whites are willing to pay a premium to live in a predominantly white neighborhood. Equivalent housing in white areas commands a higher rent.[126] These higher rents are largely attributable to exclusionary zoning policies that restrict the supply of housing. Regulations ensure that all housing units are expensive enough to prevent access by undesirable groups. By bidding up the price of housing, many white neighborhoods effectively shut out blacks, because blacks are unwilling, or unable, to pay the premium to buy entry into these expensive neighborhoods. Conversely, equivalent housing in black neighborhoods is far more affordable to those who are unable or unwilling to pay a premium to live in white neighborhoods. Through the 1990s, residential segregation remained at its extreme and has been called "hypersegregation" by some sociologists or "American Apartheid".[127]
In February 2005, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Johnson v. California 543 U.S. 499 (2005) that the California Department of Corrections' unwritten practice of racially segregating prisoners in its prison reception centers—which California claimed was for inmate safety (gangs in California, as throughout the U.S., usually organize on racial lines)—is to be subject to strict scrutiny, the highest level of constitutional review.
Yemen[edit]

See also Castes in Yemen

In Yemen, the Arab elite practices a form of discrimination against the lower class Akhdam people based on their racial system.[128]
See also[edit]

Amity-Enmity Complex

Notes[edit]


^ Principles to Guide Housing Policy at the Beginning of the Millennium, Michael Schill & Susan Wachter, Cityscape
^ ECRI General Policy Recommendation N°7: National legislation to combat racism and racial discrimination — Explanatory memorandum, Para. 16
^ Recommendations of the Forum on Minority Issues A/HRC/10/11/Add.1 — para. 27
^ Thomas C. Schelling (1969) "Models of segregation", American Economic Review, 1969, 59(2), 488–493.
^ E.g., Virginia Racial Integrity Act, Virginia Code § 20–58 and § 20–59
^ Racial segregation. Britannica Online Encyclopedia.
^ "Algeria was in fact a colony but constitutionally was a part of France and not thought of in the 1950s (even by many on the left) as a colony. It was a society of nine million or so 'Muslim' Algerians who were dominated by the million settlers of diverse origins (but fiercely French) who maintained a quasi-apartheid regime." Bell, David Scott. Presidential Power in Fifth Republic France, Berg Publishers, 2000, p. 36.
^ "[the] senatus-consulte of 1865 stipulated that all the colonised indigenous were under French jurisdiction, i.e., French nationals subjected to French laws, but it restricted citizenship only to those who renounced their Muslim religion and culture. There was an obvious split in French legal discourse: a split between nationality and citizenship which established the formal structures of a political apartheid encouraging the existence of 'French subjects' disenfranchised, without any rights to citizenship, treated as objects of French law and not citizens". Debra Kelly. Autobiography And Independence: Selfhood and Creativity in North African Postcolonial Writing in French, Liverpool University Press, 2005, p. 43.
^ "In contrast with the Moroccan and Tunisian protectorates, Algeria was made an integral part of France and became a colony of settlement for more than one million Europeans... under colonial rule, Algerians encountered France's 'civilising mission' only through the plundering of lands and colonial apartheid society..." Bonora-Waisman, Camille. France and the Algerian Conflict: Issues in Democracy and Political Stability, 1988–1995, Ashgate Publishing, 2003, p. 3.
^ "As a settler colony with an internal system of apartheid, administered under the fiction that it was part of metropolitan France, and endowed with a powerful colonial lobby that virtually determined the course of French politics with respect to its internal affairs, it experienced insurrection in 1954 on the part of its Muslim population." Wall, Irwin M. France, the United States, and the Algerian War, University of California Press, 2001, p. 262.
^ "The Situation with the Sorbs in the Past and Present Archived 13 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine." (pdf).
^ Raabe, p. 189.
^ a b Q. Whitman, James (2017). Hitler's American Model: The United States and the Making of Nazi Race Law. Princeton University Press. pp. 37–43. 
^ S. H. Milton (2001). ""Gypsies" as social outsiders in Nazi Germany". In Robert Gellately and Nathan Stoltzfus. Social Outsiders in Nazi Germany. Princeton University Press. pp. 216, 231. ISBN 9780691086842. 
^ Michael Burleigh (7 November 1991). The Racial State: Germany 1933–1945. Cambridge University Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-521-39802-2. 
^ The Laws for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour (15 September 1935), section 1. "Marriages between Jews and citizens of German or kindred blood are forbidden. Marriages concluded in defiance of this law are void, even if, for the purpose of evading this law, they were concluded abroad."
^ Leila J. Rupp, Mobilizing Women for War, p 125, ISBN 0-691-04649-2
^ Diemut Majer (2003). "Non-Germans" Under the Third Reich: The Nazi Judicial and Administrative System in Germany and Occupied Eastern Europe with Special Regard to Occupied Poland, 1939–1945. JHU Press. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-8018-6493-3. 
^ "Holocaust Timeline: The Ghettos". Fcit.usf.edu. 23 November 1939. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Michael Marek (nda). "Final Compensation Pending for Former Nazi Forced Laborers". Dw-world.de. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ "Forced Labor at Ford Werke AG during the Second World War". Summeroftruth.org. Archived from the original on 14 October 2007. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ "Hitler's Plans". Dac.neu.edu. Archived from the original on 1 April 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ "Poles: Victims of the Nazi Era". Holocaust-trc.org. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Edward H. Schafer (1963). The golden peaches of Samarkand: a study of Tʻang exotics. University of California Press. p. 22. ISBN 0-520-05462-8. Retrieved 28 June 2010. 
^ Mark Edward Lewis (2009). China's cosmopolitan empire: the Tang dynasty. Harvard University Press. p. 170. ISBN 0-674-03306-X. Retrieved 28 October 2010. 
^ Jacques Gernet (1996). A history of Chinese civilization. Cambridge University Press. p. 294. ISBN 0-521-49781-7. Retrieved 28 October 2010. 
^ a b ed. Walthall 2008, p. 148.
^ Wakeman 1977, p. 79.
^ Crossley, 2010, p. 95.
^ eds. Watson, Ebrey 1991, pp. 179–180.
^ JR, FREDERIC WAKEMAN (1 January 1985). "The Great Enterprise: The Manchu Reconstruction of Imperial Order in Seventeenth-century China". University of California Press – via Google Books. 
^ Naquin 1987, p. 141.
^ Fairbank, Goldman 2006, p. 2006.
^ "Summing up Naquin/Rawski". 
^ eds. Watson, Ebrey 1991, p. 175.
^ Spencer 1990, p. 41.
^ Spence 1988, pp. 4–5.
^ Wang 2004, pp. 215–216 & 219–221.
^ Walthall, Anne (1 January 2008). "Servants of the Dynasty: Palace Women in World History". University of California Press – via Google Books. 
^ "From Ming to Qing". Darkwing.uoregon.edu. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Wirth, Louis. The Ghetto. Transaction Publishers (1997), pp. 29–40. ISBN 1-56000-983-7.
^ "A Short History of the Jewish Tradition". .kenyon.edu. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Ghetto. Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ Encyclopædia Britannica. "Anti-Semitism in modern Europe". Britannica.com. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ "The Jews of Morocco, by Ralph G. Bennettett". Sefarad.org. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Lewis (1984), pp. 181–183
^ Soong, Roland. "Racial Classifications in Latin America", 1999.
^ Cline, Howard F., "Review", The American Historical Review, Vol. 76, No. 5 (Dec. 1971), 1626–1628.
^ a b c "Folk, fører og frifinnelse". 
^ Reinhard Zimmermann (1996). "Southern Cross: Civil Law and Common Law in South Africa". p. 90. Clarendon Press
^ "How the end of slavery led to starvation and death for millions of black Americans". The Guardian. August 24, 2015. 
^ a b c d Leon Litwack, Jim Crow Blues, Magazine of History (OAH Publications, 2004)
^ "Barack Obama legacy: Did he improve US race relations?". BBC. Retrieved August 9, 2017
^ Marion Post Wolcott (October 1939). "Negro going in colored entrance of movie house on Saturday afternoon, Belzoni, Mississippi Delta, Mississippi". Prints & Photographs Online Catalog. Library of Congress Home. Retrieved January 29, 2009. 
^ "Brown at 50". Thenation.com. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Michael Kazin, Rebecca Edwards, Adam Rothman (2009). "The Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political History". p. 245. Princeton University Press
^ a b Foner, Eric (1 February 2012). Give Me Liberty!: An American History (3 ed.). W. W. Norton & Company. p. 696. ISBN 0393935531. 
^ Lanctot|, Neil (2008) "Negro League Baseball: The Rise and Ruin of a Black Institution" p. 4. University of Pennsylvania Press
^ "How 'Black Fives' led to racial integration in basketball". BBC. Retrieved August 21, 2015
^ a b c "The Beatles banned segregated audiences, contract shows". BBC. Retrieved July 17, 2017
^ Schwartz, Larry (2007). "Owens pierced a myth". 
^ Abramovitch, Seth (19 February 2015). "Oscar's First Black Winner Accepted Her Honor in a Segregated 'No Blacks' Hotel in L.A". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 10, 2017. 
^ Abraham Lincoln, "Speeches and Writings 1832-1858: Speeches, Letters, and Miscellaneous Writings : the Lincoln-Douglas Debates, Volume 1". p. 638. Library of America, 1989
^ Walker, Dionne (2007-06-10). "Pioneer of interracial marriage looks back". Associated Press. Retrieved 2015-08-23. 
^ Racial Integrity Act of 1924, Full Text at Wikisource.org
^ Lawing, Charles B. "Loving v. Virginia and the Hegemony of "Race"" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-08-23. [permanent dead link]
^ a b c Staff writer (28 April 2007). "Parliament's law to ban migrant workers who are unmarried from living in residential areas is discriminatory attitudes". Bahrain Centre for Human Rights. Retrieved 11 July 2011. 
^ Tariq Kkonji (23 January 2006). "'No go' rule for bachelor labourers". Gulf Daily News. Retrieved 2 January 2012. 
^ a b Staff writer (28 April 2007). "Bahraini parliament moves to segregate migrants from citizens". Migrant rights. Retrieved 11 July 2011. 
^ a b Mendelson, Rachel (12 March 2012). "Vancouver Income Inequality Study Shows City Segregating Along Racial, Income Lines". Huffington Post. Retrieved 22 February 2015. 
^ "Natives only, please: A look into the eviction of non-natives from the Kahnawake reserve". National Post. Canada. Retrieved 15 February 2011. 
^ a b "Mohawk role model faces eviction over non-native fiancé". National Post. Canada. Retrieved 15 February 2011. [permanent dead link]
^ a b Brennan, Richard (21 February 2010). "Evicting 26 non-natives splits reserve". The Star. Toronto. 
^ a b "Not native? Then leave reserve, Mohawks say". National Post. Canada. Retrieved 15 February 2011. 
^ "The Agenda – The Agenda Blogs – Behind The Headlines". Tvo.org. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. Retrieved 15 February 2011. 
^ "R. v. Kapp et al – Reasons for Judgment". Provincialcourt.bc.ca. Archived from the original on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 15 February 2011. 
^ "2004 BCSC 958 R. v. Kapp et al". Courts.gov.bc.ca. 12 July 2004. Retrieved 15 February 2011. 
^ "Country profile: Fiji". BBC News. 22 December 2009. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Tom Cockrem. "Fiji: History". Lonelyplanet.com. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ "President signs long-awaited Fiji constitution into law" Australia Network News, August 25, 2015
^ on 9 April 2006 UTC (9 April 2006). "UN seminar highlights concern in Fiji over ethnic segregation". Rnzi.com. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ he:חוק איסור לשון הרע
^ Israel and the occupied territories
^ "The Jewish Religious Conflict Tearing at Israel". Time. 2010-06-17. 
^ Discrimination claimed in Modiin Illit haredi schools – Israel News, Ynetnews. Ynetnews.com (1995-06-20). Retrieved on 2010-12-16.
^ Hassidim invite Sephardi girls to school. Jpost.com. Retrieved on 2010-12-16.
^ Schwartz, Tanya (2001). Ethiopian Jewish Immigrants in Israel: The Homeland Postponed. p. 9. ISBN 9780700712380. 
^ "Ethiopian Israelis Accuse State of School Segregation" – via Haaretz. 
^ "יותר ממחצית היהודים: נישואים לערבי הם בגידה – חדשות היום". ynet.co.il. 27 March 2007. Retrieved 12 March 2012. 
^ "Israelis Should Avoid Using Term 'Apartheid'". 
^ Gabe Fisher. Controversial survey ostensibly highlights widespread anti-Arab attitudes in Israel. Times of Israel, 2012
^ Oucho, John (2002). Undercurrents of Ethnic Conflicts in Kenya. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 90-04-12459-4. 
^ a b Kasara, Kimuli (June 2016). "Does Local Ethnic Segregation Lead to Violence?: Evidence from Kenya" (PDF). Columbia University Department of Political Science. 
^ Tannenbaum, Jessie; Valcke, Anthony; McPherson, Andrew (2009-05-01). "Analysis of the Aliens and Nationality Law of the Republic of Liberia". Rochester, NY. SSRN 1795122 . 
^ American Bar Association (May 2009). "ANALYSIS OF THE ALIENS AND NATIONALITY LAW OF THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA" (PDF). ABA Rule of Law Initiative. 
^ Constitution of Malaysia, Article 10
^ "Asia-Pacific". BBC News. 25 June 2007. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ "Infernal ramblings". Infernal ramblings. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ "BBC NEWS - Africa - Mauritanian MPs pass slavery law". 
^ Corrigan, T. (6 September 2007). "Mauritania made slavery illegal last month". The East African. Retrieved 6 June 2013. 
^ "BBC World Service - The Abolition season on BBC World Service". 
^ "Fair elections haunted by racial imbalance". Irinnews.org. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ "War and Genocide in Sudan". Iabolish.org. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ "Mauritania: The real beginning of the end of slavery?". Irinnews.org. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ "Race Relations Act 1976 (Repealed)". 
^ "Britons warned over 'segregation'". BBC News. 22 September 2005. 
^ "Race 'segregation' caused riots". BBC News. 11 December 2001. 
^ a b "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2012. Retrieved 6 December 2011. 
^ PHILLIPS, D. (2002) Movement to opportunity? South Asian relocation in northern cities. End of Award report, ESRC R000238038. School of Geography, University of Leeds. Pg.7.
^ a b Kozol, Jonathan (2005). The Shame of the Nation. Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-5245-5. 
^ "Racial Discrimination and Redlining in Cities" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2006. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ See: Race and health
^ In poor health: Supermarket redlining and urban nutrition, Elizabeth Eisenhauer, GeoJournal Volume 53, Number 2 / February 2001
^ How East New York Became a Ghetto by Walter Thabit. ISBN 0-8147-8267-1. Page 42.
^ Inequality and Segregation R Sethi, R Somanathan – Journal of Political Economy, 2004
^ Keating William Dennis The Suburban Racial Dilemma: Housing and Neighborhoods (1994) Temple University Press. ISBN 1-56639-147-4
^ "Myth of the Melting Pot: America's Racial and Ethnic Divides". Washington post.com. 22 February 1998. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Massey Douglas S. Segregation and stratification: A bio-social perspective Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race (2004), 1: 7–25 Cambridge University Press
^ Inequality and Segregation Rajiv Sethi and Rohini Somanathan Journal of Political Economy, volume 112 (2004), pages 1296–1321
^ Immergluck, D. (2002). "Redlining Redux". Urban Affairs Review. 38 (1): 22–41. doi:10.1177/107808702401097781. 
^ Squires, Gregory D. (2003). "Racial Profiling, Insurance Style: Insurance Redlining and the Uneven Development of Metropolitan Areas". Journal of Urban Affairs. 25 (4): 391–410. doi:10.1111/1467-9906.t01-1-00168. 
^ Zenou Yves, Boccard Nicolas Racial Discrimination and Redlining in Cities (1999)
^ VI De Facto Segregation. Archived from the original on 30 April 2007. Retrieved 9 January 2008. 
^ Bayer, Patrick; Fernando Ferreira; Robert McMillan (August 2007). "A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods" (PDF). Journal of Political Economy. 115 (4): 588–638. doi:10.1086/522381. SSRN 466280 . 
^ Cutler, David M.; Edward L. Glaeser; Jacob L. Vigdor (June 1999). "The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto" (PDF). Journal of Political Economy. 107 (3): 455–506. doi:10.1086/250069. 
^ Kiel K.A., Zabel J.E. (1996). "Housing Price Differentials in U.S. Cities: Household and Neighborhood Racial Effects". Journal of Housing Economics. 5 (2): 143. doi:10.1006/jhec.1996.0008. 
^ Massey D.S., Denton N. A. (1993). American Apartheid. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
^ "Yemen: Akhdam people suffer history of discrimination". IRIN. 1 November 2005. Retrieved 9 January 2008. 


References[edit]

Dobratz, Betty A. and Shanks-Meile, Stephanie L, White Power, White Pride: The White Separatist Movement in the United States, Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001, 384 pages, ISBN 0-8018-6537-9.
Rural Face of White Supremacy: Beyond Jim Crow, by Mark Schultz. University of Illinois Press, 2005, ISBN 0-252-02960-7.
Yin, L. 2009. "The Dynamics of Residential Segregation in Buffalo: An Agent-Based Simulation" Urban Studies 46(13), pp2749–2770.

Further reading[edit]

Grigoryeva, Angelina and Ruef, Martin, "The Historical Demography of Racial Segregation," American Sociological Review 80 (Aug. 2015), 814–42.
Elliott, Mark (2006). Color-Blind Justice: Albion Tourgée and the Quest for Racial Equality from the Civil War to Plessy v. Ferguson. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-518139-5. 
Tushnet, Mark (2008). I dissent: Great Opposing Opinions in Landmark Supreme Court Cases. Boston: Beacon Press. pp. 69–80. ISBN 978-0-8070-0036-6. 
Brook, Thomas (1997). Plessy v. Ferguson: A Brief History with Documents. Boston: Bedford Books. 
Fireside, Harvey (2004). Separate and Unequal: Homer Plessy and the Supreme Court Decision That Legalized Racism. New York: Carroll & Graf. ISBN 0-7867-1293-7. 
Lofgren, Charles A. (1987). The Plessy Case: A Legal-Historical Interpretation.. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Medley, Keith Weldon (2003). We As Freemen: Plessy v. Ferguson. Gretna, LA: Pelican. ISBN 1-58980-120-2.  Review
Chin, Gabriel J. (1996). "The Plessy Myth: Justice Harlan and the Chinese Cases". Iowa Law Review. 82: 151. SSRN 1121505 . 
Nightengale, Carl H. (2012). Segregation: A Global History of Divided Cities. Chicago, London: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-58074-6. 

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Racial segregation



A site dedicated to the life of MLK
Encyclopædia Britannica: Article on Racial Segregation
A study of segregation
Constitutional Law and Race-Conscious Policies in K–12 Education
US racial segregation of proms continue
South Africa's District Six Museum which examines forced segregation







v
t
e


Racism



Types of racism



Against Jews
Aversive
Among White people
Among LGBT people
Among US minorities

Colorism


Among hipsters
Consumer
Covert
Cultural
Environmental
Gendered
Institutional
Internalized
Islamophobia
Nationalist
New racism

Neo-racism


Reverse
Romantic
Sexual
Scientific
Societal
Symbolic





Manifestations
of racism



Anti-miscegenation laws
Expression

in the media
in Charles Dickens' works
in music
in early US films

Censored Eleven


in horror films
in porn
online

on Wikipedia


in sport

baseball
martial arts
soccer


in school curricula
in US politics
Jokes
Slurs


Racial antagonism
Racial determinism
Racial hatred
Racial hierarchy

Casta


Racial polarization
Racial quota
Racial vilification
Racial violence

Race war







Racism by region



Africa
Arab world
Asia
Australia
Europe
Middle East
North America
South America





Related topics



Anti-racism
Psychological impact

Psychoanalysis


Racial transformation
Passing
Racial democracy
Racial fetishism
Race traitor
List of racism-related articles
List of anti-ethnic terms






 Category










v
t
e


Segregation in countries by type



Geographical
(religious)



Bosnia and Herzegovina
Partition of India
Northern Ireland
Greece and Turkey
Partition of Bengal
Saudi Arabia
Bahrain
Myanmar





Racial



Australia
Argentina
Canada
Bahrain
Brazil
Dominican Republic
Fiji
France
Malaysia
Nazi Germany
Poland
Portugal
Rhodesia
South Africa
Spain
Saudization
Emiratisation
United States

schools
Anti-miscegenation laws in the United States







Gender



Islam (in Iran)
Taliban
Saudi Arabia
Judaism
Separatist feminism





Dynamics



Auto-segregation
Balkanization
Ethnic cleansing
Exclusionary zoning
Forced migration
Internment

labor camps


Residential segregation in the United States
Social exclusion





Related
topics



Apartheid

laws


Anti-miscegenation laws
Black Codes
Corporative federalism
Discrimination
Hafrada
Jim Crow laws
Nativism
Nuremberg Laws
Racism
Rankism
Religious intolerance
Reservation in India
Second-class citizen
Separate but equal
Separate school (Canada)
Shunning
Social apartheid
Xenophobia








See also: Desegregation

busing


Pillarisation
 Category

caste
gender
racial


 Commons












v
t
e


Discrimination



General forms



Age
Caste
Class
Color
Disability
Gender
Genotype
Hair
Height
Language
Looks
Mental condition
Race / Ethnicity / Nationality
Rank
Religion
Sex
Sexuality
Size
Species





Social



AIDS stigma
Adultism
Anti-albinism
Anti-autism
Anti-homelessness
Anti-intellectualism
Anti-intersex
Anti-left handedness
Anti-Masonry
Antisemitism
Audism
Binarism
Biphobia
Cronyism
Drug use
Elitism
Ephebiphobia
Ethnopluralism
Fatism
Genderism
Gerontophobia
Heteronormativity
Heterosexism
Homophobia
Islamophobia
Leprosy stigma
Lesbophobia
Mentalism
Misandry
Misogyny
Nepotism
Pedophobia
Pregnancy
Reverse
Sectarianism
Shadism
Supremacism

Arab
Black
White


Transmisogyny
Transphobia
Vegaphobia
Xenophobia





Manifestations



Animal cruelty
Animal testing
Blood libel
Blood sport
Carnism
Compulsory sterilization
Counter-jihad
Cultural genocide
Democide
Disability hate crime
Educational
Economic
Eliminationism
Employment
Enemy of the people
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnocide
Forced conversion
Freak show
Gay bashing
Gendercide
Genital mutilation
Genocide

examples


Glass ceiling
Group libel
Hate crime
Hate group
Hate speech
Homeless dumping
Housing
Indian rolling
LGBT hate crime
Lavender scare
Lynching
Meat eating
Mortgage
Murder music
Occupational segregation
Persecution
Pogrom
Purge
Race war
Red Scare
Religious persecution
Scapegoating
Segregation academy
Sex-selective abortion
Slavery
Slut-shaming
Trans bashing
Victimisation
Violence against women
White flight
White power music
Wife selling
Witch-hunt





Discriminatory
policies



Segregation

age
racial
religious
sex


Age of candidacy
Blood quantum
Cleanliness of blood
Crime of apartheid
Disabilities

Jewish
Catholic


Ethnocracy
Gender pay gap
Gender roles
Gerontocracy
Gerrymandering
Ghetto benches
Internment
Jewish quota
Jim Crow laws
Law for Protection of the Nation
McCarthyism
MSM blood donor controversy
Nonpersons
Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota)
Nuremberg Laws
One-drop rule
Racial quota
Racial steering
Redlining
Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting)
Sodomy law
Ugly law
Voter suppression





Countermeasures



Affirmative action
Ahimsa
Animal rights
Anti-discrimination law
Cultural assimilation
Cultural pluralism
Desegregation
Diversity training
Empowerment
Feminism
Fighting Discrimination
Human rights
Intersex rights
Multiculturalism
Nonviolence
Racial integration
Self-determination
Social integration
Toleration
Vegetarianism
Veganism





Related topics



Allophilia
Anti-cultural sentiment
Anthropocentrism
Assimilation
Bias
Christian privilege
Data discrimination
Dehumanization
Diversity
Ethnic penalty
Eugenics
Intersectionality
Male privilege
Masculism
Multiculturalism
Neurodiversity
Oppression
Police brutality
Political correctness
Power distance
Prejudice
Racial bias in criminal news
Racism by country
Regressive left
Religious intolerance
Second-generation gender bias
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social stigma
Stereotype

threat


White privilege








 Category
 Portal









Authority control



GND: 4115696-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Racial_segregation&oldid=817695804"					Categories: Racial segregationAntisemitismPolitical theoriesPolitics and raceUrban decaySocial inequalityHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse dmy dates from October 2012All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from July 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013Articles with unsourced statements from July 2011Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2017All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from April 2017Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers