This article is about the generic oscillation. For the radiation, see Radio wave. For the electronics, see Radio frequency engineering.
"RF" redirects here. For other uses, see RF (disambiguation).
Radio frequency (RF) is any of the electromagnetic wave frequencies that lie in the range extending from around 7004200000000000000♠20 kHz to 7011300000000000000♠300 GHz, roughly the frequencies used in radio communication.[1] The term does not have an official definition, and different sources specify slightly different upper and lower bounds for the frequency range. RF usually refers to electrical rather than mechanical oscillations. However, mechanical RF systems do exist (see mechanical filter and RF MEMS).
Although radio frequency is a rate of oscillation, the term "radio frequency" or its abbreviation "RF" are used as a synonym for radio – i.e., to describe the use of wireless communication, as opposed to communication via electric wires. Examples include:

Radio-frequency identification
ISO/IEC 14443-2 Radio frequency power and signal interface[2]




Contents


1 Special properties of RF current
2 Radio communication
3 Frequency bands
4 In medicine
5 Effects on the human body

5.1 Extremely low frequency RF
5.2 Microwaves
5.3 General RF exposure


6 As a weapon
7 Measurement
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Special properties of RF current[edit]
Electric currents that oscillate at radio frequencies have special properties not shared by direct current or alternating current of lower frequencies.

Energy from RF currents in conductors can radiate into space as electromagnetic waves (radio waves). This is the basis of radio technology.
RF current does not penetrate deeply into electrical conductors but tends to flow along their surfaces; this is known as the skin effect.
RF currents applied to the body often do not cause the painful sensation and muscular contraction of electric shock that lower frequency currents produce.[3][4] This is because the current changes direction too quickly to trigger depolarization of nerve membranes. However this does not mean RF currents are harmless. They can cause internal injury as well as serious superficial burns called RF burns.
RF current can easily ionize air, creating a conductive path through it. This property is exploited by "high frequency" units used in electric arc welding, which use currents at higher frequencies than power distribution uses.
Another property is the ability to appear to flow through paths that contain insulating material, like the dielectric insulator of a capacitor. This is because capacitive reactance in a circuit decreases with frequency.
In contrast, RF current can be blocked by a coil of wire, or even a single turn or bend in a wire. This is because the inductive reactance of a circuit increases with frequency.
When conducted by an ordinary electric cable, RF current has a tendency to reflect from discontinuities in the cable such as connectors and travel back down the cable toward the source, causing a condition called standing waves. Therefore, RF current must be carried by specialized types of cable called transmission line.

Radio communication[edit]
To receive radio signals an antenna must be used. However, since the antenna will pick up thousands of radio signals at a time, a radio tuner is necessary to tune into a particular frequency (or frequency range).[5] This is typically done via a resonator – in its simplest form, a circuit with a capacitor and an inductor form a tuned circuit. The resonator amplifies oscillations within a particular frequency band, while reducing oscillations at other frequencies outside the band. Another method to isolate a particular radio frequency is by oversampling (which gets a wide range of frequencies) and picking out the frequencies of interest, as done in software defined radio.
The distance over which radio communications is useful depends significantly on things other than wavelength, such as transmitter power, receiver quality, type, size, and height of antenna, mode of transmission, noise, and interfering signals. Ground waves, tropospheric scatter and skywaves can all achieve greater ranges than line-of-sight propagation. The study of radio propagation allows estimates of useful range to be made.
Frequency bands[edit]
Main article: Radio spectrum
The radio spectrum of frequencies is divided into bands with conventional names designated by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU):


Frequency
Wavelength
Designation
Abbreviation[6]
IEEE bands[7]


3–30 Hz
105–104 km
Extremely low frequency
ELF
-


30–300 Hz
104–103 km
Super low frequency
SLF
-


300–3000 Hz
103–100 km
Ultra low frequency
ULF
-


3–30 kHz
100–10 km
Very low frequency
VLF
-


30–300 kHz
10–1 km
Low frequency
LF
-


300 kHz – 3 MHz
1 km – 100 m
Medium frequency
MF
-


3–30 MHz
100–10 m
High frequency
HF
HF


30–300 MHz
10–1 m
Very high frequency
VHF
VHF


300 MHz – 3 GHz
1 m – 10 cm
Ultra high frequency
UHF
UHF, L, S


3–30 GHz
10–1 cm
Super high frequency
SHF
S, C, X, Ku, K, Ka


30–300 GHz
1 cm – 1 mm
Extremely high frequency
EHF
Ka, V, W, mm


300 GHz – 3 THz
1 mm – 0.1 mm
Tremendously high frequency
THF
-


Frequencies of 1 GHz and above are conventionally called microwave,[8] while frequencies of 300 GHz and above are designated millimeter wave. More detailed band designations are given by the standard IEEE letter- band frequency designations[7] and the EU/NATO frequency designations.[9]
In medicine[edit]
Radio frequency (RF) energy, in the form of radiating waves or electrical currents, has been used in medical treatments for over 75 years,[10] generally for minimally invasive surgeries using radiofrequency ablation including the treatment of sleep apnea.[11] Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses radio frequency waves to generate images of the human body.[12]
Radio frequencies at non-ablation energy levels are sometimes used as a form of cosmetic treatment that can tighten skin, reduce fat (lipolysis), or promote healing.[13]
RF diathermy is a medical treatment that uses RF induced heat as a form of physical or occupational therapy and in surgical procedures. It is commonly used for muscle relaxation. It is also a method of heating tissue electromagnetically for therapeutic purposes in medicine. Diathermy is used in physical therapy and occupational therapy to deliver moderate heat directly to pathologic lesions in the deeper tissues of the body. Surgically, the extreme heat that can be produced by diathermy may be used to destroy neoplasms, warts, and infected tissues, and to cauterize blood vessels to prevent excessive bleeding. The technique is particularly valuable in neurosurgery and surgery of the eye. Diathermy equipment typically operates in the short-wave radio frequency (range 1–100 MHz) or microwave energy (range 434–915 MHz).
Pulsed electromagnetic field therapy (PEMF) is a medical treatment that purportedly helps to heal bone tissue reported in a recent NASA study. This method usually employs electromagnetic radiation of different frequencies - ranging from static magnetic fields, through extremely low frequencies (ELF) to higher radio frequencies (RF) administered in pulses.
Effects on the human body[edit]
Extremely low frequency RF[edit]
High-power extremely low-frequency RF with electric field levels in the low kV/m range is known to induce perceivable currents within the human body that create an annoying tingling sensation. These currents will typically flow to ground through a body contact surface such as the feet, or arc to ground where the body is well insulated.[14][15]
Microwaves[edit]
Main article: Microwave burn
Microwave exposure at low-power levels below the Specific absorption rate set by government regulatory bodies are considered harmless non-ionizing radiation and have no effect on the human body. However, levels above the Specific absorption rate set by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission are considered potentially harmful (see Mobile phone radiation and health).
Long-term human exposure to high-levels of microwaves is recognized to cause cataracts according to experimental animal studies and epidemiological studies. The mechanism is unclear but may include changes in heat sensitive enzymes that normally protect cell proteins in the lens. Another mechanism that has been advanced is direct damage to the lens from pressure waves induced in the aqueous humor.
High-power exposure to microwave RF is known to create a range of effects from lower to higher power levels, ranging from unpleasant burning sensation on the skin and microwave auditory effect, to extreme pain at the mid-range, to physical burning and blistering of skin and internals at high power levels (see microwave burn).
General RF exposure[edit]
The 1999 revision of Canadian Safety Code 6 recommended electric field limits of 100 kV/m for pulsed EMF to prevent air breakdown and spark discharges, mentioning rationale related to auditory effect and energy-induced unconsciousness in rats.[16] The pulsed EMF limit was removed in later revisions, however.[17]
For health effects see electromagnetic radiation and health.
For high-power RF (electromagnetic, not electrical) exposure see radiation burn.
For low-power RF exposure see radiation-induced cancer.
As a weapon[edit]
See also: Directed energy weapons § Microwave weapons
A heat ray is an RF harassment device that makes use of microwave radio frequencies to create an unpleasant heating effect in the upper layer of the skin. A publicly known heat ray weapon called the Active Denial System was developed by the US military as an experimental weapon to deny the enemy access to an area. A death ray is a weapon that delivers heat ray electromagnetic energy at levels that injure human tissue. The inventor of the death ray, Harry Grindell Matthews, claims to have lost sight in his left eye while developing his death ray weapon based on a primitive microwave magnetron from the 1920s (note that a typical microwave oven induces a tissue damaging cooking effect inside the oven at about 2 kV/m).
Measurement[edit]






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Since radio frequency radiation has both an electric and a magnetic component, it is often convenient to express intensity of radiation field in terms of units specific to each component. The unit volts per meter (V/m) is used for the electric component, and the unit amperes per meter (A/m) is used for the magnetic component. One can speak of an electromagnetic field, and these units are used to provide information about the levels of electric and magnetic field strength at a measurement location.
Another commonly used unit for characterizing an RF electromagnetic field is power density. Power density is most accurately used when the point of measurement is far enough away from the RF emitter to be located in what is referred to as the far field zone of the radiation pattern.[18] In closer proximity to the transmitter, i.e., in the "near field" zone, the physical relationships between the electric and magnetic components of the field can be complex, and it is best to use the field strength units discussed above. Power density is measured in terms of power per unit area, for example, milliwatts per square centimeter (mW/cm²). When speaking of frequencies in the microwave range and higher, power density is usually used to express intensity since exposures that might occur would likely be in the far field zone.
See also[edit]

Amplitude modulation ("AM")
Electromagnetic Interference
Electromagnetic radiation
Electromagnetic spectrum
EMF measurement
Frequency allocation
Frequency bandwidth
Frequency modulation ("FM")
Plastic welding
Pulsed electromagnetic field therapy
Spectrum management

References[edit]



^ "Definition of RADIO FREQUENCY". Merriam-Webster. Encyclopædia Britannica. n.d. Retrieved 6 August 2015. 
^ "ISO/IEC 14443-2:2001 Identification cards — Contactless integrated circuit(s) cards — Proximity cards — Part 2: Radio frequency power and signal interface". Iso.org. 2010-08-19. Retrieved 2011-11-08. 
^ Curtis, Thomas Stanley (1916). High Frequency Apparatus: Its Construction and Practical Application. USA: Everyday Mechanics Company. p. 6. 
^ Mieny, C. J. (2003). Principles of Surgical Patient Care (2nd ed.). New Africa Books. p. 136. ISBN 9781869280055. 
^ Brain, Marshall (2000-12-07). "How Radio Works". HowStuffWorks.com. Retrieved 2009-09-11. 
^ Jeffrey S. Beasley; Gary M. Miller (2008). Modern Electronic Communication (9th ed.). pp. 4–5. ISBN 978-0132251136. 
^ a b IEEE Std 521-2002 Standard Letter Designations for Radar-Frequency Bands, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 2002.
^ Kumar, Sanjay; Shukla, Saurabh (2014). Concepts and Applications of Microwave Engineering. PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. p. 3. ISBN 8120349350. 
^ Leonid A. Belov; Sergey M. Smolskiy; Victor N. Kochemasov (2012). Handbook of RF, Microwave, and Millimeter-Wave Components. Artech House. pp. 27–28. ISBN 978-1-60807-209-5. 
^ Ruey J. Sung & Michael R. Lauer (2000). Fundamental approaches to the management of cardiac arrhythmias. Springer. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-7923-6559-4. 
^ Melvin A. Shiffman; Sid J. Mirrafati; Samuel M. Lam; Chelso G. Cueteaux (2007). Simplified Facial Rejuvenation. Springer. p. 157. ISBN 978-3-540-71096-7. 
^ Bethge, K. (2004-04-27). Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 9783540208051. 
^ Noninvasive Radio Frequency for Skin Tightening and Body Contouring, Frontline Medical Communications, 2013
^ Limits of Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields in the Frequency Range from 3 kHz to 300 GHz, Canada Safety Code 6, page 63
^ Extremely Low Frequency Fields Environmental Health Criteria Monograph No.238, chapter 5, page 121, WHO
^ Limits of Human Exposure to Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields in the Frequency Range from 3 kHz to 300 GHz, Canada Safety Code 6, page 62
^ http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/pubs/radiation/radio_guide-lignes_direct/index-eng.php Safety Code 6: Health Canada's Radiofrequency Exposure Guidelines - Environmental and Workplace Health - Health Canada
^ Broadcasters, National Association of (1996). Antenna & Tower Regulation Handbook. NAB, Science and Technology Department. ISBN 9780893242367. 



External links[edit]

Definition of frequency bands (VLF, ELF … etc.) IK1QFK Home Page (vlf.it)
Radio, light, and sound waves, conversion between wavelength and frequency
RF Terms Glossary







v
t
e


Radio spectrum (ITU)









ELF
3 Hz/100 Mm
30 Hz/10 Mm




SLF
30 Hz/10 Mm
300 Hz/1 Mm




ULF
300 Hz/1 Mm
3 kHz/100 km




VLF
3 kHz/100 km
30 kHz/10 km




LF
30 kHz/10 km
300 kHz/1 km




MF
300 kHz/1 km
3 MHz/100 m




HF
3 MHz/100 m
30 MHz/10 m




VHF
30 MHz/10 m
300 MHz/1 m




UHF
300 MHz/1 m
3 GHz/100 mm




SHF
3 GHz/100 mm
30 GHz/10 mm




EHF
30 GHz/10 mm
300 GHz/1 mm




THF
300 GHz/1 mm
3 THz/0.1 mm















v
t
e


Electromagnetic spectrum




← higher frequencies       longer wavelengths →

Gamma rays
X-rays
Ultraviolet
Visible
Infrared
Terahertz radiation
Microwave
Radio





Visible (optical)



Violet
Blue
Green
Yellow
Orange
Red





Microwaves



W band
V band
Q band
Ka band
K band
Ku band
X band
S band
C band
L band





Radio



EHF
SHF
UHF
VHF
HF
MF
LF
VLF
ULF
SLF
ELF





Wavelength types



Microwave
Shortwave
Medium wave
Longwave












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Analog television broadcasting topics



Systems



180-line
405-line ( System A )
441-line
525-line ( System J , System M )
625-line ( System B , System C , System D , System G , System H , System I , System K , System L , System N )
819-line ( System E , System F )





Color systems



NTSC
PAL
PAL-M
PAL-S
PALplus
SECAM





Video



Back porch and front porch
Black level
Blanking level
Chrominance
Chrominance subcarrier
Colorburst
Color killer
Color TV
Composite video
Frame (video)
Horizontal scan rate
Horizontal blanking interval
Luma
Nominal analogue blanking
Overscan
Raster scan
Safe area
Television lines
Vertical blanking interval
White clipper





Sound



Multichannel television sound
NICAM
Sound-in-Syncs
Zweikanalton





Modulation



Frequency modulation
Quadrature amplitude modulation
Vestigial sideband modulation (VSB)





Transmission



Amplifiers
Antenna (radio)
Broadcast transmitter/Transmitter station
Cavity amplifier
Differential gain
Differential phase
Diplexer
Dipole antenna
Dummy load
Frequency mixer
Intercarrier method
Intermediate frequency
Output power of an analog TV transmitter
Pre-emphasis
Residual carrier
Split sound system
Superheterodyne transmitter
Television receive-only
Direct-broadcast satellite television
Television transmitter
Terrestrial television
Transposer





Frequencies & Bands



Frequency offset
Microwave transmission
Television channel frequencies
UHF
VHF





Propagation



Beam tilt
Distortion
Earth bulge
Field strength in free space
Knife-edge effect
Noise (electronics)
Null fill
Path loss
Radiation pattern
Skew
Television interference





Testing



Distortionmeter
Field strength meter
Vectorscope
VIT signals
Zero reference pulse





Artifacts



Dot crawl
Ghosting
Hanover bars
Sparklies









Authority control



GND: 4160130-0
NDL: 00566770











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radio_frequency&oldid=818550109"					Categories: Radio spectrumRadio technologyWavesElectromagnetic spectrumTelevision terminologyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2017All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers