Not to be confused with Radio syndication.
There are two types of radio networks currently in use around the world: the one-to-many broadcast network commonly used for public information and mass media entertainment; and the two-way radio type used more commonly for public safety and public services such as police, fire, taxicabs, and delivery services. Cell Phones are able to send and receive simultaneously by using two different frequencies at the same time. Many of the same components and much of the same basic technology applies to all three.
The Two-way type of radio network shares many of the same technologies and components as the Broadcast type radio network but is generally set up with fixed broadcast points (transmitters) with co-located receivers and mobile receivers/transmitters or Transceivers. In this way both the fixed and mobile radio units can communicate with each other over broad geographic regions ranging in size from small single cities to entire states/provinces or countries. There are many ways in which multiple fixed transmit/receive sites can be interconnected to achieve the range of coverage required by the jurisdiction or authority implementing the system: conventional wireless links in numerous frequency bands, fibre-optic links, or micro-wave links. In all of these cases the signals are typically backhauled to a central switch of some type where the radio message is processed and resent (repeated) to all transmitter sites where it is required to be heard.
In contemporary two-way radio systems a concept called trunking is commonly used to achieve better efficiency of radio spectrum use and provide very wide-ranging coverage with no switching of channels required by the mobile radio user as it roams throughout the system coverage. Trunking of two-way radio is identical to the concept used for cellular phone systems where each fixed and mobile radio is specifically identified to the system Controller and its operation is switched by the controller. See also the entries Two-way radio and Trunked radio system to see more detail on how various types of radios and radio systems work.



Contents


1 Broadcasting networks
2 List of radio networks

2.1 Australia
2.2 Brazil
2.3 Canada
2.4 People's Republic of China
2.5 India
2.6 Indonesia
2.7 Iran
2.8 Ireland
2.9 Japan
2.10 Republic of Korea
2.11 New Zealand
2.12 Pakistan
2.13 Philippines
2.14 Poland
2.15 Turkey
2.16 United Kingdom
2.17 United States
2.18 International


3 See also



Broadcasting networks[edit]
See also: Broadcast network
The broadcast type of radio network is a network system which distributes programming to multiple stations simultaneously, or slightly delayed, for the purpose of extending total coverage beyond the limits of a single broadcast signal. The resulting expanded audience for radio programming or information essentially applies the benefits of mass-production to the broadcasting enterprise. A radio network has two sales departments, one to package and sell programs to radio stations, and one to sell the audience of those programs to advertisers.
Most radio networks also produce much of their programming. Originally, radio networks owned some or all of the stations that broadcast the network's radio format programming. Presently however, there are many networks that do not own any stations and only produce and/or distribute programming. Similarly station ownership does not always indicate network affiliation. A company might own stations in several different markets and purchase programming from a variety of networks.
Radio networks rose rapidly with the growth of regular broadcasting of radio to home listeners in the 1920s. This growth took various paths in different places. In Britain the BBC was developed with public funding, in the form of a broadcast receiver license, and a broadcasting monopoly in its early decades. In contrast, in the United States various competing commercial broadcasting networks arose funded by advertising revenue. In that instance, the same corporation that owned or operated the network often manufactured and marketed the listener’s radio.
Major technical challenges to be overcome when distributing programs over long distances are maintaining signal quality and managing the number of switching/relay points in the signal chain. Early on, programs were sent to remote stations (either owned or affiliated) by various methods, including leased telephone lines, pre-recorded gramophone records and audio tape. The world's first all-radio, non-wireline network was claimed to be the Rural Radio Network, a group of six upstate New York FM stations that began operation in June 1948. Terrestrial microwave relay, a technology later introduced to link stations, has been largely supplanted by coaxial cable, fiber, and satellite, which usually offer superior cost-benefit ratios.
Many early radio networks evolved into Television networks.
List of radio networks[edit]
Australia[edit]
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
Brazil[edit]

Radio Jovem Pan
Radio CBN
Radio Bandeirantes
BandNews FM
MiliciaSat (catholic network)
Radio Globo
Transamérica Pop, Hits

Canada[edit]

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation

CBC Radio One
CBC Radio 2
CBC Radio 3
Première Chaîne
Espace musique
Bande à part


MBC Radio
Corus Radio Network
Énergie
Rouge FM
Rythme FM
Sportsnet Radio
TSN Radio


Defunct


CNR Radio Network (1923-1933)
Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission (1932-1936)
Broadcasting Corporation of Newfoundland (1939-1949)
Dominion Network (1944-1962)
Trans-Canada Network (1944-1962)
CKO (1977-1989)
Pelmorex Radio Network (1990-1999)
The Team (2001-2002)
Aboriginal Voices Radio Network (2002-2016)

People's Republic of China[edit]

China National Radio
China Radio International
Shanghai Media Group

India[edit]

All India Radio (AIR)
Vividh Bharati
Radio City (91.1)
Big FM (92.7)
Radio One (94.3)
Radio Mirchi (98.3)
Red FM (93.5)
Suryan FM (93.5)
Hello FM (106.4)
chaska (95.0)
Fever 104

Indonesia[edit]

Radio Republik Indonesia (RRI)
Elshinta Radio
Radio Sonora

Iran[edit]

All Iranian radio (many ch.)

Ireland[edit]

RTÉ Radio 1
RTÉ 2fm
RTÉ lyric fm
RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta
Today FM

Japan[edit]

NHK Radio 1
NHK Radio 2
JRN
NRN
NHK FM
JFN
JFL
MegaNet

Republic of Korea[edit]

Korean Broadcasting System
Munhwa Broadcasting Corporation
Seoul Broadcasting System

New Zealand[edit]
Almost all radio stations in New Zealand are part of a radio network and most are network-owned.

Radio New Zealand - State owned non commercial

Radio New Zealand Concert
Radio New Zealand National


MediaWorks Radio - Commercial network of stations

George FM
Mai FM
More FM - Local programming in most markets between 6am and 1pm.
Radio Live
The Breeze - Local in Wellington and Christchurch
The Edge FM
The Rock
The Sound


The Radio Network - Commercial network of stations

Coast
Flava
Newstalk ZB
Radio Hauraki
Radio Sport
The Hits - Local breakfast in some markets, Local 9am - 3pm in other markets.
ZM


Rhema Group

Life FM
New Zealand's Rhema
Southern Star


Maori Radio Network

Pakistan[edit]

Radio Pakistan
Radio Pakwafa
Radio Bakwas
Apna FM
Hum FM
City FM 89
FM 98
FM 103
FM 105

Philippines[edit]

ABS-CBN Broadcasting Corporation
Advanced Media Broadcasting System
Aliw Broadcasting Corporation
Associated Broadcasting Company
Audiovisual Communicators, Inc.
Bombo Radyo Philippines
Bicolandia Broadcasting Network
Brainstone Broadcasting Inc.
Catholic Media Network
Christian Era Broadcasting Service
Delta Broadcasting System, Inc.
Eagle Broadcasting Corporation
Empire Entertainment
Far East Broadcasting Company
FBS Radio Network Inc.
GMA Network
Intercontinental Broadcasting Corporation
Manila Broadcasting Company
Mareco Broadcasting Network
Nation Broadcasting Corporation
National Broadcasting System
Palawan Broadcasting Corporation
PBN Broadcasting Network
Philippine Broadcasting Service
Progressive Broadcasting Corporation
Quest Broadcasting Inc.
Radio Mindanao Network
Radio Philippines Network
Rajah Broadcasting Network
Raven Broadcasting Corporation
Real Radio Network Inc.
RBN-BBC Broadcasting Corporation
Regional Broadcasting Corporation
Sonshine Media Network International
Southern Broadcasting Network
The Radio Partners, Inc.
Vanguard Radio Network
ZOE Broadcasting Network

Poland[edit]

Public stations in Poland

Polskie Radio

Program 1 (Jedynka) - (news, current affairs, easy listening music, focused at listeners aged 40–64) - AM, FM, DAB+ and the internet
Program 2 (Dwójka) - (Classical music, drama, comedy, literature) - FM, DAB+ and the internet
Program 3 (Trójka) - (Rock, alternative, Middle of the Road, focused at listeners aged 25–49) - FM, DAB+ and the internet
Program 4 (Czwórka) - (Dance, R&B, Reggae, Rap, Soul, focused at listeners aged 15–29) - FM, DAB+ and the internet
Polskie Radio Dla Zagranicy - (external service in English, Ukrainian, Russian, Belarusian) - AM, FM, DAB+, satellite and the internet
Rolskie Radio 24
Polskie Radio Rytm
Polskie Radio Regionalna




Non-commercial radio stations in Poland

Radio Maryja (catholic)
Radio Orthodoxia
Radio Jutrzenka


Commercial radio stations in Poland

"Bauer Media Group" company:

RMF FM - hot adult contemporary radio (Target Demographic 18-44) (nationwide)
RMF MAXXX
RMF Classic
Radio GRA


Eurozet

Radio Zet - hot adult contemporary radio (Target Demographic 21-49) (nationwide)
Radio Zet Gold
Radio Zet Chillil
Antyradio - rock and metal music (3 local stations)


"Time" company:

Radio Eska - contemporary hit radio (Target Demographic 13-29) (40 local stations)
Eska Rock - mainly rock music (local station broadcasting in Warsaw)
VOX FM - mostly Disco Polo
Radio WAWA - only polish music (8 local stations)


Joint project of Eurozet and "Time:"

Radio Plus - upbeat oldies from the 1970s to 1990s (Target Demographic 40 and older) (18 local stations)


"Agora" company:

TOK FM - rolling news, talk, current affars
Zlote Przeboje - mainly oldies music (Target Demographic 30-49) (22 local stations)
Rock Radio - rock music (Target Demographic 18-39) (7 local stations)
Blue FM - local station in Poznań


other:

Muzo.fm - music and news stations
Radio Kolor - local station in Warsaw
Radio Alfa - local station in Kraków
Radio Parada - local station in Łódź
Radio Kaszëbë - local station broadcasting in north-central Poland
and over 100 other local stations





Turkey[edit]

All Turkish radio

United Kingdom[edit]

Bauer Radio
British Broadcasting Corporation
Capital FM Network
Heart Network
Real Radio
XFM

United States[edit]
Further information: List of United States radio networks
International[edit]

Radio Rainbow International the voice of peace
RadioBalkanNET
United Nations Radio

See also[edit]

Lists of radio stations in Africa
Lists of radio stations in Asia
Lists of radio stations in Europe
Lists of radio stations in North America
Lists of radio stations in South America
Lists of radio stations in the South Pacific and Oceania
Wireless network







v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radio_network&oldid=810680417"					Categories: Radio networks