This article is about a form of human sexual assault. For rape among non-human animals, see Sexual coercion. For other uses, see Rape (disambiguation).


Rape





Tarquin and Lucretia by Titian. The rape of Lucretia started events that led to the overthrow of the Roman Kingdom and establishment of the Roman Republic, as well as her suicide. Many artists and writers were inspired by the story, including Shakespeare, Botticelli, Rembrandt, Dürer, Artemisia Gentileschi, Geoffrey Chaucer, and Thomas Heywood.


Classification and external resources


Specialty
emergency medicine


ICD-10
T74.2, Y05


ICD-9-CM
E960.1


MedlinePlus
001955


eMedicine
article/806120


MeSH
D011902



[edit on Wikidata]





Rape


Types




Acquaintance rape
Date rape
Gray rape
Marital rape
Statutory rape
Prison rape
Gang rape
Serial rape
Campus rape
Corrective rape
Genocidal rape
Unacknowledged rape
Rape by deception




Effects and motivations




Effects and aftermath
Pregnancy from rape
Rape trauma syndrome
Causes
Post-assault mistreatment
Weinstein effect
Sociobiological theories
Rape culture




By country




Afghanistan
Belgium
China
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Egypt
Finland
France
Germany
India
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States




During conflicts




Nanking Massacre
Rape during the liberation of Poland
Rape during the occupation of Germany
Rape during the Bosnian War
Rape during the Bangladesh Liberation War
Rape during the Rwandan Genocide
Rape during the Darfur genocide
Rape during the Kashmir conflict
Rape during the Syrian Civil War
Rape during Iraqi insurgency




Laws




Rape shield law
False accusation of rape
Rape investigation
Rape kit




Statistics/ related




History of rape
Date rape drug
Rape statistics
Rape by gender

Rape of males


Anti-rape device
Rape crisis centers
Rape investigation
Rape myth
Rape pornography
Rape and revenge films
Rape fantasy
Rape schedule
Anti-rape movement






Portals
Criminal justice
Law







v
t
e





Rape is a type of sexual assault usually involving sexual intercourse or other forms of sexual penetration carried out against a person without that person's consent. The act may be carried out by physical force, coercion, abuse of authority, or against a person who is incapable of giving valid consent, such as one who is unconscious, incapacitated, has an intellectual disability or is below the legal age of consent.[1][2][3] The term rape is sometimes used interchangeably with the term sexual assault.[4]
The rate of reporting, prosecuting and convicting for rape varies between jurisdictions. Internationally, the incidence of rapes recorded by the police during 2008 ranged, per 100,000 people, from 0.2 in Azerbaijan to 92.9 in Botswana with 6.3 in Lithuania as the median.[5] Worldwide, rape is primarily committed by males.[6] Rape by strangers is usually less common than rape by persons the victim knows, and male-on-male and female-on-female prison rapes are common and may be the least reported forms of rape.[7][8][9]
Widespread and systematic rape (e.g., war rape) and sexual slavery can occur during international conflict. These practices are crimes against humanity and war crimes. Rape is also recognized as an element of the crime of genocide when committed with the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a targeted ethnic group.
People who have been raped can be traumatized and develop posttraumatic stress disorder.[10] Serious injuries can result along with the risk of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections. A person may face violence or threats from the rapist, and, in some cultures, from the victim's family and relatives.[11][12][13]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Definitions

2.1 General
2.2 Scope
2.3 Consent


3 Motives
4 Effects

4.1 Emotional and psychological
4.2 Physical
4.3 Sexually transmitted infections
4.4 Victim blaming, secondary victimization and other mistreatment

4.4.1 Honor killings and forced marriages




5 Treatment

5.1 Non-genital injuries

5.1.1 Physical assessment
5.1.2 Diagnostic testing
5.1.3 Forensic sampling


5.2 After the examination
5.3 Genital injuries
5.4 Infections
5.5 Emotional and psychiatric


6 Prevention
7 Statistics and epidemiology

7.1 Worldwide
7.2 United States


8 Prosecution

8.1 Reporting
8.2 Conviction


9 False accusation
10 History

10.1 Definitions and evolution of laws
10.2 Social issues
10.3 In war


11 See also
12 Notes
13 References
14 Further reading
15 External links



Etymology
The term rape originates from the Latin rapere (supine stem raptum), "to snatch, to grab, to carry off".[14][15] Since the 14th century, the term has come to mean "to seize and take away by force".[16] In Roman law, the carrying off of a woman by force, with or without intercourse, constituted "raptus".[15] In Medieval English law the same term could refer to either kidnapping or rape in the modern sense of "sexual violation".[14] The original meaning of "carry off by force" is still found in some phrases, such as "rape and pillage", or in titles, such as the stories of the Rape of the Sabine Women and The Rape of Europa or the poem The Rape of the Lock, which is about the theft of a lock of hair.
Definitions
General
Main articles: Types of rape and Laws regarding rape
See also: Rape by gender
Rape is defined in most jurisdictions as sexual intercourse, or other forms of sexual penetration, committed by a perpetrator against a victim without their consent.[17] The definition of rape is inconsistent between governmental health organizations, law enforcement, health providers, and legal professions.[18] It has varied historically and culturally.[17][18] Originally, rape had no sexual connotation and is still used in other contexts in English. In Roman law, it or raptus was classified as a form of crimen vis, "crime of assault".[19][20] Raptus described the abduction of a woman against the will of the man under whose authority she lived, and sexual intercourse was not a necessary element. Other definitions of rape have changed over time. In the US, a husband could not be charged with raping his wife until 1979.[21] In the 1950s, in some states in the U.S., a white woman having consensual sex with a black man was considered rape.[22]
Until 2012, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) considered rape a crime solely committed by men against women. In 2012, they changed their definition from "The carnal knowledge of a female forcibly and against her will" to "The penetration, no matter how slight, of the vagina or anus with any body part or object, or oral penetration by a sex organ of another person, without the consent of the victim." The previous definition, which had remained unchanged since 1927, was considered outdated and narrow. The updated definition includes recognizing any gender of victim and perpetrator and that rape with an object can be as traumatic as penile/vaginal rape. The bureau further describes instances when the victim is unable to give consent because of mental or physical incapacity. It recognizes that a victim can be incapacitated by drugs and alcohol and unable to give valid consent. The definition does not change federal or state criminal codes or impact charging and prosecution on the federal, state or local level; it rather means that rape will be more accurately reported nationwide.[23][24]
Health organizations and agencies have also expanded rape beyond traditional definitions. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines rape as a form of sexual assault,[25] while the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) includes rape in their definition of sexual assault; they term rape a form of sexual violence. The CDC lists other acts of coercive, non-consensual sexual activity that may or may not include rape, including drug-facilitated sexual assault, acts in which a victim is made to penetrate a perpetrator or someone else, intoxication where the victim is unable to consent (due to incapacitation or being unconscious), non-physically forced penetration which occurs after a person is pressured verbally (by intimidation or misuse of authority to force to consent), or completed or attempted forced penetration of a victim via unwanted physical force (including using a weapon or threatening to use a weapon).[26][27]
Some countries or jurisdictions differentiate between rape and sexual assault by defining rape as involving penile penetration of the vagina, or solely penetration involving the penis, while other types of non-consensual sexual activity are called sexual assault.[28][29] Scotland, for example, emphasizes penile penetration, requiring that the sexual assault must have been committed by use of a penis to qualify as rape.[30][31] The 1998 International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda defines rape as "a physical invasion of a sexual nature committed on a person under circumstances which are coercive".[17] In other cases, the term rape has been phased out of legal use in favor of terms such as sexual assault or criminal sexual conduct.[32]
Scope
Victims of rape or sexual assault come from a wide range of genders, ages, sexual orientations, ethnicitities, geographical locations, cultures and degrees of impairment or disability. Incidences of rape are classified into a number of categories, and they may describe the relationship of the perpetrator to the victim and the context of the sexual assault. These include date rape, gang rape, marital rape, incestual rape, child sexual abuse, prison rape, acquaintance rape, war rape and statutory rape. Forced sexual activity can be committed over a long period of time with little to no physical injury.[33][34][35]
Consent
Lack of consent is key to the definition of rape.[3] Consent is affirmative "informed approval, indicating a freely given agreement" to sexual activity.[26] It is not necessarily expressed verbally, and may instead be overtly implied from actions, but the absence of objection does not constitute consent.[36] Lack of consent may result from either forcible compulsion by the perpetrator or an inability to consent on the part of the victim (such as persons who are asleep, intoxicated or otherwise mentally compromised).[37] Sexual intercourse with a person below the age of consent, i.e., the age at which legal competence is established, is referred to as statutory rape.[3]
Duress is the situation when the person is threatened by force or violence, and may result in the absence of an objection to sexual activity. This can lead to the presumption of consent.[37] Duress may be actual or threatened force or violence against the victim or someone close to the victim. Even blackmail may constitute duress. Abuse of power may constitute duress. For instance, in the Philippines, a man commits rape if he engages in sexual intercourse with a woman "By means of fraudulent machination or grave abuse of authority".[38] The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in its landmark 1998 judgment used a definition of rape which did not use the word 'consent': "a physical invasion of a sexual nature committed on a person under circumstances which are coercive."[39]
Marital rape, or spousal rape, is non-consensual sex in which the perpetrator is the victim's spouse. It is a form of partner rape, domestic violence, and sexual abuse. Once widely accepted or ignored by law, spousal rape is now denounced by international conventions and is increasingly criminalized. Still, in many countries, spousal rape either remains legal, or is illegal but widely tolerated and accepted as a husband's prerogative. In 2006, the UN Secretary-General's In-depth study on all forms of violence against women stated that (pg 113): "Marital rape may be prosecuted in at least 104 States. Of these, 32 have made marital rape a specific criminal offence, while the remaining 74 do not exempt marital rape from general rape provisions. Marital rape is not a prosecutable offense in at least 53 States. Four States criminalize marital rape only when the spouses are judicially separated. Four States are considering legislation that would allow marital rape to be prosecuted."[40] Since 2006, several other states have outlawed marital rape (for example Thailand in 2007[41]). In the US, the criminalization of marital rape started in the mid-1970s and in 1993 North Carolina became the last state to make marital rape illegal.[42] In many countries, it is not clear if marital rape may or may not be prosecuted under ordinary rape laws. In the absence of a spousal rape law, it may be possible to bring prosecution for acts of forced sexual intercourse inside marriage by prosecuting, through the use of other criminal offenses (such as assault based offenses), the acts of violence or criminal threat that were used to obtain submission.[43]
Consent may be complicated by law, language, context, culture and sexual orientation. Verbalized 'no' to sex may be interpreted as 'keep trying', or even 'yes' by offenders. Some may believe that when injuries are not visible, the woman must have consented. If a man solicits sex from another man, the pursuer may be regarded as virile.[44]
Motives
Further information: Causes of sexual violence
The WHO states that the principal factors that lead to the perpetration of sexual violence against women, including rape, are:[45]

beliefs in family honor and sexual purity;
attitudes of male sexual entitlement;
weak legal sanctions for sexual violence.

No single facet explains the motivation for rape; the underlying motives of rapists can be multi-faceted. Several factors have been proposed: anger, power, sadism, sexual gratification, or evolutionary proclivities.[46][47] However, some factors have significant causal evidence supporting them. American clinical psychologist David Lisak, co-author of a 2002 study of undetected rapists,[48] says that compared with non-rapists, both undetected and convicted rapists are measurably more angry at women and more motivated by a desire to dominate and control them, are more impulsive, disinhibited, anti-social, hypermasculine, and less empathic.[49]
Sexual aggression is often considered a masculine identity characteristic of manhood in some male groups and is significantly correlated to the desire to be held higher in esteem among male peers.[50] Sexually aggressive behavior among young men has been correlated with gang or group membership as well as having other delinquent peers.[51][52] Gang rape is often perceived by male perpetrators as a justified method of discouraging or punishing what they consider as immoral behavior among women for example wearing short skirts or visiting bars. In some areas in Papua New Guinea, women can actually be punished by public gang rape usually through permission by elders.[53]
Effects
One metric used by the WHO to determine the severity of global rates of coercive, forced sexual activity was the question "Have you ever been forced to have sexual intercourse against your will?" Asking this question produced higher positive response rates than being asked, whether they had ever been abused or raped.[54]
The WHO report describes the consequences of sexual abuse:


Gynecological disorders
Reproductive disorders
Sexual disorders
Infertility
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Pregnancy complications
Miscarriage
Sexual dysfunction
Acquiring sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS
Mortality from injuries
Increased risk of suicide
Depression
Chronic pain
Psychosomatic disorders
Unsafe abortion
Unwanted pregnancy (see Pregnancy from rape)[54]


Emotional and psychological
Frequently, victims may not recognize what happened to them was rape. Some may remain in denial for years afterwards.[55][56] Confusion over whether or not their experience constitutes rape is typical, especially for victims of psychologically coerced rape. Women may not identify their victimization as rape for many reasons such as feelings of shame, embarrassment, non-uniform legal definitions, reluctance to define the friend/partner as a rapist, or because they have internalized victim-blaming attitudes.[56] The public perceives these behaviors as 'counterintuitive' and therefore, as evidence of a dishonest woman.[55]
During the assault, a person will respond with fight, flight, freeze, friend (sometimes called fawn),[57] or flop. Victims may react in ways they did not anticipate. After the rape, they may be uncomfortable/frustrated with and not understand their reactions.[58][59] Most victims respond by 'freezing up' or becoming compliant and cooperative during the rape. These are common survival responses of all mammals.[60] This can cause confusion for others and the person assaulted. An assumption is that someone being raped would call for help or struggle. A struggle would result in torn clothes or injuries.[58]
Dissociation can occur during the assault.[58] Memories may be fragmented especially immediately afterwards. They may consolidate with time and sleep.[58] A man or boy who is raped may be stimulated and even ejaculate during the experience of the rape. A woman or girl may orgasm during a sexual assault. This may become a source of shame and confusion for those assaulted along with those who were around them.[61][62][63]
Trauma symptoms may not show until years after the sexual assault occurred. Immediately following a rape, the survivor may react outwardly in a wide range of ways, from expressive to closed down; common emotions include distress, anxiety, shame, revulsion, helplessness, and guilt.[58] Denial is not uncommon.[58]
In the weeks following the rape, the survivor may develop symptoms of post traumatic stress syndrome and may develop wide array of psychosomatic complaints.[58][64]:310 PTSD symptoms include re-experiencing of the rape, avoiding things associated with the rape, numbness, and increased anxiety and startle response.[58] The likelihood of sustained severe symptoms is higher if the rapist confined or restrained the person, if the person being raped believed the rapist would kill him or her, the person who was raped was very young or very old, and if the rapist was someone he or she knew.[58] The likelihood of sustained severe symptoms is also higher if people around the survivor ignore (or are ignorant of) the rape or blame the rape survivor.[58]
Most people recover from rape in three to four months, but many have persistent PTSD that may manifest in anxiety, depression, substance abuse, irritability, anger, flashbacks, or nightmares.[58] In addition, rape survivors may have long term generalised anxiety disorder, may develop one or more specific phobias, major depressive disorder, and may experience difficulties with resuming their social life, and with sexual functioning.[58] People who have been raped are at higher risk of suicide.[61][65]
Men experience similar psychological effects of being raped, but they are less likely to seek counseling.[61]
Another effect of rape and sexual assault is the stress created in those who study rape or counsel the survivors. This is called vicarious traumatization.[66]
Physical
The presence or absence of physical injury may be used to determine whether a rape has occurred.[67] Those who have experienced sexual assault yet have no physical trauma may be less inclined to report to the authorities or to seek health care.[68]
While penetrative rape generally does not involve the use of a condom, in some cases a condom is used. This significantly reduces the likelihood of pregnancy and disease transmission, both to the victim and to the rapist. Rationales for condom use include: avoiding contracting infections or diseases (particularly HIV), especially in cases of rape of sex workers or in gang rape (to avoid contracting infections or diseases from fellow rapists); eliminating evidence, making prosecution more difficult (and giving a sense of invulnerability); giving the appearance of consent (in cases of acquaintance rape); and thrill from planning and the use of the condom as an added prop. Concern for the victim is generally not considered a factor.[69]
Sexually transmitted infections
See also: Virgin cleansing myth and Prison rape in the United States § Sexually transmitted diseases




A street sign in South Africa, appealing to men not to rape children in the belief that it will cure them of HIV/AIDS.


Those who have been raped have relatively more reproductive tract infections than those not been raped.[70] The HIV virus can be transmitted through rape. Acquiring AIDS through rape puts people risk of suffering psychological problems. Acquiring HIV through rape may lead to the in behaviors that create risk of injecting drugs.[71] Acquiring sexually transmitted infections increases the risk of aquring HIV.[70] The belief that having sex with a virgin can cure HIV/AIDS exists in parts of Africa. This leads to the rape of girls and women.[72][73][74][75] The claim that the myth drives either HIV infection or child sexual abuse in South Africa is disputed by researchers Rachel Jewkes and Helen Epstein.[76]
Victim blaming, secondary victimization and other mistreatment
Main articles: Victim blaming and Post-assault treatment of sexual assault victims
Society's treatment of victims has the potential to exacerbate their trauma.[56] People who have been raped or sexually assaulted are sometimes blamed and considered responsible for the crime.[18] This refers to the just world fallacy and rape myth acceptance that certain victim behaviors (such as being intoxicated, flirting or wearing sexually provocative clothing) may encourage rape.[77][78] In many cases, victims are said to have "asked for it" because of not resisting their assault or violating female gender expectations.[79][78] A global survey of attitudes toward sexual violence by the Global Forum for Health Research shows that victim-blaming concepts are at least partially accepted in many countries. Women who have been raped are sometimes deemed to have behaved improperly. Usually, these are cultures where there is a significant social divide between the freedoms and status afforded to men and women.[80]

"Rape victims are blamed more when they resist the attack later in the rape encounter rather than earlier (Kopper, 1996), which seems to suggest the stereotype that these women are engaging in token resistance (Malamuth & Brown, 1994; Muehlenhard & Rogers, 1998) or leading the man on because they have gone along with the sexual experience thus far. Finally, rape victims are blamed more when they are raped by an acquaintance or a date rather than by a stranger (e.g., Bell, Kuriloff, & Lottes, 1994; Bridges, 1991; Bridges & McGr ail, 1989; Check & Malamuth, 1983; Kanekar, Shaherwalla, Franco, Kunju, & Pinto, 1991; L'Armand & Pepitone, 1982; Tetreault & Barnett, 1987), which seems to evoke the stereotype that victims really want to have sex because they know their attacker and perhaps even went out on a date with him. The underlying message of this research seems to be that when certain stereotypical elements of rape are in place, rape victims are prone to being blamed."[81]

Commentators state: "individuals may endorse rape myths and at the same time recognize the negative effects of rape."[81] A number of gender role stereotypes can play a role in rationalization of rape. These include the idea that power is reserved to men whereas women are meant for sex and objectified, that women want forced sex and to be pushed around,[82] and that male sexual impulses and behaviors are uncontrollable and must be satisfied.[83]
For females, victim-blaming correlates with fear. Many rape victims blame themselves. Female jurors might look at the woman on the witness stand and believe she had done something to entice the defendant.[84]
Honor killings and forced marriages
In many cultures, those who are raped have a high risk of suffering additional violence or threats of violence after the rape. This can be perpetrated by the rapist, friends, or relatives of the rapist. The intent can be to prevent the victim from reporting the rape. Other reasons for threats against the those assaulted is to punish them for reporting it, or of forcing them to withdraw the complaint. The relatives of the person who has been raped may wish to prevent "bringing shame" to the family and may also threaten them. This is especially the case in cultures where female virginity is highly valued and considered mandatory before marriage; in extreme cases, rape victims are killed in honor killings.[11][12][13][85]
Treatment




Non-genital injuries to women who are sexually assaulted


In the US, victims' rights include the right to have a victims advocate preside over every step of the medical/legal exam to ensure sensitivity towards victims, provide emotional support, and minimize the risk of re-traumatization. Victims are to be informed of this immediately by law enforcement or medical service providers.[86][87] Emergency rooms of many hospitals employ sexual assault nurse/forensic examiners (SAN/FEs) with specific training to care for those who have experienced a rape or sexual assault. They are able to conduct a focused medical-legal exam. If such a trained clinician is not available, the emergency department has a sexual assault protocol that has been established for treatment and the collection of evidence.[27][88] Staff are also trained to explain the examinations in detail, the documentation and the rights associated with the requirement for informed consent. Emphasis is placed on performing the examinations at a pace that is appropriate for the person, their family, their age, and their level of understanding.[88] Privacy is recommended to prevent self-harm.[89]
Non-genital injuries
Physical assessment
Many rapes do not result in serious injury.[90] The first medical response to sexual assault is a complete assessment. This general assessment will prioritize the treatment of injuries by the emergency room staff. Medical personnel involved are trained to assess and treat those assaulted or follow protocols established to ensure privacy and best treatment practices. Informed consent is always required prior to treatment unless the person who was assaulted is unconscious, intoxicated or does not have the mental capacity to give consent.[27][88] Priorities governing the physical exam are the treatment of serious life-threatening emergencies and then a general and complete assessment.[91] Some physical injuries are readily apparent such as, bites,[92] broken teeth, swelling, bruising, lacerations and scratches. In more violent cases, the victim may need to have gunshot wounds or stab wounds treated.[27] The loss of consciousness is relevant to the medical history.[88] If abrasions are found, immunization against tetanus is offered if 5 years have elapsed since the last immunization.[93]
Diagnostic testing
After the general assessment and treatment of serious injuries, further evaluation may include the use of additional diagnostic testing such as x-rays, CT or MRI image studies and blood work. The presence of infection is determined by sampling of body fluids from the mouth, throat, vagina, perineum, and anus.[88]
Forensic sampling
Main article: Rape investigation
Victims have the right to refuse any evidence collection. Victims advocates ensure the victims' wishes are respected by hospital staff. After the physical injuries are addressed and treatment has begun, then forensic examination proceeds along with the gathering of evidence that can be used to identify and document the injuries.[27] Such evidence-gathering is only done with the complete consent of the patient or the caregivers of the patient. Photographs of the injuries may be requested by staff.[88] At this point in the treatment, if a victims' advocate had not been requested earlier, experienced social support staff are made available to the patient and family.[94]
If the patient or the caregivers, (typically parents) agree, the medical team utilizes standardized sampling and testing usually referred to a forensic evidence kit or "rape kit".[88] The patient is informed that submitting to the use of the rape kit does not obligate them to file criminal charges against the perpetrator. The patient is discouraged from bathing or showering for the purpose of obtaining samples from his or her hair.[94] Evidence gathered within the past 72 hours is more likely to be valid.[88] The sooner that samples are obtained after the assault, the more likely that evidence is present in the sample and provide valid results. Once the injuries of the patient have been treated and she or he is stabilized, the sample gathering will begin. Staff will encourage the presence of a rape/sexual assault counselor to provide an advocate and reassurance.[94]
During the medical exam, evidence of bodily secretions is assessed. Dried semen that is on clothing and skin can be detected with a fluorescent lamp.[88][95] Notes will be attached to those items on which semen has been found.These specimens are marked, placed in a paper bag,[96] and be marked for later analysis for the presence of seminal vesicle-specific antigen.[88][89]
Though technically, medical staff are not part of the legal system, only trained medical personnel can obtain evidence that is admissible during a trial. The procedures have been standardized. Evidence is collected, signed, and locked in a secure place to guarantee that legal evidence procedures are maintained. This is known as the chain of evidence and is a legal term that describes a carefully monitored procedure of evidence collection and preservation. Maintaining the Chain of evidence from the medical examination, testing and tissue sampling from its origin of collection to court allows the results of the sampling to be admitted as evidence.[94] The use of photography is often used for documentation.[97]
After the examination
Some physical effects of the rape are not immediately apparent. Follow up examinations also assess the patient for tension headaches, fatigue, sleep pattern disturbances, gastrointestinal irritability, chronic pelvic pain, menstrual pain or irregularity, pelvic inflammatory disease, multiple yeast infections, sexual dysfunction, premenstrual distress, fibromyalgia, vaginal discharge, vaginal itching, burning during urination, and generalized vaginal pain.[91]
Women are typically offered contraceptive medications because about 5% of male-on-female rapes result in pregnancy.[93]
Genital injuries
An internal pelvic exam is not recommended for sexually immature or prepubescent girls due to the probability that internal injuries do not exist in this age group. An internal exam may be recommended if significant bloody discharge is observed, though.[88] A complete pelvic exam for rape (anal or vaginal) is conducted. An oral exam is done if there have been injuries to the mouth, teeth, gums or pharynx. Though the patient may have no complaints about genital pain signs of trauma can still be assessed. Prior to the complete bodily and genital exam, the patient is asked to undress, standing on a white sheet that collects any debris that may be in the clothing. The clothing and sheet are properly bagged and labeled along with other samples that can be removed from the body or clothing of the patient. Samples of fibers, mud, hair, leaves are gathered if present. Samples of fluids are collected to determine the presence of the perpetrator's saliva and semen that may be present in the patients mouth, vagina or rectum. Sometimes the victim has scratched the perpetrator in defense and fingernail scrapings can be collected.[94]
Injuries to the genital areas can be swelling, lacerations, and bruising.[94][98] Common genital injuries are anal injury, labial abrasions, hymenal bruising, tears of the posterior fourchette and fossa.[94] Bruises, tears, abrasions, inflammation and lacerations may be visible. If a foreign object was used during the assault, x-ray visualization will identify retained fragments.[99] Genital injuries are more prevalent in post-menopausal women and prepubescent girls. Internal injuries to the cervix and vagina can be visualized using colposcopy. Using colposcopy has increased the detection of internal trauma from six percent to fifty-three percent. Genital injuries to children who have been raped or sexually assaulted differ in that the abuse may be on-going or it happened in the past after the injuries heal. Scarring is one sign of the sexual abuse of children.[94]
Infections
The presence of a sexually contracted infection can not be confirmed after rape because it cannot be detected until 72 hours afterwards.[100]
The person who was raped may already have a sexually transmitted bacterial, viral and other infections and if diagnosed, it is treated.[93][97] Prophylactic antibiotic treatment for vaginitis, gonorrhea, trichomoniasis and chlamydia may be done. Chlamydial and gonococcal infections in women are of particular concern due to the possibility of ascending infection. Immunization against hepatitis B is often considered.[100][93][89] After prophylactic treatment is initiated, further testing is done to determine what other treatments may be necessary for other infections transmitted during the assault.[93] These are:

Serum hepatitis B surface antigen assay
Microscopic evaluation of vaginal discharge (saline wash and staining)
Cultures for Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis from each penetrated location
Serum Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test
Complete blood count (CBC)
Liver function tests
Serum creatinine level[93]

Treatment may include the administration of zidovudine/lamivudine, tenofovir/emtricitabine, ritonavir/lopinavir. Information regarding other treatment options are available from the CDC.[94]
The transmission of HIV is frequently a major concern of the patient.[97] Prophylactic treatment for HIV is not necessarily administered. Routine treatment for HIV after rape or sexual assault is controversial due to the low risk of infection after one sexual assault. Transmission of HIV after one exposure to penetrative anal sex is estimated to be 0.5 to 3.2 percent. Transmission of HIV after one exposure to penetrative vaginal intercourse is 0.05 to 0.15 percent. HIV can also be contracted through the oral route but is considered rare.[94][101] Other recommendations are that the patient be treated prophylactically for HIV if the perpetrator is found to be infected.[92]
Testing at the time of the initial exam does not typically have forensic value if patients are sexually active and have an STI since it could have been acquired prior to the assault. Rape shield laws protect the person who was raped and who has positive test results. These laws prevent having such evidence used against someone who was raped. Someone who was raped may be concerned that a prior infection may suggest sexual promiscuity. There may, however, be situations in which testing has the legal purpose, as in cases where the threat of transmission or actual transmission of an STI was part of the crime. In nonsexually active patients, an initial, baseline negative test that is followed by a subsequent STI could be used as evidence, if the perpetrator also had an STI.[97]
Treatment failure is possible due to the emergence of antibiotic-resistant strains of pathogens.[102]
Emotional and psychiatric
Psychiatric and emotional consequences can be apparent immediately after rape and it may be necessary to treat these very early in the evaluation and treatment.[97] Other treatable emotional and psychiatric disorders may not become evident after the rape. These can be eating disorders, anxiety, fear, intrusive thoughts, fear of crowds, avoidance, anger, depression, humiliation, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) hyperarousal, sexual disorders,(including fear of engaging in sexual activity), mood disorders, suicidal ideation, borderline personality disorder, nightmares, fear of situations that remind the patient of the rape and fear of being alone,[91] agitation, numbness and emotional distance.[94] Victims are able to receive help by using a telephone hotline, counseling, or shelters.[34] Recovery from sexual assault is a complicated and controversial concept,[103] but support groups, usually accessed by organizations are available to help in recovery. Professional counseling and on-going treatment by trained health care providers is often sought by the victim.[104]
There are clinicians who are specially trained in the treatment of those who have experienced rape and sexual assault/abuse. Treatment can be lengthy and be challenging for both the counselor and the patient. Several treatment options exist and vary by accessibility, cost, or whether or not insurance coverage exists for the treatment. Treatment also varies dependent upon the expertise of the counselor—some have more experience and or have specialized in the treatment of sexual trauma and rape. To be the most effective, a treatment plan should developed based upon the struggles of the patient and not necessarily based upon the traumatic experience. An effective treatment plan will take the following into consideration: current stressors, coping skills, physical health, interpersonal conflicts, self-esteem, family issues, involvement of the guardian, and the presence of mental health symptoms. [104]
The degree of success for emotional and psychiatric treatments is often dependent upon the terminology used in the treatment, i.e. redefining the event and experience. Labels used like "rape victim" and "rape survivor" to describe the new identities of women who have been raped suggest that the event is the dominant and controlling influence on her life. These may have an effect on supportive personnel. The consequences of using these labels needs to be assessed.[91] Positive outcomes of emotional and psychiatric treatment for rape exist; these can be an improved self-concept, the recognition of growth, and implementing new coping styles.[91]
A perpetrator found guilty by the court is often required to receive treatment. There are many options for treatment, some more successful than others.[105] The psychological factors that motivated the convicted perpetrator are complex but treatment can still be effective. A counselor will typically evaluate disorders that are currently present in the offender. Investigating the developmental background of the offender can help explain the origins of the abusive behavior occurred in the first place. Emotional and psychological treatment has the purpose of identifying predictors of recidivism, or the potential that the offender will commit rape again. In some instances neurological abnormalities have been identified in the perpetrators, and in some cases they have themselves experienced past trauma. Adolescents and other children can be the perpetrators of rape, although this is uncommon. In this instance, appropriate counseling and evaluation are usually conducted.[35]
Short-term treatment with a benzodiazepine may help with anxiety and antidepressants may be helpful for symptoms of post traumatic stress disorder, depression and panic attacks.[93]
Prevention
Main article: Initiatives to prevent sexual violence
As sexual violence affects all parts of society, the response to sexual violence is comprehensive. The responses can be categorized as: individual approaches, health care responses, community-based efforts and actions to prevent other forms of sexual violence.[citation needed]
Sexual assault may be prevented by secondary school,[106] college,[107][108] and workplace education programs.[109] At least one program for fraternity men produced "sustained behavioral change."[107][110]
Statistics and epidemiology

Main article: Rape statistics
See also: Estimates of sexual violence
Worldwide
International Crime on Statistics and Justice by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) find that worldwide, most victims of rape are women and most perpetrators male.[111] Rapes against women are rarely reported to the police and the number of female rape victims is significantly underestimated.[111] Southern Africa, Oceania and North America report the highest numbers of rape.[111]




UNODC : Reported rape per 100,000 population (2011)


The humanitarian news organization IRIN claims that an estimated "500,000 rapes are committed annually in South Africa[112] once called 'the world's rape capital.'[113] The country has some of the highest incidences of child sexual abuse in the world with more than 67,000 cases of rape and sexual assaults against children reported in 2000, with welfare groups believing that unreported incidents could be up to 10 times higher.[72] Current data suggest that the incidence of rape has risen significantly in India.[114]
Most rape research and reports of rape are limited to male-female forms of rape. Research on male-on-male and female-on-male rape is rare. Fewer than one in ten male-male rapes are reported. As a group, males who have been raped by either gender often get little services and support, and legal systems are often ill-equipped to deal with this type of crime. Instances in which the perpetrator is female, are not clear and lead to the denial of women being sexual aggressors. This could obscure the dimensions of the problem. Research also suggests that men with sexually aggressive peers have a higher chance of reporting coercive or forced sexual intercourse outside gang circles than men without such sexually aggressive peers.[115]
United States
Main article: Rape in the United States
FBI sex offense victims in 2012:[116]

67,354 female
12,000 male.

FBI convicted sex offenders in 2012:[117]

78,500 male
4394 female.

Statistics maintained by the CDC include:

one in four of women and one in nine men have experienced sexual violence, stalking or rape
one in three women and one in six men experienced violent sexual contact in their life
nearly 23 million women and 1.7 million men have been victims of rape or attempted rape at some point in their lives
8.5 million women experienced rape before age 18
1.5 million men were made to penetrate before age 18
one in four women have experienced severe physical violence by an intimate partner
one in seven men have experienced severe physical violence by an intimate partner[118]

Risk factors vary among different ethnicities. About one third of African American adolescent females report encountering some form of sexual assault including rape.[119] One in three Native American women will experience sexual assault, more than twice the national average for American women.[120]
More than 250,000 cases of rape or attempted rape were recorded by police annually in 65 countries in 2001 through 2002.[121] In 2007, 40% of the 90,427 forcible rapes reported were cleared by arrest or "exceptional means." Exceptional refers to situations where the person refuses to provide information or assistance necessary to obtain an arrest, the defendant dies before being arrested, or the defendant cannot be extradited from another state.[122]
Forty-three percent of high school and young college men reported being coerced into sexual behavior and, of those, 95% reported that a female was the aggressor.[123]
Prosecution
Reporting




People in Bangalore, India demanding justice for young student who was gang-raped in Delhi in December 2012.


In 2005, sexual violence, and rape in particular, was considered the most under-reported violent crime in Great Britain.[124] The number of reported rapes in Great Britain is lower than both incidence and prevalence rates.[125]
The legal requirements for reporting rape vary by jurisdiction—each U.S. state may have different requirements.[citation needed] New Zealand has less stringent limits.[126]
In Italy, a 2006 National Statistic Institute survey on sexual violence against women found that 91.6% of women who suffered this did not report it to the police.[127]
Conviction
In the United Kingdom, In 1970 there was a 33% rate of conviction, while by 1985 there was a 24 per cent conviction rate for rape trials in the UK, by 2004 the conviction rate reached 5%.[128] At that time the government report has expressed documented the year-on-year increase in attrition of reported rape cases, and pledged to address this "justice gap".[124] According to Amnesty International Ireland had the lowest rate of conviction for rape, (1%) among 21 European states, in 2003.[129] In America as of 2012, there exists a noticeable discrepancy in conviction rates among women of various ethnic identities; an arrest was made in just 13% of the sexual assaults reported by American Indian women, compared with 35% for black women and 32% for whites.[120]
False accusation
Main article: False accusation of rape
Eight percent of 2,643 sexual assault cases were classified as false reports by the police in one study. The researchers noted that much of these classifications were based on the personal judgments and biases of the police investigators and were made in violation of official criteria for establishing a false allegation. Closer analysis of this category applying the Home Office counting rules for establishing a false allegation and excluding cases where the application of the cases where confirmation of the designation was uncertain reduced the percentage of false reports to 3%. The researchers concluded that "one cannot take all police designations at face value" and that "[t]here is an over-estimation of the scale of false allegations by both police officers and prosecutors". Moreover, they added:

The interviews with police officers and complainants' responses show that despite the focus on victim care, a culture of suspicion remains within the police, even amongst some of those who are specialists in rape investigations. There is also a tendency to conflate false allegations with retractions and withdrawals, as if in all such cases no sexual assault occurred. This reproduces an investigative culture in which elements that might permit a designation of a false complaint are emphasized (later sections reveal how this also feeds into withdrawals and designation of 'insufficient evidence'), at the expense of a careful investigation, in which the evidence collected is evaluated.[130][131]

Another large-scale study was conducted in Australia, with the 850 rapes reported to the Victoria police between 2000 and 2003 (Heenan & Murray, 2006). Using both quantitative and qualitative methods, the researchers examined 812 cases with sufficient information to make an appropriate determination, and found that 2.1% of these were classified by police as false reports. All of these complainants were then charged or threatened with charges for filing a false police report.[132]
The Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) analyzed every rape complaint made over a 17-month period and found that actual false allegations made up less than 1%.[133][134]

"The indication is that it is therefore extremely rare that a suspect deliberately makes a false allegation of rape or domestic violence purely out of malice."[133]

FBI reports consistently put the number of "unfounded" rape accusations around 8%. The unfounded rate is higher for forcible rape than for any other Index crime. The average rate of unfounded reports for Index crimes is 2%.[135] "Unfounded" is not synonymous with false allegation.[136] Bruce Gross of the Forensic Examiner stated:

This statistic is almost meaningless, as many of the jurisdictions from which the FBI collects data on crime use different definitions of, or criteria for, "unfounded." That is, a report of rape might be classified as unfounded (rather than as forcible rape) if the alleged victim did not try to fight off the suspect, if the alleged perpetrator did not use physical force or a weapon of some sort, if the alleged victim did not sustain any physical injuries, or if the alleged victim and the accused had a prior sexual relationship. Similarly, a report might be deemed unfounded if there is no physical evidence or too many inconsistencies between the accuser's statement and what evidence does exist. As such, although some unfounded cases of rape may be false or fabricated, not all unfounded cases are false.[122]

Other studies have suggested that the rate of false allegations in America may be higher. A nine-year study by Eugene J. Kanin of Purdue University in a small metropolitan area in the Midwestern United States claimed that 41% of rape accusations were false.[137] However David Lisak, an associate professor of psychology and director of the Men's Sexual Trauma Research Project at the University of Massachusetts Boston states that "Kanin's 1994 article on false allegations is a provocative opinion piece, but it is not a scientific study of the issue of false reporting of rape". He further states that Kanin's study has significantly poor systematic methodology and had no independent definition of a false report. Instead, Kanin classified reports that the police department classified as false also as false.[138] The criterion for falsehood was simply a denial of a polygraph test of the accuser.[137] A 1998 report by the National Institute of Justice found that DNA evidence excluded the primary suspect in 26% of rape cases and concluded that this "strongly suggests that postarrest and postconviction DNA exonerations are tied to some strong, underlying systemic problems that generate erroneous accusations and convictions".[139] However, this study also noted that analyzed samples involved a specific subset of rape cases (e.g. those where "there is no consent defense").
A 2010 study by David Lisak, Lori Gardinier and other researchers published in the journal of Violence against Women found that out of 136 cases reported in a ten-year period, only 5.9% were found likely to be false.[140]
History
Main article: History of rape
Definitions and evolution of laws




The Bulgarian martyresses, a painting depicting the rape of Bulgarian women by Ottoman troops during the April Uprising of 1876.


Augustus Caesar enacted reforms for the crime of rape under the assault statute Lex Iulia de vi publica, which bears his family name, Iulia. It was under this statute rather than the adultery statute of Lex Iulia de adulteriis that Rome prosecuted this crime.[141]
In ancient Greece and Rome, both male-on-female and male-on-male concepts of rape existed. Roman laws allowed three distinct charges for the crime: stuprum, unsanctioned sexual intercourse (which, in the early times, also included adultery); vis, a physical assault for purpose of lust; and iniuria, a general charge denoting any type of assault upon person. Aforementioned Lex Iulia specifically criminalized per vim stuprum, unsanctioned sexual intercourse by force. The former two were public criminal charges which could be brought whenever the victim was a woman or a child of either gender, but only if the victim was a freeborn Roman citizen (ingenuus), and carried potential sentence of death or exile. Iniuria was a civil charge that demanded monetary compensation, and had a wider application (for example, it could have been brought in case of sexual assault on a slave by a person other than his/her owner.) In contrast to the modern understanding of the subject, Romans drew clear distinctions between "active" (penetrative) and "passive" (receptive) partners, and all these charges implied penetration by the assailant (which necessarily ruled out the possibility of female-on-male or female-on-female rape.) It is not clear which (if any) of these charges applied to assaults upon an adult male, though such an assault upon a citizen was definitely seen as a grave insult (within Roman culture, an adult male citizen could not possibly consent to the receptive role in a sexual intercourse without a severe loss of status.) The law known as Lex Scantinia covered at least some forms of male-on-male stuprum, and Quintillian mentions a fine of 10,000 sesterces – about 10 years worth of a Roman legionnaire's pay – as a normal penalty for stuprum upon an ingenuus. However, its text is lost and its exact provisions are no longer known.[142]
Like theft or robbery, rape was originally considered a "private wrong" iniuria privita, a crime between the abductor and the legal guardian of the woman in question. It was made into a "public wrong" (iniuria publica) by the Roman Emperor Constantine.[143][144]
Emperor Justinian continued the use of the statute to prosecute rape during the sixth century in the Eastern Roman Empire.[145] By late antiquity, the general term raptus had referred to abduction, elopement, robbery, or rape in its modern meaning. Confusion over the term led ecclesiastical commentators on the law to differentiate it into raptus seductionis (elopement without parental consent) and raptus violentiae (ravishment). Both of these forms of raptus had a civil penalty and possible excommunication for the family and village receiving the abducted woman, although raptus violentiae also incurred punishments of mutilation or death.[146]
Virtually all societies have had a concept of the crime of rape. Although what constituted this crime has varied by historical period and culture, until quite recently, the definitions tended to focus around an act of forced vaginal intercourse perpetrated through physical violence or imminent threat of death or severe bodily injury, by a man, on a woman or a girl, not his wife. These definitions differ significantly from the modern definitions of rape in Western countries today. For example, the actus reus of the crime, was, in most societies, the insertion of the penis into the vagina, and, until the 19th century, many jurisdictions required ejaculation for the act to constitute the offense of rape.[147][148] Acts other than vaginal intercourse did not constitute rape in common law countries and in many other societies. In many cultures, such acts were illegal, even if they were consensual and performed between married couples (see sodomy laws). In England, for example, the Buggery Act 1533, which remained in force until 1828, provided for the death penalty for "buggery". Many countries criminalized "non-traditional" forms of sexual activity well into the modern era: notably, in the U.S. state of Idaho, sodomy between consensual partners was punishable by a term of five years to life in prison as late as 2003, and this law was only ruled to be inapplicable to married couples in 1995.[149] Today, in many countries, the definition of the actus reus has been extended to all forms of penetration of the vagina and anus (e.g. penetration with objects, fingers or other body parts) as well as insertion of the penis in the mouth.
Beyond the ancient era, due to the influence of Christianity on sexual mores, the notion of "rape" became narrowed to include only acts performed by a male to a female. The way sexuality was conceptualized in many societies rejected the very notion that a woman could force a man into sex — women were often seen as passive while men were deemed to be assertive and aggressive. Sexual penetration of a male by another male fell under the legal domain of "sodomy".
One of the most distinctive features of rape historically was the fact that not all incidents of forced intercourse constituted this crime. An incident could be excluded from the definition of rape due to the relation between the parties, such as marriage (until a few decades ago wives were nearly universally excluded, and in many countries they continue to be so) or due to the background of the victim (in many cultures forced sex on prostitute, slave, war enemy, member of a racial minority, etc., was not rape). For instance, in 17th century Scandinavia, Christian V's law of 1687 stipulated that rape could only be committed on three categories of women: somebody else's wife, a widow, or an honest virgin. Women who did not fit in any of these categories were not considered legal victims of the crime of rape.[150]
Social issues
In ancient history, rape was viewed less as a type of assault on the female but rather a serious property crime against the man to whom she belonged; typically the father or husband. The loss of virginity was an especially serious matter. The loss of virginity and subsequent damage resulted in her reduced prospects in finding a husband and a reduction in her bride price. This was especially true in the case of betrothed virgins, as the loss of chastity was perceived as severely depreciating her value to a prospective husband. In such cases, the law would void the betrothal and demand financial compensation from the rapist, payable to the woman's household, whose "goods" were "damaged".[151] Under biblical law, the rapist might be compelled to marry the unmarried woman instead of receiving the civil penalty if her father agreed. This was especially prevalent in laws where the crime of rape did not include, as a necessary element, the violation of the woman's body, thus dividing the crime in the current meaning of rape and a means for a man and woman to force their families to permit marriage.[original research?] (See Deuteronomy 22:28–29.)[non-primary source needed]
From the classical antiquity of Greece and Rome into the Colonial period, rape along with arson, treason and murder was a capital offense. "Those committing rape were subject to a wide range of capital punishments that were seemingly brutal, frequently bloody, and at times spectacular." In the 12th century, kinsmen of the victim were given the option of executing the punishment themselves. "In England in the early fourteenth century, a victim of rape might be expected to gouge out the eyes and/or sever the offender's testicles herself."[152] Despite the harshness of these laws, actual punishments were usually far less severe: in late Medieval Europe, cases concerning rapes of marriageable women, wives, widows, or members of the lower class were rarely brought forward, and usually ended with only a small monetary fine or a marriage between the victim and the rapist.[153] In the 15 and 16th centuries, rape in the Basque charters (Enkarterri, Durangaldea) was punished with death for the offender and the person who was helping him.[154]
Adult women were often extremely reluctant to bring up charges of rape: public admission of having been raped was severely damaging to one's social standing, courts tended to be skeptical of the charges, conviction rates were low, and, in the event that the accusation could not be proved, the victim could then be accused of committing adultery with the rapist (traditionally a serious offense that could have been punished by mutilation[155] or even death). Certain classes of women, such as prostitutes, were banned from raising accusations of rape altogether.[156]
The ius primae noctis ("law of the first night") is a term now popularly used to describe an alleged legal right allowing the lord of an estate to take the virginity of his serfs' maiden daughters. Little or no historical evidence has been unearthed from the Middle Ages to support the idea that such a right ever actually existed.[157][158]
The medieval theologian Thomas Aquinas argued that rape, though sinful, was much less sinful than masturbation or coitus interruptus, because it fulfilled the procreative function of sex, while the other acts violated the purpose of sex.[159][160][161][notes 1]
In Medieval Europe, a woman's parents could forcibly marry her to a stranger without her consent, and, once she was married, she could no longer refuse to consent to sex: the medieval concept of rape did not allow for the possibility of being raped by one's husband. In 1563, the Council of Trent expressly declared that legal Catholic marriages had to be done with consent of both parties, but did not require parental consent, essentially declaring forced marriages invalid.[162] This was not universally accepted: for example, in France, women were not granted the right to marry without parental consent until 1793.[163]
The criminal justice system of many countries was widely regarded as unfair to sexual assault victims. Both sexist stereotypes and common law combined to make rape a "criminal proceeding on which the victim and her behavior were tried rather than the defendant".[164] Additionally, gender neutral laws have combated the older perception that rape never occurs to men,[165]
In war
Main article: War rape




La vuelta del malón (The return of the raiders) by Ángel Della Valle (1892).


In 1998, Judge Navanethem Pillay of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda said: "From time immemorial, rape has been regarded as spoils of war. Now it will be considered a war crime. We want to send out a strong message that rape is no longer a trophy of war."[166] Rape, in the course of war, dates back to antiquity, ancient enough to have been mentioned in the Bible.[167] The Israelite, Persian, Greek and Roman armies reportedly engaged in war rape.[168] The Mongols, who established the Mongol Empire across much of Eurasia, caused much destruction during their invasions.[169] Contemporary documents say that after a conquest, the Mongol soldiers looted, pillaged and raped.[170] According to Rogerius of Apulia, a monk who survived the Mongol invasion of Hungary, the Mongol warriors "found pleasure" in humiliating local women.[171]
The systematic rape of as many as 80,000 women by the Japanese soldiers during the six weeks of the Nanking Massacre is an example of such atrocities.[172] During World War II an estimated 200,000 Korean and Chinese women were forced into prostitution in Japanese military brothels, as so-called "comfort women".[173] French Moroccan troops known as Goumiers committed rapes and other war crimes after the Battle of Monte Cassino. (See Marocchinate.)[174] French women in Normandy complained about rapes during the liberation of Normandy.[175] Soldiers raping women and girls was common in many areas occupied by the Red Army. A female Soviet war correspondent described what she had witnessed: "The Russian soldiers were raping every German female from eight to eighty. It was an army of rapists."[176]
According to researcher and author Krisztián Ungváry, some 38,000 civilians were killed during the Siege of Budapest: about 13,000 from military action and 25,000 from starvation, disease and other causes. Included in the latter figure are about 15,000 Jews, largely victims of executions by Hungarian Arrow Cross Party militia. When the Soviets finally claimed victory, they initiated an orgy of violence, including the wholesale theft of anything they could lay their hands on, random executions and mass rape. An estimated 50,000 women and girls were raped,[177]:348–350[178][notes 2] although estimates vary from 5,000 to 200,000.[179]:129 Hungarian girls were kidnapped and taken to Red Army quarters, where they were imprisoned, repeatedly raped and sometimes murdered.[180]:70–71
See also


Abusive power and control
Child grooming
Courtship disorder
Criminal transmission of HIV
Emergency contraception (the morning after pill)
Factors associated with being a victim of sexual violence
Post-assault treatment of sexual assault victims
Rape culture
Rape in fiction
Sexual violence by intimate partners
Special Victims Unit (also known as the Sex Crimes Unit)
Serial rapist
Against Our Will
A Natural History of Rape
Women Against Rape


Notes


^ Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, question 154. "...it follows that in this matter [the sin of unnatural vice] is gravest of all. After it comes incest... With regard to the other species of lust they imply a transgression merely of that which is determined by right reason, on the presupposition, however, of natural principles." Here, unnatural vice includes, in decreasing order of sinfulness, bestiality, homosexual intercourse, any unconventional form of heterosexual intercourse, and 'uncleanness' (masturbation). 'Other species of lust' include intercourse with a consecrated virgin or a nun, rape, adultery, seduction of a virgin, and 'simple fornication' (consensual intercourse between unmarried people.)
^ "The worst suffering of the Hungarian population is due to the rape of women. Rapes—affecting all age groups from ten to seventy are so common that very few women in Hungary have been spared." Swiss embassy report cited in Ungváry 2005, p.350. (Krisztian Ungvary The Siege of Budapest 2005)


References


^ "Sexual violence chapter 6" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2002. Retrieved 5 December 2015. 
^ "Rape". dictionary.reference.com. April 15, 2011. 
^ a b c "Rape". legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com. April 15, 2011. 
^ Petrak, Jenny; Hedge, Barbara, eds. (2003). The Trauma of Sexual Assault Treatment, Prevention and Practice. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-470-85138-8. 
^ "Rape at the National Level, number of police recorded offenses". United Nations.
^ "Violence against women". World Health Organization. Retrieved 2017-09-08. 
^ Human Rights WatchNo Escape: Male Rape In U.S. Prisons. Part VII. Anomaly or Epidemic: The Incidence of Prisoner-on-Prisoner Rape.; estimates that 100,000–140,000 violent male-male rapes occur in U.S. prisons annually; compare with FBI statistics that estimate 90,000 violent male-female rapes occur annually.
^ Robert W. Dumond, "Ignominious Victims: Effective Treatment of Male Sexual Assault in Prison," August 15, 1995, p. 2; states that "evidence suggests that [male-male sexual assault in prison] may be a staggering problem". Quoted in Mariner, Joanne; (Organization), Human Rights Watch (2001-04-17). No escape: male rape in U.S. prisons. Human Rights Watch. p. 370. ISBN 978-1-56432-258-6. Retrieved 7 June 2010. 
^ Struckman-Johnson, Cindy; David Struckman-Johnson (2006). "A Comparison of Sexual Coercion Experiences Reported by Men and Women in Prison". Journal of Interpersonal Violence. 21 (12): 1591–1615. doi:10.1177/0886260506294240. ISSN 0886-2605. PMID 17065656. ; reports that "Greater percentages of men (70%) than women (29%) reported that their incident resulted in oral, vaginal, or anal sex. More men (54%) than women (28%) reported an incident that was classified as rape."
^ "Post Traumatic Stress Disorder in Rape Survivors". The American Academy of Experts in Traumatic Stress. 1995. Retrieved 2013-04-30. 
^ a b "Rape victim threatened to withdraw case in UP". Zeenews.india.com. 2011-03-19. Retrieved 2013-02-03. 
^ a b "Stigmatization of Rape & Honor Killings". WISE Muslim Women. 2002-01-31. Retrieved 2013-02-03. 
^ a b Harter, Pascale (2011-06-14). "BBC News - Libya rape victims 'face honour killings'". BBC News. Retrieved 2013-02-03. 
^ a b Corinne J. Saunders, Rape and Ravishment in the Literature of Medieval England, Boydell & Brewer, 2001, p. 20.
^ a b Keith Burgess-Jackson, A Most Detestable Crime: New Philosophical Essays on Rape, Oxford University Press, New York, 1999, p.16.
^ "Rape". Merriam-Webster. 
^ a b c Smith, ed. by Merril D. (2004). Encyclopedia of rape (1. publ. ed.). Westport, Conn. [u.a.]: Greenwood Press. pp. 169–170. ISBN 978-0-313-32687-5. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ a b c Maier, S. L. (2008). ""I Have Heard Horrible Stories . . .": Rape Victim Advocates' Perceptions of the Revictimization of Rape Victims by the Police and Medical System". Violence Against Women. 14 (7): 786–808. doi:10.1177/1077801208320245. ISSN 1077-8012. 
^ Justinian, Institutiones [1]
^ Adolf Berger, Encyclopedic Dictionary on Roman Law, pp. 667 (raptus) and 768 (vis) [2]
^ Rothman, Lily. "When Spousal Rape First Became a Crime in the U.S". Time. Retrieved 2017-09-08. 
^ Urbina, Ian (11 October 2014). "The Challenge of Defining Rape". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 December 2015. 
^ "An Updated Definition of Rape (U.S. Dept of Justice, January 6, 2012)". Archived from the original on 13 March 2012. Retrieved 30 October 2014. 
^ U.S. to Expand Rape Definition in Crime Statistics (New York Times, January 6, 2012)
^ Krug, Etienne G.; et al., eds. (2002). "WORLD REPORT ON VIOLENCE AND HEALTH" (PDF). World Health Organization. p. 149. Retrieved 5 December 2015. 
^ a b Basile, KC; Smith, SG; Breiding, MJ; Black, MC; Mahendra, RR (2014). "Sexual Violence Surveillance: Uniform Definitions and Recommended Data Elements, Version 2.0" (PDF). National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved 6 June 2017. 
^ a b c d e Markovchick, Vincent (2016). "Sexual Assault". Emergency medicine secrets. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier. pp. 516–520. ISBN 9780323355162. 
^ Kalbfleisch, Pamela J.; Cody, Michael J. (2012). Gender Power and Communication in Human Relationships. Routledge. ISBN 1-136-48050-1. Retrieved April 30, 2013. 
^ Ken Plummer (2002). Modern Homosexualities: Fragments of Lesbian and Gay Experiences. Routledge. pp. 187–191. ISBN 1-134-92242-6. Retrieved August 24, 2013. 
^ "Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009". legislation.gov.uk/UK Statute Law Database. 2009. Retrieved December 12, 2013. 
^ Tom de Castella, Jon Kelly (August 22, 2012). "Assange case: How is rape defined?". BBC News. Retrieved December 12, 2013. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ "Criminal code". Retrieved 2010-12-31. 
^ "UCSB's SexInfo". Soc.ucsb.edu. Retrieved 2010-12-31. 
^ a b Rosdahl, Caroline (2012). Textbook of basic nursing. Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 978-1-60547-772-5. 
^ a b Kelly, Gary (2011). Sexuality today. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-353199-1. 
^ Gruber, Aya (December 2016). "Consent Confusion". Cardozo Law Review. 38 (2): 415–458. Retrieved March 20, 2017. 
^ a b Rape and sexual violence: Human rights law and standards in the International Criminal Court. Amnesty International 2011
^ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8353. Philippine Law. Approved: September 30, 1997
^ Fourth Annual Report of ICTR to the General Assembly (1999) March 23, 2007
^ "VAW/for printer/1/14/0" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-02-12. 
^ "Asia-Pacific | Thailand passes marital rape bill". BBC News. 2007-06-21. Retrieved 2014-02-12. 
^ "The Daily Gazette — Google News Archive Search". Retrieved 30 October 2014. 
^ Search. "Rape & Sexual Assault | AWARE Singapore". Aware.org.sg. Retrieved 2014-02-12. 
^ Kulick, Don (2003). "No". Language & Communication. 23 (2): 139–151. doi:10.1016/S0271-5309(02)00043-5. ISSN 0271-5309. 
^ WHO (23 November 2012). "Violence against women". who.int. World Health Organization. Retrieved 3 February 2013. 
^ Thornhill, Randy; Palmer, Craig T. (2000). A natural history of rape biological bases of sexual coercion. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. ISBN 978-1-282-09687-5. 
^ Pinker, Steven (2003), "Chapter 19: children", in Pinker, Steven, The blank slate: the modern denial of human nature, London: Penguin Group, pp. 372–399, ISBN 978-1-101-20032-2. 
^ Lisak, David; Miller, Paul M. (February 2002). "Repeat rape and multiple offending among undetected rapists". Violence & Victims. 17 (1): 73–84. doi:10.1891/vivi.17.1.73.33638. PMID 11991158.  Pdf.
^ Lisak, David (March–April 2011). "Understanding the predatory nature of sexual violence". Sexual Assault Report. Civic Research Institute. 14 (4): 49–64. Retrieved 10 June 2014.  Pdf.
^ Petty GM, Dawson B (1989). "Sexual aggression in normal men: incidence, beliefs and personality characteristics". Personality and Individual Differences. 10 (3): 355–362. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(89)90109-8. 
^ Ouimette PC, Riggs D (1998). "Testing a mediational model of sexually aggressive behavior in nonincarcerated perpetrators". Violence and Victims. 13 (2): 117–130. PMID 9809392. 
^ Borowsky IW, Hogan M, Ireland M (1997). "Adolescent sexual aggression: risk and protective factors". Pediatrics. 100 (6): E7. doi:10.1542/peds.100.6.e7. PMID 9382908. 
^ Jenkins C. Sexual behavior in Papua New Guinea. In: Report of the Third Annual Meeting of the International Network on Violence Against Women, January 1998. Washington, DC, International Network on Violence Against Women, 1998.
^ a b Krug (2002). Rapport mondial sur la violence et la santé (PDF). Genève: Organisation mondiale de la santé. ISBN 92-4-154561-5. 
^ a b Long, Jennifer (2016). "Introducing expert testimony to explain victim behavior in sexual and domestic violence prosecutions" (PDF). NDAA.org. 
^ a b c "Victim Responses to Sexual Assault: Counterintuitive or Simply Adaptive". www.ncjrs.gov. Retrieved 2017-09-09. 
^ Matley, Eliza. Presenting the Key to Learning: Comfort Corners. "Trauma Responses: Fight, Flight, Freeze or Fawn?" https://www.csustan.edu/sites/default/files/groups/University%20Honors%20Program/Journals/eliza_matley.pdf
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Mason, F; Lodrick, Z (February 2013). "Psychological consequences of sexual assault". Best practice & research. Clinical obstetrics & gynaecology. 27 (1): 27–37. doi:10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2012.08.015. PMID 23182852. 
^ Note: One of the authors of the "Psychological consequences of sexual assault" article describes what she means by "friend" and "flop" in an article: Lodrick, Zoe (2007). "Psychological trauma – what every trauma worker should know". The British Journal of Psychotherapy Integration. 4 (2).  Friend: "Friend is the earliest defensive strategy available to us..... Throughout life when fearful most humans will activate their social engagement system (Porges, 1995). ... The social engagement system, or friend response to threat, is evident in the child who smiles or even laughs when being chastised." Flop: "Flop occurs if, and when, the freeze mechanism fails.... The survival purpose of the flop state is evident: if ‘impact’ is going to occur the likelihood of surviving it will be increased if the body yields, and psychologically, in the short-term at least, the situation will be more bearable if the higher brain functions are ‘offline’."
^ Bracha, H. Stefan (September 2004). "Freeze, Flight, Fight, Fright, Faint: Adaptationist Perspectives on the Acute Stress Response Spectrum". CNS Spectrums. 9 (9): 679–685. doi:10.1017/S1092852900001954. ISSN 2165-6509. 
^ a b c McLean, IA (February 2013). "The male victim of sexual assault". Best practice & research. Clinical obstetrics & gynaecology. 27 (1): 39–46. doi:10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2012.08.006. PMID 22951768. 
^ Chivers, ML; Seto, MC; Lalumière, ML; Laan, E; Grimbos, T (February 2010). "Agreement of self-reported and genital measures of sexual arousal in men and women: a meta-analysis". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 39 (1): 5–56. doi:10.1007/s10508-009-9556-9. PMC 2811244 . PMID 20049519. 
^ Levin, RJ; van Berlo, W (April 2004). "Sexual arousal and orgasm in subjects who experience forced or non-consensual sexual stimulation -- a review". Journal of clinical forensic medicine. 11 (2): 82–8. doi:10.1016/j.jcfm.2003.10.008. PMID 15261004. 
^ Hoffman, Barbara; et al. (2016). Williams Gynecology (3rd ed.). McGraw Hill Professional. ISBN 9780071849098. CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al. (link)
^ Jina, R; Thomas, LS (February 2013). "Health consequences of sexual violence against women". Best practice & research. Clinical obstetrics & gynaecology. 27 (1): 15–26. doi:10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2012.08.012. PMID 22975432. 
^ "Guidelines for the prevention and management of vicarious trauma among researchers of sexual and intimate partner violence" (PDF). Sexual Violence Research Initiative. 2015. 
^ Walker, G (August 2015). "The (in)significance of genital injury in rape and sexual assault". Journal of forensic and legal medicine. 34: 173–8. doi:10.1016/j.jflm.2015.06.007. PMID 26165680. 
^ Kennedy, K. M. (2012). "The Relationship of Victim Injury to the Progression of Sexual Crimes through the Criminal Justice System". Journal of Forensic and Legal Medicine. 19 (6): 309–311. doi:10.1016/j.jflm.2012.04.033. 
^ Wolff, Craig (August 22, 1994). "Rapists and Condoms; Is Use a Cavalier Act or a Way to Avoid Disease and Arrest?". New York Times. 
^ a b Kimura, Seiji (2013). Physical and emotional abuse triggers, short and long-term consequences and prevention methods. Hauppauge, New York: Nova Science Publishers, Inc. ISBN 9781624174469. 
^ "Sexual Violence and HIV". Sexual Violence Research Initiative. Archived from the original on 2013-02-18. Retrieved 2013-02-03. 
^ a b "South African men rape babies as 'cure' for Aids". The Daily Telegraph. November 11, 2001
^ Jenny, Carole (2010). Child Abuse and Neglect: Diagnosis, Treatment and Evidence — Expert Consult. Elsevier Health Sciences. p. 187. ISBN 978-1-4377-3621-2. 
^ Klot, Jennifer; Monica Kathina Juma (2011). HIV/AIDS, Gender, Human Security and Violence in Southern Africa. Pretoria: Africa Institute of South Africa. p. 47. ISBN 0-7983-0253-4. 
^ "HIV/AIDS, the stats, the Virgin Cure and infant rape". Science in Africa. 2002-01-25. Retrieved 2013-02-03. 
^ Epstein H, Jewkes R (2009-10-24). "The myth of the virgin rape myth". The Lancet. 374 (9699): 1419. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61858-4. PMID 19854367.  "In the current South African case, this claim is predicated on racist assumptions about the amorality of African men..."
^ Pauwels, B. (2002). "Blaming the victim of rape: The culpable control model perspective." Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 63(5-B).
^ a b Grubb, Amy; Turner, Emily (2012-09-01). "Attribution of blame in rape cases: A review of the impact of rape myth acceptance, gender role conformity and substance use on victim blaming". Aggression and Violent Behavior. 17 (5): 443–452. doi:10.1016/j.avb.2012.06.002. 
^ Abrahms D.; Viky G.; Masser B.; Gerd B. (2003). "Perceptions of stranger and acquaintance rape: The role of benevolent and hostile sexism in victim blame and rape proclivity". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 84 (1): 111–125. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.1.111. PMID 12518974. 
^ "Attitudes to sexual violence". Web.archive.org. 2005-02-05. Archived from the original on 2005-02-05. Retrieved 2010-12-31. 
^ a b Amy M. Buddie; Arthur G. Miller (2001). "Beyond Rape Myths: A more complex view of perceptions of rape victims". Sex Roles: A Journal of Research. 45 (3/4): 139–160. doi:10.1023/A:1013575209803.  PDF copy
^ Neumann, S., Gang Rape: Examining Peer Support and Alcohol in Fraternities. Sex Crimes and Paraphilias
^ Joan Z. Spade; Catherine G. Valentine (10 December 2007). The kaleidoscope of gender: prisms, patterns, and possibilities. Pine Forge Press. ISBN 978-1-4129-5146-3. Retrieved 1 October 2011. 
^ "EMMA — Most Londoners Believe Rape Victims are to Blame". Emmainteractive.com. Retrieved 2012-08-24. 
^ "BBC News — Morocco protest after raped Amina Filali kills herself". BBC News. 2012-03-15. Retrieved 2013-02-03. 
^ "VictimLaw - Victims Right". www.victimlaw.org. Retrieved 2017-09-09. 
^ "What is a Victim Advocate-". victimsofcrime.org. Retrieved 2017-09-09. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k McInerny, Thomas K. (2017). Textbook of Pediatric Care - 2nd Edition. American Academy of Pediatrics. ISBN 978-1-58110-966-5.  STAT!Ref Online Electronic Medical Library[subscription required]
^ a b c Cybulska, Beata (2013). "Immediate medical care after sexual assault". Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics & Gynaecology. 27 (1): 141–149. doi:10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2012.08.013. ISSN 1521-6934. [subscription required]
^ Kennedy, K. M. (2013). "Heterogeneity of Existing Research Relating to Sexual Violence, Sexual Assault and Rape Precludes Meta-analysis of Injury Data". Journal of Forensic and Legal Medicine. 20 (5): 447–459. doi:10.1016/j.jflm.2013.02.002. 
^ a b c d e Hockett, Jericho M.; Saucier, Donald A. (2015). "A systematic literature review of "rape victims" versus "rape survivors": Implications for theory, research, and practice". Aggression and Violent Behavior. 25: 1–14. doi:10.1016/j.avb.2015.07.003. ISSN 1359-1789. 
^ a b "HIV Clinical Resource: HIV Prophylaxis for Victims of Sexual Assault". Office of the Medical Director, New York State Department of Health AIDS Institute in Collaboration with Johns Hopkins University Division of Infectious Disease. Retrieved 2015-12-10. 
^ a b c d e f g Varcarolis, Elizabeth (2013). Essentials of psychiatric mental health nursing. St. Louis: Elsevier. pp. 439–442. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k Hoffman, Barbara (2012). Williams gynecology. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical. ISBN 978-0-07-171672-7. 
^ "Semen fluoresces best at wavelengths of 420 and 450 nm, when viewed through orange goggles. A Wood lamp emits light at only 360-nm wavelength. Therefore specialized alternate light sources that emit wavelengths at 420 and 450 nm, such as a Bluemaxx, should be used. Although this type of lamp will improve the detection of dried semen, many other substances will fluoresce as well; thus, confirmation of semen cannot be made with this method.", McInerny (2017)
^ This practice discourages the growth of microorganisms which could alter analysis. Cybulska
^ a b c d e Violence Against Women (PDF). U.S. Department of Justice - Office of Violence Against Women. April 2013. Retrieved 10 January 2016. 
^ Donita,, D'Amico,. Health & physical assessment in nursing. Barbarito, Colleen, (3rd edition ed.). Boston. p. 664. ISBN 9780133876406. OCLC 894626609. CS1 maint: Extra text (link)
^ Dalton, Maureen (2014-10-09). Forensic Gynaecology. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107064294. 
^ a b Marcdante, Karen (2015). Nelson essentials of pediatrics. Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders. ISBN 978-1-4557-5980-4. [subscription required]
^ "Antiretroviral Postexposure Prophylaxis After Sexual, Injection-Drug Use, or Other Nonoccupational Exposure to HIV in the United States". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 21 January 2005. Retrieved 2015-12-10. 
^ Baarda, Benjamin I.; Sikora, Aleksandra E. (2015). "Proteomics of Neisseria gonorrhoeae: the treasure hunt for countermeasures against an old disease". Frontiers in Microbiology. 6. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2015.01190. ISSN 1664-302X. 
^ "Recovering from Sexual Assault". Rainn.org. Retrieved 2010-12-31. 
^ a b Budrionis, Rita (2015). The sexual abuse victim and sexual offender treatment planner, with DSM-5 updates. Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley. ISBN 1-119-07481-9. 
^ Saleh, Fabian (2009). Sex offenders identification, risk assessment, treatment, and legal issues. Oxford New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-517704-6. 
^ Smothers M.K.; Smothers, D. Brian (2011). "A Sexual Assault Primary Prevention Model with Diverse Urban Youth". Journal of Child Sexual Abuse. 20 (6): 708–27. doi:10.1080/10538712.2011.622355. PMID 22126112. 
^ a b Foubert J.D. (2000). "The Longitudinal Effects of a Rape-prevention Program on Fraternity Men's Attitudes, Behavioral Intent, and Behavior" (PDF). Journal of American College Health. 48 (4): 158–63. doi:10.1080/07448480009595691. PMID 10650733. 
^ Vladutiu C.J.; et al. (2011). "College- or university-based sexual assault prevention programs: a review of program outcomes, characteristics, and recommendations". Trauma, Violence, and Abuse. 12 (2): 67–86. doi:10.1177/1524838010390708. PMID 21196436. 
^ Yeater EA, O'Donohue W (November 1999). "Sexual assault prevention programs: current issues, future directions, and the potential efficacy of interventions with women". Clin Psychol Rev. 19 (7): 739–71. doi:10.1016/S0272-7358(98)00075-0. PMID 10520434. 
^ Garrity S.E. (2011). "Sexual assault prevention programs for college-aged men: A critical evaluation". Journal of Forensic Nursing. 7 (1): 40–8. doi:10.1111/j.1939-3938.2010.01094.x. PMID 21348933. 
^ a b c Harrendorf, Haskenan, Malby, Stefan, Marku, Steven. "International Statistics on Crime and Justice" (PDF). www.unodc.org. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "SOUTH AFRICA: One in four men rape". IRIN Africa. 18 June 2009. Retrieved 11 December 2011. 
^ "South Africa, once called 'the world's rape capital,' is running out of rape kits". The Washington Post. March 5, 2013.
^ Sharma, Indira; Srivastava, Shruti; Bhatia, MS; Chaudhuri, Uday; Parial, Sonia; Sharma, Avdesh; Kataria, Dinesh; Bohra, Neena (2015). "Violence against women". Indian Journal of Psychiatry. 57 (6): 333. doi:10.4103/0019-5545.161500. ISSN 0019-5545. 
^ Gwartney-Gibbs PA, Stockard J, Bohmer S (1983). "Learning courtship aggression: the influence of parents, peers and personal experiences-". Family Relations. 35 (3): 276–282. doi:10.2307/583540. JSTOR 583540. 
^ "Victims sex by offense category". FBI. Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2012. 
^ "Offenders sex by offense category". FBI. Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
^ "National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey, Violence Prevention". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 28 April 2017. Retrieved 2015-12-05.  This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
^ Zitelli, Basil (2012). Zitelli and Davis' atlas of pediatric physical diagnosis. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-323-07932-7. 
^ a b Timothy Williams (2012-05-22). "For Native American Women, Scourge of Rape, Rare Justice". New York Times. 
^ The Eighth United Nations Survey on Crime Trends and the Operations of Criminal Justice Systems (2001–2002) – Table 02.08 Total recorded rapes. unodc.org
^ a b Gross, Bruce (2009). "False Rape Allegations: An Assault On Justice". The Forensic Examiner. Of the 90,427 forcible rapes reported in 2007, 40% were cleared by arrest or "exceptional means" (FBI, 2008d) with 23,307 of those being arrests 
^ French, Bryana H., Jasmine D. Tilghman, and Dominique A. Malebranche, "Sexual Coercion Context and Psychosocial Correlates Among Diverse Males", University of Missouri, Psychology of Men and Masculinity; online March, 2014
^ a b Kelly, Liz (2005). A gap or a chasm? : Attrition in reported rape cases. London: Home Office Research, Development and Statistics Directorate. ISBN 1-84473-555-9. 
^ "Domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking: Findings from the British Crime Survey" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on August 12, 2011. Retrieved 2010-12-31. 
^ "Reporting Rape, Western Cape Government, New Zealand". 2015. Retrieved 2015-12-08. 
^ "The Secretary Generals database on violence against women". UN Secretary General's Database on Violence Against Women. 2009-07-24. Archived from the original on 2014-02-01. Retrieved 2013-02-03. 
^ Miranda Sawyer. "50,000 rapes each year but only 600 rapists sent to jail". The Guardian. 
^ "A damning indictment of Ireland's attitude to women | Amnesty International". Amnesty INternational. Archived from the original on 2013-03-08. Retrieved 2013-02-03. 
^ A gap or a chasm? Attrition in reported rape cases Home Office Research — February 2005 Archived March 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Cybulska B (2007). "Sexual assault: key issues". J R Soc Med. 100 (7): 321–4. doi:10.1258/jrsm.100.7.321. PMC 1905867 . PMID 17606752. 
^ "Abstracts Database — National Criminal Justice Reference Service". Ncjrs.gov. Retrieved 2010-12-31. 
^ a b UK, The Huffington Post (2013-03-13). "'Damaging Myths' About False Rape Accusations Harming Real Victims". HuffPost UK. Retrieved 2017-09-08. 
^ "Charging perverting the course of justice and wasting police time in cases involving allegedly false rape and domestic violence allegations" Archived from: http://www.cps.gov.uk/publications/research/perverting_course_of_justice_march_2013.pdf
^ Crime Index Offenses Reported. FBI.gov. 1996
^ False Allegations, Recantations, and Unfounding in the Context of Sexual Assault. Attorney General's Sexual Assault Task Force Oregon, US January 10, 2008.
^ a b Kanin, E.J. (1994). "An alarming national trend: False rape allegations". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 23 (1). 
^ Lisak, David; Gardinier, Lori; Nicksa, Sarah C.; Cote, Ashley M. (2010). "False Allegations of Sexual Assualt [sic]: An Analysis of Ten Years of Reported Cases". Violence Against Women. 16 (12): 1318–1334. doi:10.1177/1077801210387747. PMID 21164210. 
^ Connors, Edward; Lundregan, Thomas; Miller, Neal; McEwen, Tom (June 1996). "Convicted by Juries, Exonerated by Science: Case Studies in the Use of DNA Evidence to Establish Innocence After Trial" (PDF). National Institute of Justice. pp. xxviii–xxix. 
^ Lisak, David; Gardinier, Lori; Nicksa, Sarah C.; Cote, Ashley M. (2010-12-01). "False Allegations of Sexual Assualt: An Analysis of Ten Years of Reported Cases". Violence Against Women. 16 (12): 1318–1334. doi:10.1177/1077801210387747. ISSN 1077-8012. PMID 21164210. 
^ James Fitzjames Stephen, A History of the Criminal Law of England, p. 17 [3]
^ Nghiem L. Nguyen (2006). "Roman Rape: An Overview of Roman Rape Laws from the Republican Period to Justinian's Reign". 
^ George Mousourakis, The Historical and Institutional Context of Roman Law p. 30 [4]
^ Brundage, James A., "Rape and Seduction in Medieval Canon Law", in Sexual Practices and the Medieval Church, edited by Vern L. Bullough and James Brundage, Buffalo, 1982, p.141
^ Justinian Institutiones
^ Basil of Caesarea, Letters circa 374 AD
^ Development of Global Prohibition Regimes: Pillage and Rape in War - Tuba Inal. Retrieved 2013-06-15. 
^ The Routledge History of Sex and the Body: 1500 to the Present. 2013-03-14. Retrieved 2013-06-15. 
^ Painter, George. "The History of Sodomy Laws in the United States - Idaho". Gay & Lesbian Archives of the Pacific Northwest. Retrieved 2015-12-11. 
^ "Case Closed: Rape and Human Rights in Nordic countries" Archived 2013-10-20 at the Wayback Machine., Amnesty International report, 8 March 2010
^ Hammurabi's Code #156
^ "The Medieval Blood Sanction and the Divine Beneficene of Pain: 1100–1450", Trisha Olson, Journal of Law and Religion, 22 JLREL 63 (2006)
^ Eckman, Zoe (2009). "An Oppressive Silence: The Evolution of the Raped Woman in Medieval France and England" (PDF). Historian: Journal of the Undergraduate History Department at New York University. 50: 68–77. 
^ Enríquez Fernández, Javier; Hidalgo de Cisneros Amestoy, Concepción; et al. (1994). "Fuentes Jurídicas Medievales del Señoría de Vizcaya. Fueros de las Encartaciones, de la Merindad de Durango y de las Ferrerías". Fuentes Documentales Medievales del País Vasco. Eusko Ikaskuntza (51). Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 22 September 2013. Section: Fuerza de muger
^ G Sperati (February 2009). "Amputation of the nose throughout history". Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital. 29 (1): 44–50. PMC 2689568 . PMID 19609383. 
^ Julius Ralph Ruff. Violence in early modern Europe, 1500-1800. p. 144. 
^ The jus primae noctis as a male power display: A review of historic sources with evolutionary interpretation. Fibri.de (1996-10-30). Retrieved on 2011-10-01.
^ "The Straight Dope: Did medieval lords have "right of the first night" with the local brides?". straightdope.com. 
^ Alan Soble, Sexual Investigations, NYU Press, 1998, p.10-11.
^ Vern L. Bullough, Bonnie Bullough, Human Sexuality: An Encyclopedia
^ Daphne Hampson, After Christianity
^ "The Council of Trent, The Twenty-Fourth Session". 
^ "Women in the French revolution" (PDF). 
^ Angela Marie Howard Zophy; Angela Howard; Frances M. Kavenik (1990). Handbook of American women's history. Garland. ISBN 978-0-8240-8744-9. Retrieved 1 October 2011. 
^ Rape — Overview; Act and Mental State, Wayne R. LaFave Professor of Law, University of Illinois, "Substantive Criminal Law" 752-756 (3d ed. 2000)
^ Navanethem Pillay is quoted by Professor Paul Walters in his presentation of her honorary doctorate of law, Rhodes University, April 2005 Judge Navanethem Pillay. Introduction by Professor Paul Walters, Public Orator (doc file)
^ Nowell, Irene (1997). Women in the Old Testament. Liturgical Press. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-8146-2411-1. 
^ Vikman, Elisabeth (April 2005). "Ancient origins: Sexual violence in warfare, Part I". Anthropology & Medicine. 12 (1): 21–31. doi:10.1080/13648470500049826. 
^ "Rise of Mongol Power"
^ "Genghis Khan a Prolific Lover, DNA Data Implies". National Geographic News. February 14, 2003.
^ Richard Bessel; Dirk Schumann (2003). Life after death: approaches to a cultural and social history of Europe during the 1940s and 1950s. Cambridge University Press. pp. 143–. ISBN 978-0-521-00922-5. Retrieved 1 October 2011. 
^ Chinese city remembers Japanese 'Rape of Nanjing'. CNN. December 13, 1997
^ Comfort Women Were 'Raped': U.S. Ambassador to Japan. chosun.com. March 19, 2007
^ "Italian women win cash for wartime rapes". Listserv.acsu.buffalo.edu. Archived from the original on 2013-07-15. Retrieved 2010-12-31. 
^ Mathieu von Rohr (May 29, 2013). "'Bandits in Uniform': The Dark Side of GIs in Liberated France". Spiegel. Retrieved 2013-05-31. 
^ Beevor, Antony (2002-05-01). "They raped every German female from eight to 80". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2008-01-01. 
^ Ungvary, Krisztian; Ladislaus Lob; John Lukacs (April 11, 2005). The siege of Budapest: One Hundred Days in World War II. Yale University Press. p. 512. ISBN 0-300-10468-5. 
^ James, Mark. "Remembering Rape: Divided Social Memory and the Red Army in Hungary 1944–1945". Past & Present. Oxford University Press. 188 (August 2005): 133–161. doi:10.1093/pastj/gti020. ISSN 1477-464X. 
^ Bessel, Richard; Dirk Schumann (May 5, 2003). Life after Death: Approaches to a Cultural and Social History of Europe. Cambridge University Press. p. 376. ISBN 0-521-00922-7. 
^ Naimark, Norman M. (1995). The Russians in Germany: A History of the Soviet Zone of Occupation, 1945–1949. Cambridge: Belknap. ISBN 0-674-78405-7. 


Further reading


Bergen, Raquel Kennedy (1996). Wife rape: understanding the response of survivors and service providers. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. ISBN 978-0-8039-7240-7. 
Denov, Myriam S. (2004). Perspectives on female sex offending: a culture of denial. Aldershot, Hants, England: Ashgate. ISBN 978-0-7546-3565-9. 
Freedman, Estelle B. (2013). Redefining rape: sexual violence in the era of suffrage and segregation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-6747-2484-6. 
Groth, Nicholas A. (1979). Men Who Rape: The Psychology of the Offender. New York, NY: Plenum Press. p. 227. ISBN 978-0-7382-0624-0. 
Jozkowski, Kristen N.; Canan, Sasha N.; Rhoads, Kelley; Hunt, Mary (October–December 2016). "Methodological considerations for content analysis of sexual consent communication in mainstream films". Sexualization, Media, & Society. Sage. 2 (4): 1–17. doi:10.1177/2374623816679184. 
King, Michael B.; Mezey, Gillian C. (2000). Male victims of sexual assault. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-262932-6. 
Lee, Ellis (1989). Theories of Rape: Inquiries Into the Causes of Rape. Taylor & Francis. p. 185. ISBN 978-0-89116-172-1. 
McKibbin, William F.; Shackelford, Todd K.; Goetz, Aaron T.; Starratt, Valerie G. (March 2008). "Why do men rape? An evolutionary psychological perspective". Review of General Psychology. American Psychological Association via PsycNET. 12 (1): 86–97. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.12.1.86.  Pdf.
Odem, Mary E.; Clay-Warner, Jody (1998). Confronting Rape and Sexual Assault. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-842-02599-7. 
Palmer, Craig; Thornhill, Randy (2000). A natural history of rape biological bases of sexual coercion. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-585-08200-4. 
Pierce, Karen F.; Deacy, Susan; Arafat, K.W. (2002). Rape in antiquity. London: The Classical Press of Wales in association with Duckworth. ISBN 978-0-7156-3147-8. 
Rice, Marnie E.; Lalumiere, Martin L.; Quinsey, Vernon L. (2005). The causes of rape: understanding individual differences in male propensity for sexual aggression (the law and public policy.). American Psychological Association (APA). ISBN 978-1-59147-186-8. 
Shapcott, David (1988). The Face of the Rapist. Auckland, NZ: Penguin Books. p. 234. ISBN 978-0-14-009335-3. 
Smith, Merril D. (2004). Encyclopedia of rape. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-32687-5. 


External links



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Rape





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rape.



Indian Penal Code S.375 & S.376 (Mobile Friendly)
 News related to rape at Wikinews
Center for Adolescent Health and the Law
The complicated, inadequate language of sexual violence Vox, Nov 30, 2017
State statutes, US Department of Health and Human Services, Child Welfare Information Gateway







v
t
e


Human sexuality and sexology




Sexual relationship
phenomena




Asexuality

Gray asexuality


Bisexuality
Casual relationship
Casual sex
Celibacy
Celibacy syndrome
Committed relationship
Free love
Foreplay
Herbivore men
Heterosexuality
Homosexuality
Hypersexuality
Marriage
One-night stand
Polyamory
Promiscuity

Female


Romantic love

Romantic orientation


Flirting
Sex life
Sexual abstinence
Sexual partner
Single person
Swinging





Sexual dynamics



Hypergamy
Intersex
Physical attractiveness
Sexual attraction
Sexual ethics





See also



Sexual addiction
Sex Addicts Anonymous
Sexual surrogate












v
t
e


Sexual ethics



Human sexuality



Adolescent sexuality

Rainbow party


Adultery
Education
Fetishism
Incest

law


Miscegenation
Objectification
Orientation
Pregnancy

Abortion


Prostitution

law


Survival sex





Child sexuality



Child marriage
Child pornography

law


Child prostitution
Child sex tourism





Sexual abuse



Child-on-child sexual abuse
Child sexual abuse

law


Harassment
Rape

law







Age of consent (reform)



Africa
Asia
Europe
North America

United States


Oceania
South America








 List of topics












v
t
e


Violence against women



Issues



Abuse during childbirth
Acid throwing
Breast ironing
Bride burning
Bride buying
Dating abuse
Domestic violence

outline
management
and pregnancy


Dowry death
Eve teasing
Honor killing
Female genital mutilation

Gishiri cutting
Infibulation
Husband stitch


Female infanticide
Femicide
Foot binding
Force-feeding
Forced abortion
Forced marriage
Forced pregnancy
Forced prostitution
Human trafficking
Murder of pregnant women
Raptio
Sati
Violence against prostitutes





Sexual assault, rape



Sexual assault

Campus sexual assault
Mass sexual assault


Rape

and pregnancy
laws


Types of rape

by deception
corrective
date
gang
genocidal
in war
marital
prison
statutory


Sexual slavery
Sexual violence





Related topics



Prosecution of gender-targeted crimes
November 25th
February 6th
Serial rapist






 Category










v
t
e


Abuse



Types



Abuse during childbirth
Anti-social behaviour
Bullying
Child abuse (neglect, sexual)
Cruelty to animals
Domestic abuse
Elder abuse
Gaslighting
Harassment
Humiliation
Incivility
Institutional abuse
Intimidation
Neglect
Persecution
Professional abuse
Proxy abuse
Psychological abuse
Physical abuse
Religious abuse
Sexual abuse
Stalking
Structural abuse
Verbal abuse
more...





Related topics



Abusive power and control
Child grooming
Complex post-traumatic stress disorder
Dehumanization
Denial
Destabilisation
Disengaging from an abuser
Exaggeration
Isolation
Just-world hypothesis
Lying
Manipulation
Minimisation
Narcissism
Psychological projection
Psychological trauma
Psychopathy
Rationalization
Traumatic bonding
Victim blaming
Victim playing
Victimisation











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rape&oldid=818517061"					Categories: Acute painGender-related violenceRapeSex crimesSexual abuseViolence against menViolence against womenViolent crimeWikipedia pages referenced by the pressHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 maint: Explicit use of et al.CS1 maint: Extra textCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia articles incorporating text from the Centers for Disease Control and PreventionWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesInfobox medical conditionAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2017Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015All articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from January 2015All pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2015