For other meanings of the terms for rapid transit, see rapid transit (disambiguation), metro (disambiguation), subway (disambiguation), rail (disambiguation), and urban rail transit.
"Metro line" redirects here. For the bus company in London, see Metroline. For the light rail line in Edmonton, see Metro Line.




The New York City Subway is the world's largest single operator rapid transit system by number of stations, at 472.






The Moscow Metro is one of the busiest metro systems in the world and is the busiest in Europe.


Rapid transit or mass rapid transit, also known as heavy rail, metro, subway, tube, or underground, is a type of high-capacity public transport generally found in urban areas.[1][2][3] Unlike buses or trams, rapid transit systems are electric railways that operate on an exclusive right-of-way, which cannot be accessed by pedestrians or other vehicles of any sort,[4] and which is often grade separated in tunnels or on elevated railways.
Modern services on rapid transit systems are provided on designated lines between stations typically using electric multiple units on rail tracks, although some systems use guided rubber tires, magnetic levitation, or monorail.[citation needed] The stations typically have high platforms, without steps inside the trains, requiring custom-made trains in order to minimize gaps between train and platform. They are typically integrated with other public transport and often operated by the same public transport authorities. However, some rapid transit systems have at-grade intersections between a rapid transit line and a road or between two rapid transit lines.[5] It is unchallenged in its ability to transport large numbers of people quickly over short distances with little to no use of land.
The world's first rapid transit system was the partially underground Metropolitan Railway which opened as a conventional railway in 1863, and now forms part of the London Underground.[6] In 1868, New York opened the elevated West Side and Yonkers Patent Railway, initially a cable-hauled line using static steam engines.
China has the largest number of rapid transit systems in the world. The world's longest single-operator rapid transit system by route length is the Shanghai Metro.[7][8] The world's largest single rapid transit service provider by number of stations (472 stations in total)[9] is the New York City Subway. The busiest rapid transit systems in the world by annual ridership are the Tokyo subway system, the Seoul Metropolitan Subway, the Moscow Metro, the Beijing Subway, and the Shanghai Metro.[10]



Contents


1 Terminology
2 History
3 Operation

3.1 Lines

3.1.1 Network topologies


3.2 Passenger information
3.3 Safety and security
3.4 Added Features


4 Infrastructure

4.1 Stations
4.2 Modal tradeoffs and interconnections


5 Costs, benefits, and impacts
6 See also
7 References
8 Notes
9 External links



Terminology[edit]
Main article: Passenger rail terminology
Metro is the most common term for underground rapid transit systems used by non-native English speakers.[11] Rapid transit systems may be named after the medium by which passengers travel in busy central business districts; the use of tunnels inspires names such as subway,[12] underground,[13] Untergrundbahn (U-Bahn) in German,[14] or the Tunnelbana (T-bana) in Swedish;[15] the use of viaducts inspires names such as elevated (el or L), skytrain,[16] overhead, overground or Hochbahn in German. One of these terms may apply to an entire system, even if a large part of the network (for example, in outer suburbs) runs at ground level.
In most of Britain, a subway is a pedestrian underpass; the terms Underground and Tube are used for the London Underground, and the North East England Tyne and Wear Metro, mostly overground, is known as the Metro. In Scotland, however, the Glasgow Subway underground rapid transit system is known as the Subway. In the US, underground mass transit systems are primarily known as subways, whereas the term metro is a shortened reference to a metropolitan area. In that vein, Chicago's commuter rail system, serving the metropolitan area, is called Metra. Exceptions in naming rapid transit systems are the Washington Metro, Los Angeles Metro Rail, and the Miami Metrorail, which are generally called the Metro.[17]
History[edit]
Main article: History of rapid transit




Initial construction stages of London's Metropolitan Railway at King's Cross St. Pancras in 1861


The opening of London's steam-hauled Metropolitan Railway in 1863 marked the beginning of rapid transit. Initial experiences with steam engines, despite ventilation, were unpleasant. Experiments with pneumatic railways failed in their extended adoption by cities. Electric traction was more efficient, faster and cleaner than steam and the natural choice for trains running in tunnels and proved superior for elevated services. In 1890 the City & South London Railway was the first electric-traction rapid transit railway, which was also fully underground.[18] Both railways were eventually merged into London Underground. The 1893 Liverpool Overhead Railway was designed to use electric traction from the outset.[19]
The technology quickly spread to other cities in Europe, the United States, Argentina, and Canada, with some railways being converted from steam and others being designed to be electric from the outset. Budapest in Hungary and Glasgow, Chicago and New York all converted or purpose-designed and built electric rail services.[20]
Advancements in technology have allowed new automated services. Hybrid solutions have also evolved, such as tram-train and premetro, which incorporate some of the features of rapid transit systems.[18] In response to cost, engineering considerations and topological challenges some cities have opted to construct tram systems.[21]
Since the 1960s many new systems were introduced in Europe, Asia and Latin America.[14] In the 21st century, China became the world's leader in metro expansion with near 60 cities having or planning rapid transit systems, and many other Asian cities also undertook the construction of such systems.
Operation[edit]




Subway line in Warsaw, Poland on Wilanowska station




Play media


Train parade on Circle Line in Moscow Metro


Rapid transit is used in cities, agglomerations, and metropolitan areas to transport large numbers of people often short distances at high frequency. The extent of the rapid transit system varies greatly between cities, with several transport strategies.
Some systems may extend only to the limits of the inner city, or to its inner ring of suburbs with trains making frequent station stops. The outer suburbs may then be reached by a separate commuter rail network where more widely spaced stations allow higher speeds. In some cases the differences between urban rapid transit and suburban systems are not clear.[3]
Rapid transit systems may be supplemented by other systems such as trolleybuses, regular buses, trams, or commuter rail. This combination of transit modes serves to offset certain limitations of rapid transit such as limited stops and long walking distances between outside access points. Bus or tram feeder systems transport people to rapid transit stops.[22]
Lines[edit]




Metro M1 kit on line C in Prague Metro






Coaches of Delhi Metro are color-coded to indicate each line or service, with named icons to indicate stations.


Each rapid transit system consists of one or more lines, or circuits. Each line is serviced by at least one specific route with trains stopping at all or some of the line's stations. Most systems operate several routes, and distinguish them by colors, names, numbering, or a combination thereof. Some lines may share track with each other for a portion of their route or operate solely on their own right-of-way. Often a line running through the city center forks into two or more branches in the suburbs, allowing a higher service frequency in the center. This arrangement is used by many systems, such as the Copenhagen Metro,[23] the Oslo Metro and the New York City Subway.[24]
Alternatively, there may be a single central terminal (often shared with the central railway station), or multiple interchange stations between lines in the city center, for instance in the Prague Metro.[25] The London Underground[26] and Paris Métro[27] are densely built systems with a matrix of crisscrossing lines throughout the cities. The Chicago 'L' has most of its lines converging on The Loop, the main business, financial, and cultural area. Some systems have a circular line around the city center connecting to radially arranged outward lines, such as the Moscow Metro's Koltsevaya Line and Beijing Subway's Line 10.
The capacity of a line is obtained by multiplying the car capacity, the train length, and the service frequency. Heavy rapid transit trains might have six to twelve cars, while lighter systems may use four or fewer. Cars have a capacity of 100 to 150 passengers, varying with the seated to standing ratio—more standing gives higher capacity. The minimum time interval between trains is shorter for rapid transit than for mainline railways owing to the use of Communications based train control: the minimum headway can reach 90 seconds, but many systems typically use 120 seconds to allow for recovery from delays. Typical capacity lines allow 1,200 people per train, giving 36,000 people per hour. The highest attained capacity is 80,000 people per hour by the MTR Corporation in Hong Kong.[28]
Network topologies[edit]
Main article: List of metro systems
Rapid transit topologies are determined by a large number of factors, including geographical barriers, existing or expected travel patterns, construction costs, politics, and historical constraints. A transit system is expected to serve an area of land with a set of lines, which consist of shapes summarized as "I", "U", "S", and "O" shapes or loops. Geographical barriers may cause chokepoints where transit lines must converge (for example, to cross a body of water), which are potential congestion sites but also offer an opportunity for transfers between lines. Ring lines provide good coverage, connect between the radial lines and serve tangential trips that would otherwise need to cross the typically congested core of the network. A rough grid pattern can offer a wide variety of routes while still maintaining reasonable speed and frequency of service.[29]













Line, e.g. Algiers, Almaty, Baltimore, Cleveland, Gwangju, Helsinki, Hiroshima, Kazan, Mumbai, Panama City, Yekaterinburg 













Cross, e.g. Bangalore, Atlanta, Esfahan, Incheon, Lima, Kaohsiung, Kyoto, Manila (LRT), Minsk, Nizhny Novgorod, Philadelphia, Rome, Sendai, Warsaw 













X-shaped, e.g. Amsterdam, Brussels, San Francisco Bay Area, Stockholm 













Two crossing paths (air bladder), e.g. Cairo, Lille, Marseille, Milan, Montreal, Nuremberg, Toronto 













Secant, e.g. Hyderabad, Athens, Budapest, Lisbon, Munich, Prague, São Paulo, St. Petersburg, Tashkent, Tianjin, 













Radial, e.g. Boston, Budapest, Buenos Aires, Chicago, Daegu, Kiev, Kuala Lumpur, Sapporo, Tehran, Washington DC 













Circle, e.g. Glasgow 













Circle-radial, e.g. Beijing, Bucharest, London, Madrid, Moscow, Seoul, Shanghai, Singapore, Tokyo, Copenhagen 













Complex grid, e.g. Berlin, Delhi, Guangzhou, Hong Kong, Mexico City, New York, Osaka, Paris, Shenzhen, Taipei 






Passenger information[edit]




Tokyo Metro uses large LCD information display to show the current location, upcoming stops, and advertisements in several languages.






Information panel showing the current location and upcoming stops of an East-West MRT train in Singapore


Rapid transit operators have often built up strong brands, often focused on easy recognition—to allow quick identification even in the vast array of signage found in large cities—combined with the desire to communicate speed, safety, and authority.[30] In many cities, there is a single corporate image for the entire transit authority, but the rapid transit uses its own logo that fits into the profile.
A transit map is a topological map or schematic diagram used to show the routes and stations in a public transport system. The main components are color-coded lines to indicate each line or service, with named icons to indicate stations. Maps may show only rapid transit or also include other modes of public transport.[31] Transit maps can be found in transit vehicles, on platforms, elsewhere in stations, and in printed timetables. Maps help users understand the interconnections between different parts of the system; for example, they show the interchange stations where passengers can transfer between lines. Unlike conventional maps, transit maps are usually not geographically accurate, but emphasize the topological connections among the different stations. The graphic presentation may use straight lines and fixed angles, and often a fixed minimum distance between stations, to simplify the display of the transit network. Often this has the effect of compressing the distance between stations in the outer area of the system, and expanding distances between those close to the center.[31]
Some systems assign unique alphanumeric codes to each of their stations to help commuters identify them, which briefly encodes information about the line it is on, and its position on the line.[32] For example, on the Singapore MRT, Changi Airport MRT Station has the alphanumeric code CG2, indicating its position as the 2nd station on the Changi Airport branch of the East West Line. Interchange stations would have at least two codes, for example, Raffles Place MRT Station has two codes, NS26 and EW14, the 26th station on the North South Line and the 14th station on the East West Line.
With widespread use of the Internet and cell phones globally, transit operators now use these technologies to present information to their users. In addition to online maps and timetables, some transit operators now offer real-time information which allows passengers to know when the next vehicle will arrive, and expected travel times. The standardized GTFS data format for transit information allows many third-party software developers to produce web and smartphone app programs which give passengers customized updates regarding specific transit lines and stations of interest.
Safety and security[edit]




Platform-edge doors are used for safety at Daan Station on Line 2, Taipei Metro, Taiwan


See also: Classification of railway accidents
Compared to other modes of transport, rapid transit has a good safety record, with few accidents. Rail transport is subject to strict safety regulations, with requirements for procedure and maintenance to minimize risk. Head-on collisions are rare due to use of double track, and low operating speeds reduce the occurrence and severity of rear-end collisions and derailments. Fire is more of a danger underground, such as the King's Cross fire in London in November 1987, which killed 31 people. Systems are generally built to allow evacuation of trains at many places throughout the system.[33][34]
High platforms (usually over 1 meter / 3 feet) are a safety risk, as people falling onto the tracks have trouble climbing back. Platform screen doors are used on some systems to eliminate this danger.




An underground station of Chennai Metro with platform-edge doors in Chennai, India


Rapid transit facilities are public spaces and may suffer from security problems: petty crimes, such as pickpocketing and baggage theft, and more serious violent crimes. Security measures include video surveillance, security guards, and conductors. In some countries a specialized transit police may be established. These security measures are normally integrated with measures to protect revenue by checking that passengers are not travelling without paying.[35] Some subway systems, such as the Beijing Subway, which is ranked by Worldwide Rapid Transit Data as the "World's Safest Rapid Transit Network" in 2015, incorporate airport-style security checkpoints at every station. Rapid transit systems have been subject to terrorism with many casualties, such as the 1995 Tokyo subway sarin gas attack[36] and the 2005 "7/7" terrorist bombings on the London Underground.
Added Features[edit]
Some rapid transport trains have extra features such as wall sockets and internet connectivity.
Infrastructure[edit]




Inside a tunnel on the Turin Metro, the interlocking tunnel lining segments placed by a tunnel boring machine can be clearly seen.






Landungsbrücken station in Hamburg is an example where the U-Bahn is on the surface while the S-Bahn station is on a lower level


Main article: Rapid transit technology
Most rapid transit trains are electric multiple units with lengths from three to over ten cars.[37] Crew sizes have decreased throughout history, with some modern systems now running completely unstaffed trains.[38] Other trains continue to have drivers, even if their only role in normal operation is to open and close the doors of the trains at stations. Power is commonly delivered by a third rail or by overhead wires. The whole London Underground network uses fourth rail and others use the linear motor for propulsion.[39] Most run on conventional steel railway tracks, although some use rubber tires, such as the Montreal Metro and Mexico City Metro and some lines in the Paris Métro. Rubber tires allow steeper gradients and a softer ride, but have higher maintenance costs and are less energy efficient. They also lose traction when weather conditions are wet or icy, preventing above-ground use of the Montréal Metro and limiting above-ground use on the Sapporo Municipal Subway but not rubber-tired systems in other cities.[40] High capacity Monorails with larger and longer trains can be classified as rapid transit systems.[citation needed] Such monorail systems recently started operating in Chongqing and São Paulo. Light metro is a subclass of rapid transit that has the speed and grade separation of a "full metro'' but is designed for smaller passenger numbers. It often has smaller loading gauges, lighter train cars and smaller consists of typically two to four cars. Light metros are typically used as feeder lines into the main rapid transit system.[41] For instance, the Wenhu Line of the Taipei Metro serves many relatively sparse neighbourhoods and feeds into and complements the high capacity metro lines.
Some systems have been built from scratch, others are reclaimed from former commuter rail or suburban tramway systems that have been upgraded, and often supplemented with an underground or elevated downtown section.[15] At grade alignments with a dedicated right-of-way are typically used only outside dense areas, since they create a physical barrier in the urban fabric that hinders the flow of people and vehicles across their path and have a larger physical footprint. This method of construction is the cheapest as long as land values are low. It is often used for new systems in areas that are planned to fill up with buildings after the line is built.[42]
Underground tunnels move traffic away from street level, avoiding delays caused by traffic congestion and leaving more land available for buildings and other uses. In areas of high land prices and dense land use, tunnels may be the only economic route for mass transportation. Cut-and-cover tunnels are constructed by digging up city streets, which are then rebuilt over the tunnel; alternatively, tunnel-boring machines can be used to dig deep-bore tunnels that lie further down in bedrock.[18]
Elevated railways are a cheaper and easier way to build an exclusive right-of-way without digging expensive tunnels or creating barriers. In addition to street level railways they may also be the only other feasible alternative due to considerations such as a high water table close to the city surface that raises the cost of, or even precludes underground railways (e.g. Miami). Elevated guideways were popular around the beginning of the 20th century, but fell out of favor; they came back into fashion in the last quarter of the century—often in combination with driverless systems, for instance Vancouver's SkyTrain, London's Docklands Light Railway,[43] the Miami Metrorail, and the Bangkok Skytrain.[44]
Stations[edit]
Main article: Metro station




The spacious Getafe Central station on Line 12 of Madrid Metro has several clearly visible levels.


Stations function as hubs to allow passengers to board and disembark from trains. They are also payment checkpoints and allow passengers to transfer between modes of transport, for instance to buses or other trains. Access is provided via either island- or side platforms.[45] Underground stations, especially deep-level ones, increase the overall transport time: long escalator rides to the platforms mean that the stations can become bottlenecks if not adequately built. Some underground and elevated stations are integrated into vast underground or skyway networks respectively, that connect to nearby commercial buildings.[46] In suburbs, there may be a "park and ride" connected to the station.[47]
To allow easy access to the trains, the platform height allows step-free access between platform and train. If the station complies with accessibility standards, it allows both disabled people and those with wheeled baggage easy access to the trains,[48] though if the track is curved there can be a gap between the train and platform. Some stations use platform screen doors to increase safety by preventing people falling onto the tracks, as well as reducing ventilation costs.
The deepest station in the world is Arsenalna station in Kiev, Ukraine[49] (105.5 m).
Particularly in the former Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries, but to an increasing extent elsewhere, the stations were built with splendid decorations such as marble walls, polished granite floors and mosaics—thus exposing the public to art in their everyday life, outside galleries and museums. The systems in Moscow, St. Petersburg, Tashkent and Kiev are widely regarded as some of the most beautiful in the world.[50] Several other cities such as Stockholm, Montreal, Lisbon, Naples and Los Angeles have also focused on art, which may range from decorative wall claddings, to large, flamboyant artistic schemes integrated with station architecture, to displays of ancient artifacts recovered during station construction.[51] It may be possible to profit by attracting more passengers by spending relatively small amounts on grand architecture, art, cleanliness, accessibility, lighting and a feeling of safety.[52]
Modal tradeoffs and interconnections[edit]
Main article: Urban rail transit




Stratford Station in London is shared by London Underground trains (left) and main line rail services (right), as well as the Docklands Light Railway (not shown).


Since the 1980s, trams have incorporated several features of rapid transit: light rail systems (trams) run on their own rights-of-way, thus avoiding congestion; they remain on the same level as buses and cars. Some light rail systems have elevated or underground sections. Both new and upgraded tram systems allow faster speed and higher capacity, and are a cheap alternative to construction of rapid transit, especially in smaller cities.[21]
A premetro design means that an underground rapid transit system is built in the city center, but only a light rail or tram system in the suburbs. Conversely, other cities have opted to build a full metro in the suburbs, but run trams in city streets to save the cost of expensive tunnels. In North America, interurbans were constructed as street-running suburban trams, without the grade-separation of rapid transit. Premetros also allow a gradual upgrade of existing tramways to rapid transit, thus spreading the investment costs over time. They are most common in Germany with the name Stadtbahn.[37]
Suburban commuter rail is a heavy rail system that operates at a lower frequency than urban rapid transit, with higher average speeds, often only serving one station in each village and town. Commuter rail systems of some cities (such as German S-Bahns, Chennai rail, Australian cityrails, Danish S-tog etc.) can be seen as the substitute for the city's rapid transit system providing frequent mass transit within city. As opposed to some cities (such as the Dubai Metro, Shanghai Metro, MetroSur of the Madrid Metro, Taipei Metro, Kuala Lumpur Rapid Transit etc.) the mainly urban rapid transit systems have lines that fan out to reach the outer suburbs. With some other urban or "near urban" rapid transit systems (Guangfo Metro, Bay Area Rapid Transit, Los Teques Metro and Seoul Subway Line 7, etc.) serving bi- and multi-nucleus agglomerations.
Some cities have opted for two tiers of urban railways: an urban rapid transit system (such as the Paris Métro, Berlin U-Bahn, London Underground, and the Tokyo subway) and a suburban system (such as their counterparts RER, S-Bahn, future Crossrail & London Overground, JR Urban Lines respectively). The suburban systems may have their own purpose built trackage, run at similar "rapid transit-like" frequencies, and commonly are operated by the national railway company. In some cities these suburban services run through tunnels in the city center and have direct transfers to the rapid transit system, on the same or adjoining platforms.[53][54] California's BART, Federal District's Metrô-DF and Washington's Metrorail system is an example of a hybrid of the two: in the suburbs the lines function like a commuter rail line, with longer intervals and longer distance between stations; in the downtown areas, the stations become closer together and many lines interline with intervals dropping to typical rapid transit headways.
Costs, benefits, and impacts[edit]
Main article: Transport planning




The Docklands Light Railway in London allows for dense land use, while retaining a high capacity.


As of May 2012[update], 184 cities have built rapid transit systems.[55] The capital cost is high, as is the risk of cost overrun and benefit shortfall; public financing is normally required. Rapid transit is sometimes seen as an alternative to an extensive road transport system with many motorways;[56] the rapid transit system allows higher capacity with less land use, less environmental impact, and a lower cost.[57]
Elevated or underground systems in city centers allow the transport of people without occupying expensive land, and permit the city to develop compactly without physical barriers. Motorways often depress nearby residential land values, but proximity to a rapid transit station often triggers commercial and residential growth, with large transit oriented development office and housing blocks being constructed.[56][58] Also, an efficient transit system can decrease the economic welfare loss caused by the increase of population density in a metropolis.[59]
Rapid transit systems have high fixed costs. Most systems are publicly owned, by either local governments, transit authorities or national governments. Capital investments are often partially or completely financed by taxation, rather than by passenger fares, but must often compete with funding for roads. The transit systems may be operated by the owner or by a private company through a public service obligation. The owners of the systems often also own the connecting bus or rail systems, or are members of the local transport association, allowing for free transfers between modes. Almost all transit systems operate at a deficit, requiring fare revenue, advertising and subsidies to cover costs.
The farebox recovery ratio, a ratio of ticket income to operating costs, is often used to assess operational profitability, with some systems including Hong Kong's MTR Corporation,[60] and Taipei[61] achieving recovery ratios of well over 100%. This ignores both heavy capital costs incurred in building the system, which are often subsidized with soft loans[62] and whose servicing is excluded from calculations of profitability, as well as ancillary revenue such as income from real estate portfolios.[60] Some systems, particularly Hong Kong's, extensions are partly financed by the sale of land whose value has appreciated by the new access the extension has brought to the area,[42] a process known as value capture.
See also[edit]


Transport portal
Trains portal
Buses portal



List of metro systems
Bus rapid transit
Megaproject
Rapid transit technology

References[edit]


^ "Rapid transit". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 2013-07-31. 
^ UITP (2011). "Recommended basic reference for developing a minimum set of standards for voluntary use in the field of urban rail, according to mandate M/486" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-02-22. Retrieved 2014-02-16. 
^ a b "Glossary of Transit Terminology" (PDF). American Public Transportation Association. Retrieved 2013-07-31. 
^ "Rapid Transit". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2014-11-28. 
^ "Chicago". Retrieved 2015-04-24. 
^ Transport for London. London Underground: History. ISBN 978-0-904711-30-1. Archived from the original on 2013-01-16. Retrieved 2013-01-02. 
^ "Shanghai now the world's longest metro". Railway Gazette International. 4 May 2010. Retrieved 2010-05-04. 
^ Smith, Stephen J. (6 January 2014). "New Starts: Shanghai Metro World's Longest, Panama Canal Drama, Japan's Maglev". Next City. Retrieved 2014-09-21. 
^ "Facts - Subway and Bus Ridership". Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA). Retrieved 2014-09-21. 
^ "Metros: Keeping pace with 21st century cities". uitp.org. International Association of Public Transport (French: L’Union, internationale des transports publics (UITP)). 2014. Retrieved 2014-09-20. 
^ Fjellstrom&Wright, 2002: p.2
^ Executive ed.: Joseph P. Pickert... (2000). The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (Fourth ed.). Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 0-618-08230-1. 
^ "Definition of "Underground"". Chambers Reference Online. Retrieved 2006-11-28. 
^ a b White, 2002: 63
^ a b Ovenden, 2007: 93
^ Ovenden, 2007: 16
^ "DC Metro System Fast Facts". CNN. 2013-11-03. Retrieved 2015-07-20. 
^ a b c Ovenden, 2007: 7
^ Bolger, Paul (2004-11-22). "Site Name: Liverpool Overhead Railway & Dingle Station". Subterranea Britannica. Retrieved 2007-09-19. 
^ "Subway". Encyclopædia Britannica online. Retrieved 2006-12-02. 
^ a b Pulling, Niel (2008-05-22). "Light Rail – the Solution to Inner-City Chaos?". Railway Technology. Retrieved 2008-08-18. 
^ Cervero, 1998: 13
^ Ovenden, 2007: 84
^ Ovenden, 2007: 32–35
^ Ovenden, 2007: 95
^ Ovenden, 2007: 28–31
^ Ovenden, 2007: 36–39
^ White, 2002: 65–66
^ Walker, Jarret (2012). Human transit : how clearer thinking about public transit can enrich our communities and our lives. Washington: Island Press. ISBN 978-1-59726-972-8. 
^ Ovenden, 2007: 107
^ a b Ovenden, 2007: 9
^ Ström, 1998: 58
^ Office of Hazardous Materials Safety. "A Comparison of Risk: Accidental Deaths – United States – 1999–2003". US Department of Transportation. Archived from the original on 7 September 2007. Retrieved 2007-09-10. 
^ "Office of Rail Regulation". UK Health & Safety Executive. Retrieved 2007-09-10. 
^ Needle et al., 1997: 10–13
^ "El auto de procesamiento por el 11-M". El Mundo (in Spanish). Retrieved 2008-09-08. 
^ a b White, 2002: 64
^ Railway Technology. "Toulouse Metro, France". Retrieved 2008-08-20. 
^ Sato, Yoshihiko; Matsumoto, Akira & Knothe, Klaus (2002). "Review on rail corrugation studies". Wear. 253 (1–2): 130–139. doi:10.1016/S0043-1648(02)00092-3. Retrieved 2008-08-21. 
^ Société de transport de Montréal. The Montreal Métro, a source of pride (PDF). p. 6. ISBN 2-921969-08-4. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 30, 2007. 
^ White, 2002: 64–65
^ a b Kjenstad, 1994: 46
^ "Docklands Light Railway – About DLR". Archived from the original on 27 October 2006. Retrieved 2006-12-04. 
^ "Bangkok Mass Transit System Company Limited – BTS SkyTrain". Archived from the original on 2006-11-19. Retrieved 2006-12-04. 
^ Uslan et al., 1990: 71
^ Cervero, 1998: 8
^ Cervero, 1998: 226
^ Boorse, Jack W. (1999). "Dual-Mode Traction Power Distribution for Light Rail Transit: A Design Option". Transportation Research Record. 1677: 67–72. doi:10.3141/1677-09. 
^ Ming-Tsun Ke; Tsung-Che Cheng & Wen-Por Wang (2002). "Numerical simulation for optimizing the design of subway environmental control system". Building and Environment. 37 (11): 1139–1152. doi:10.1016/S0360-1323(01)00105-6. 
^ "Metro Arts and Architecture". Metro Bits. Retrieved 2006-12-04. 
^ Storstockholms Lokaltrafik. "Konståkning i världens längsta konstutställning" (in Swedish). Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved 2008-08-20. 
^ "10 Ways to Enhance Your Community: Unleash the Power of Public Transportation" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 October 2006. Retrieved 2006-12-04. 
^ White, 2002: 63–64
^ Cervero, 1998: 21
^ "World Metro Database". Metro Bits. Retrieved 2013-11-17. 
^ a b Banister and Berechman, 2000: 258
^ Cervero, 1998: 26
^ European Conference of Ministers of Transport, 2003: 187
^ Prud'homme, Rémy. "Public transport congestion costs: The case of the Paris subway". Transport Policy. Elsevier. 21: 101–109. doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2011.11.002. Retrieved 2012-04-01. 
^ a b MTR Corporation (2008-08-05). "Announcement of Unaudited Results for the Six Months Ended 30 June 2008" (PDF). Retrieved 2008-08-21. 
^ "Taipei Rapid Transit Corporation '08 Annual Report" (PDF). Taipei Rapid Transit Corporation. p. 96. Retrieved 2010-07-06. 
^ http://cfusrug.org/articles/financing_strat.php


Notes[edit]


Banister, David & Berechman, Joseph (2000). Transport Investment and Economic Development. Routledge. ISBN 0-419-25590-7. 
Bobrick, Benson (1981). Labyrinths of Iron: a[n] History of the World's Subways. New York: Newsweek Books. ISBN 0-88225-299-2.
Cervero, Robert (1998). The Transit Metropolis. Island Press. ISBN 1-55963-591-6. 
European Conference of Ministers of Transport (2003). Safe & Sustainable Transport. Paris: OECD Publishing. ISBN 92-821-1303-5. 
Fjellstrom, K.; Wright, L. (2002). "Mass Transit Options" (PDF). Sustainable Transport: A Sourcebook for Policy-Makers in Developing Cities. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit. Retrieved 2009-07-09. 
Kjenstad, Rune (1994). På skinner i Bymarka (in Norwegian). Oslo: Baneforlaget. ISBN 82-91448-01-9. 
Ovenden, Mark (2007). Transit Maps of the World. London: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-311265-5. 
Needle, Jerome A.; Transportation Security Board & Cobb, Renée M. (1997). Improving Transit Security. Transportation Security Board. ISBN 0-309-06013-3. 
Ström, Marianne (1998). Metro Art. ACR Edition. ISBN 2-86770-068-X. 
White, Peter (2002). Public Transport: Its Planning, Management, and Operation. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0-415-25772-7. 
Uslan, Mark; American Foundation for the Blind; Peck, Alec; Wiener, William & Stern, Arlene (1990). Access to Mass Transit for Blind and Visually Impaired Travelers. American Foundation for the Blind. ISBN 0-89128-166-5. 
Executive ed.: Joseph P. Pickert... (2000). The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (Fourth ed.). Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 0-618-08230-1. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rapid transit.



UrbanRail







v
t
e


Public transport



Bus service



Bus

list


Bus rapid transit
Charabanc
Express bus
Guided bus
Intercity bus

driver


Open top bus
Public light bus
Rail replacement bus
Shuttle bus
Transit bus
Trolleybus





Rail



Cable car
Commuter rail
Funicular
Heavy rail
Heritage railway
Heritage streetcar
High-speed rail
Horsecar
Inter-city rail
Interurban
Light rail
Medium-capacity rail system
Monorail
Rapid transit
Regional rail
Rubber-tyred metro
Street running
Tram
Tram-train





Vehicles for hire



Auto rickshaw
Boda-boda
Cycle rickshaw
Gondola
Hackney carriage
Limousine
Motorcycle taxi
Paratransit
Personal rapid transit
Pulled rickshaw
Share taxi
Taxicab





Carpooling



Car jockey
Flexible carpooling
Real-time ridesharing
Slugging
Vanpool





Ship



Cable ferry
Ferry
Hovercraft
Hydrofoil
Ocean liner
Water taxi





Other transport



Aerial tramway
Airline
Airliner
Bicycle-sharing
Carsharing
Elevator
Escalator
Gondola lift
Horse-drawn vehicle
Maglev
Moving walkway
People mover
Trackless train





Locations



Airport
Bus bulb
Bus garage (bus depot)
Bus lane
Bus stand
Bus station
Bus stop
Bus terminus
Bus turnout (bus bay)
Dry dock
Hangar
Harbor
Interchange station
Kassel kerb
Layover
Metro station
Park and ride
Port
Queue jump
Taxicab stand
Train station
Tram stop
Transit mall
Transport hub





Ticketing and fares



Automated fare collection
Bus advertising
Contract of carriage
Dead mileage
Exit fare
Fare avoidance
Fare evasion
Farebox recovery ratio
Free public transport
Free travel pass
Integrated ticketing
Manual fare collection
Money train
Paid area
Proof-of-payment
Reduced fare program
Smart cards
Ticket machine
Transfer
Transit pass





Routing



Circle route
Cross-city route
Network length
Non-revenue track
Radial route
Transport network





Facilities



Checked baggage
First class
Sleeper
Standing passenger
Travel class





Scheduling



Bus bunching
Clock-face scheduling
Headway
On-time performance
Public transport timetable
Short turn





Politics



Airport security
Rail subsidies
Security
Transit district
Transit police
Transit-oriented development (TOD)
Transportation authority





Other topics



Boarding
Crush load
Destination sign
Hail and ride
Prohibited activities
Request stop
Passenger load factor
Transit map










Authority control



GND: 4078569-5
BNF: cb11950823r (data)
NDL: 00573011
NKC: ph122786











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rapid_transit&oldid=818348212"					Categories: Rapid transitPassenger rail transport1863 introductionsHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv)All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from May 2012All articles containing potentially dated statementsCS1 Norwegian-language sources (no)Commons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles containing video clips