





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





The smiley face in the top left corner is a raster image. When enlarged, individual pixels appear as squares. Zooming in further, they can be analyzed, with their colors constructed by adding the values for red, green and blue.


In computer graphics, a raster graphics or bitmap image is a dot matrix data structure, representing a generally rectangular grid of pixels, or points of color, viewable via a monitor, paper, or other display medium. Raster images are stored in image files with varying formats.[1][self-published source?]
A bitmap, a single-bit raster,[2] corresponds bit-for-bit with an image displayed on a screen, generally in the same format used for storage in the display's video memory, or maybe as a device-independent bitmap. A raster is technically characterized by the width and height of the image in pixels and by the number of bits per pixel (or color depth, which determines the number of colors it can represent).[3]
The printing and prepress industries know raster graphics as contones (from "continuous tones"). The opposite to contones is "line work", usually implemented as vector graphics in digital systems.[4] Vector images can be rasterized, and raster images vectorized, by software. In both cases some information is lost, although vectorizing can also restore some information back to machine readability, as happens in optical character recognition.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Applications

2.1 Computer displays
2.2 Image storage
2.3 Geographic information systems


3 Resolution
4 Raster-based image editors
5 See also
6 References



Etymology[edit]
The word "raster" has its origins in the Latin rastrum (a rake), which is derived from radere (to scrape). It originates from the raster scan of cathode ray tube (CRT) video monitors, which paint the image line by line by magnetically steering a focused electron beam.[5] By association, it can also refer to a rectangular grid of pixels. The word rastrum is now used to refer to a device for drawing musical staff lines.
Applications[edit]
Computer displays[edit]
Most modern computers have bitmapped displays, where each on-screen pixel directly corresponds to a small number of bits in memory.[6] The screen is refreshed simply by scanning through pixels and coloring them according to each set of bits. The refresh procedure, being speed critical, is often implemented by dedicated circuitry, often as a part of a graphics processing unit. An early scanned display with raster computer graphics was invented in the late 1960s by A. Michael Noll at Bell Labs,[7] but its patent application filed February 5, 1970 was abandoned at the Supreme Court in 1977 over the issue of the patentability of computer software.[8]
Image storage[edit]
Most computer images are stored in raster graphics formats or compressed variations, including GIF, JPEG, and PNG, which are popular on the World Wide Web.
Three-dimensional voxel raster graphics are employed in video games and are also used in medical imaging such as MRI scanners.[9]
Geographic information systems[edit]
GIS programs commonly use rasters that encode geographic data in the pixel values as well as the pixel locations.
Resolution[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Raster graphics are resolution dependent, meaning they cannot scale up to an arbitrary resolution without loss of apparent quality. This property contrasts with the capabilities of vector graphics, which easily scale up to the quality of the device rendering them. Raster graphics deal more practically than vector graphics with photographs and photo-realistic images, while vector graphics often serve better for typesetting or for graphic design. Modern computer-monitors typically display about 72 to 130 pixels per inch (PPI), and some modern consumer printers can resolve 2400 dots per inch (DPI) or more; determining the most appropriate image resolution for a given printer-resolution can pose difficulties, since printed output may have a greater level of detail than a viewer can discern on a monitor. Typically, a resolution of 150 to 300 PPI works well for 4-color process (CMYK) printing.
However, for printing technologies that perform color mixing through dithering (halftone) rather than through overprinting (virtually all home/office inkjet and laser printers), printer DPI and image PPI have a very different meaning, and this can be misleading. Because, through the dithering process, the printer builds a single image pixel out of several printer dots to increase color depth, the printer's DPI setting must be set far higher than the desired PPI to ensure sufficient color depth without sacrificing image resolution. Thus, for instance, printing an image at 250 PPI may actually require a printer setting of 1200 DPI.[10]
Raster-based image editors[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Raster-based image editors, such as Painter, Photoshop, Paint.NET, MS Paint, and GIMP, revolve around editing pixels, unlike vector-based image editors, such as Xfig, CorelDRAW, Adobe Illustrator, or Inkscape, which revolve around editing lines and shapes (vectors). When an image is rendered in a raster-based image editor, the image is composed of millions of pixels. At its core, a raster image editor works by manipulating each individual pixel. Most pixel-based image editors work using the RGB color model, but some also allow the use of other color models such as the CMYK color model.
See also[edit]

Dither
Halftone
Raster scan
Text semigraphics
Raster image processor
Raster graphics editor
Comparison of raster graphics editors
Vector graphics - a contrasting graphics method
Rasterisation

References[edit]


^ "Raster Graphics - Scratch Wiki". Wiki.scratch.mit.edu. Retrieved 30 November 2014. 
^ James D. Foley (1995). Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice. Addison-Wesley Professional. p. 13. ISBN 0-201-84840-6. "The term bitmap, strictly speaking, applies only to 1-bit-per-pixel bilevel systems; for multiple-bit-per-pixel systems, we use the more general term pixmap (short for pixel map)."
^ "Bitmap Class". Msdn.microsoft.com. Retrieved 30 November 2014. 
^ "Patent US6469805 - Post raster-image processing controls for digital color image printing". Google.nl. Retrieved 30 November 2014. 
^ Bach, Michael; Meigen, Thomas; Strasburger, Hans (1997). "Raster-scan cathode-ray tubes for vision research – limits of resolution in space, time and intensity, and some solutions". Spatial Vision. 10 (4): 403–14. doi:10.1163/156856897X00311. PMID 9176948. 
^ "bitmap display from FOLDOC". Foldoc.org. Retrieved 30 November 2014. 
^ Noll, A. Michael (March 1971). "Scanned-Display Computer Graphics". Communications of the ACM. 14 (3): 143–150. doi:10.1145/362566.362567. 
^ "Patents". Noll.uscannenberg.org. Retrieved 30 November 2014. 
^ "CHAPTER-1". Cis.rit.edu. Retrieved 30 November 2014. 
^ Fulton, Wayne (April 10, 2010). "Color Printer Resolution". A few scanning tips. Retrieved August 21, 2011. 


This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.






v
t
e


Graphics file formats



Raster



ANI
ANIM
APNG
ART
BMP
BPG
BSAVE
CAL
CIN
CPC
CPT
DDS
DPX
ECW
EXR
FITS
FLIC
FLIF
FPX
GIF
HDRi
HEVC
ICER
ICNS
ICO / CUR
ICS
ILBM
JBIG
JBIG2
JNG
JPEG
JPEG 2000
JPEG-LS
JPEG XR
KRA
MNG
MIFF
NRRD
ORA
PAM
PBM / PGM / PPM / PNM
PCX
PGF
PICtor
PNG
PSD / PSB
PSP
QTVR
RAS
RBE

JPEG-HDR
Logluv TIFF


SGI
TGA
TIFF

TIFF/EP
TIFF/IT


UFO/ UFP
WBMP
WebP
XBM
XCF
XPM
XWD





Raw



CIFF
DNG





Vector



AI
CDR
CGM
DXF
EVA
EMF
Gerber
HVIF
IGES
PGML
SVG
VML
WMF
Xar





Compound



CDF
DjVu
EPS
PDF
PICT
PS
SWF
XAML





Related



Exchangeable image file format (Exif)
Extensible Metadata Platform (XMP)








 Category
 Comparison











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Raster_graphics&oldid=807843448"					Categories: Raster graphicsComputer graphics data structuresGraphics file formatsDigital geometryHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2016All articles needing additional referencesAccuracy disputes from November 2014