
Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation




Available in
English


Created by
Lars Aarhus, Kent Hedlundh and Karel Stokkermans


Website
http://www.rsssf.com/


Launched
1994


Current status
Active


The Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation (RSSSF) is an international organization dedicated to collecting statistics about association football. The foundation aims to build an exhaustive archive of football-related information from around the world, although not all of it is accurate.
History[edit]
This enterprise according to its founders was created in January 1994 by three regulars of the Rec.Sport.Soccer (RSS) Usenet newsgroup: Lars Aarhus, Kent Hedlundh, and Karel Stokkermans. It was originally known as the "North European Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation", but the geographical reference was dropped as its membership from other regions grew.
Today the RSSSF has members and contributors from around the world, and has spawned seven spin-off projects to more closely follow the leagues of that project's home country. The spin-off projects are dedicated to Albania, Brazil, Denmark, Norway, Poland, Romania, Uruguay and Venezuela.
This enterprise was for many years closely tied with the newsgroup RSS, and it still maintains an archive (last updated 15 June 2003) of what some of its contributors consider to be the best posts of RSS.
References[edit]

Finkelstein, Daniel (15 November 2003). "Weighting in vain for Fifa's ranking aficionados". The Times (London). Retrieved 19 July 2008. 
Witzig, Richard (2006). The Global Art of Soccer. New Orleans, LA: Cusiboy Publishing. p. 418. ISBN 0-9776688-0-0. OCLC 71788848. Retrieved 19 July 2008. 

External links and references[edit]

Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation
RSSSF Charter
Best of RSS





This article about an association football-related organization is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rec.Sport.Soccer_Statistics_Foundation&oldid=780548256"					Categories: Association football websitesUsenetAssociation football organization stubsHidden categories: Use dmy dates from June 2014Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll stub articles