The body of water between Arabia and Africa
This article is about the body of water between Arabia and Africa. For other uses, see Red Sea (disambiguation).







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article is missing information about pollution of the Red Sea. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (August 2014)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Red Sea





Coordinates
22°N 38°E﻿ / ﻿22°N 38°E﻿ / 22; 38Coordinates: 22°N 38°E﻿ / ﻿22°N 38°E﻿ / 22; 38


Primary inflows
Barka River, Haddas River, Anseba River, Wadi Gasus


Primary outflows
Bab el Mandeb





Max. length
2,250 km (1,400 mi)


Max. width
355 km (221 mi)


Surface area
438,000 km2 (169,000 sq mi)


Average depth
490 m (1,610 ft)


Max. depth
3,040 m (9,970 ft)


Water volume
233,000 km3 (56,000 cu mi)




Play media


This video over the south-eastern Mediterranean Sea and down the coastline of the Red Sea was taken by the crew of Expedition 29 on board the International Space Station.


The Red Sea (also the Erythraean Sea) is a seawater inlet of the Indian Ocean, lying between Africa and Asia. The connection to the ocean is in the south through the Bab el Mandeb strait and the Gulf of Aden. To the north lie the Sinai Peninsula, the Gulf of Aqaba, and the Gulf of Suez (leading to the Suez Canal). The Red Sea is a Global 200 ecoregion. The sea is underlain by the Red Sea Rift which is part of the Great Rift Valley.
The Red Sea has a surface area of roughly 438,000 km2 (169,100 mi2),[1][2] is about 2250 km (1398 mi) long and, at its widest point, 355 km (220.6 mi) wide. It has a maximum depth of 3,040 m (9,970 ft) in the central Suakin Trough,[3] and an average depth of 490 m (1,608 ft). However, there are also extensive shallow shelves, noted for their marine life and corals. The sea is the habitat of over 1,000 invertebrate species, and 200 soft and hard corals. It is the world's northernmost tropical sea.



Contents


1 Extent
2 Names
3 History

3.1 Ancient era
3.2 Middle Ages and modern era


4 Oceanography

4.1 Salinity
4.2 Tidal range
4.3 Current
4.4 Wind regime


5 Geology

5.1 Mineral resources


6 Ecosystem
7 Desalination plants
8 Security
9 Facts and figures
10 Tourism
11 Bordering countries
12 Towns and cities
13 See also
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Extent
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Red Sea as follows:[4]



On the North. The Southern limits of the Gulfs of Suez [A line running from Ràs Muhammed (27°43'N) to the South point of Shadwan Island (34°02'E) and thence Westward on a parallel (27°27'N) to the coast of Africa] and Aqaba [A line running from Ràs al Fasma Southwesterly to Requin Island (27°57′N 34°36′E﻿ / ﻿27.950°N 34.600°E﻿ / 27.950; 34.600) through Tiran Island to the Southwest point thereof and thence Westward on a parallel (27°54'N) to the coast of the Sinaï Peninsula].
On the South. A line joining Husn Murad (12°40′N 43°30′E﻿ / ﻿12.667°N 43.500°E﻿ / 12.667; 43.500) and Ras Siyyan (12°29′N 43°20′E﻿ / ﻿12.483°N 43.333°E﻿ / 12.483; 43.333).



Names




Tihama on the Red Sea near Khaukha, Yemen


Red Sea is a direct translation of the Greek Erythra Thalassa (Ερυθρὰ Θάλασσα), Latin Mare Rubrum (alternatively Sinus Arabicus, literally "Arabian Gulf"), Arabic: البحر الأحمر‎, translit. Al-Baḥr Al-Aḥmar (alternatively بحر القلزم Baḥr Al-Qulzum, literally "the Sea of Clysma"), Somali Badda Cas and Tigrinya Qeyyiḥ bāḥrī (ቀይሕ ባሕሪ). The name of the sea may signify the seasonal blooms of the red-coloured Trichodesmium erythraeum near the water's surface.[5] A theory favored by some modern scholars is that the name red is referring to the direction south, just as the Black Sea's name may refer to north. The basis of this theory is that some Asiatic languages used color words to refer to the cardinal directions.[6] Herodotus on one occasion uses Red Sea and Southern Sea interchangeably.[7]
Historically, it was also known to western geographers as Mare Mecca (Sea of Mecca), and Sinus Arabicus (Gulf of Arabia).[8] Some ancient geographers called the Red Sea the Arabian Gulf[9] or Gulf of Arabia.[10][11]
The association of the Red Sea with the biblical account of the Israelites crossing the Red Sea is ancient, and was made explicit in the Septuagint translation of the Book of Exodus from Hebrew to Koine Greek in approximately the third century B.C. In that version, the Yam Suph (Hebrew: ים סוף‎, lit. 'Sea of Reeds') is translated as Erythra Thalassa (Red Sea). The Red Sea is one of four seas named in English after common color terms — the others being the Black Sea, the White Sea and the Yellow Sea. The direct rendition of the Greek Erythra thalassa in Latin as Mare Erythraeum refers to the north-western part of the Indian Ocean, and also to a region on Mars.
History
Ancient era




Ancient Egyptian expedition to the Land of Punt on the Red Sea coast during the reign of Queen Hatshepsut


The earliest known exploration of the Red Sea was conducted by ancient Egyptians, as they attempted to establish commercial routes to Punt. One such expedition took place around 2500 BC, and another around 1500 BC (by Hatshepsut). Both involved long voyages down the Red Sea.[12] Historically, scholars argued whether these trips were possible.[13] The biblical Book of Exodus tells the tale of the Israelites' crossing of a body of water, which the Hebrew text calls Yam Suph (Hebrew: יַם סוּף‬). Yam Suph was traditionally identified as the Red Sea. Rabbi Saadia Gaon (882‒942 CE), in his Judeo-Arabic translation of the Pentateuch, identifies the crossing place of the Red Sea as Baḥar al-Qulzum, meaning the Gulf of Suez.[14]




Settlements and commercial centers in the vicinity of the Red Sea involved in the spice trade, as described in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea


In the 6th century BC, Darius the Great of Persia sent reconnaissance missions to the Red Sea, improving and extending navigation by locating many hazardous rocks and currents. A canal was built between the Nile and the northern end of the Red Sea at Suez. In the late 4th century BC, Alexander the Great sent Greek naval expeditions down the Red Sea to the Indian Ocean. Greek navigators continued to explore and compile data on the Red Sea. Agatharchides collected information about the sea in the 2nd century BC. The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea ("Periplus of the Red Sea"), a Greek periplus written by an unknown author around the 1st century AD, contains a detailed description of the Red Sea's ports and sea routes.[15] The Periplus also describes how Hippalus first discovered the direct route from the Red Sea to India.
The Red Sea was favored for Roman trade with India starting with the reign of Augustus, when the Roman Empire gained control over the Mediterranean, Egypt, and the northern Red Sea. The route had been used by previous states but grew in the volume of traffic under the Romans. From Indian ports goods from China were introduced to the Roman world. Contact between Rome and China depended on the Red Sea, but the route was broken by the Aksumite Empire around the 3rd century AD.[16]
Middle Ages and modern era
During the Middle Ages, the Red Sea was an important part of the spice trade route. In 1513, trying to secure that channel to Portugal, Afonso de Albuquerque laid siege to Aden[17] but was forced to retreat. They cruised the Red Sea inside the Bab al-Mandab, as the first European fleet to have sailed these waters.
In 1798, France ordered General Napoleon to invade Egypt and take control of the Red Sea. Although he failed in his mission, the engineer Jean-Baptiste Lepère, who took part in it, revitalised the plan for a canal which had been envisaged during the reign of the Pharaohs. Several canals were built in ancient times from the Nile to the Red Sea along or near the line of the present Sweet Water Canal, but none lasted for long. The Suez Canal was opened in November 1869. At the time, the British, French, and Italians shared the trading posts. The posts were gradually dismantled following the First World War. After the Second World War, the Americans and Soviets exerted their influence whilst the volume of oil tanker traffic intensified. However, the Six Day War culminated in the closure of the Suez Canal from 1967 to 1975. Today, in spite of patrols by the major maritime fleets in the waters of the Red Sea, the Suez Canal has never recovered its supremacy over the Cape route, which is believed to be less vulnerable.
Oceanography




Annotated view of the Nile and Red Sea, with a dust storm[18]


The Red Sea is between arid land, desert and semi-desert. Reef systems are better developed along the Red Sea mainly because of its greater depths and an efficient water circulation pattern. The Red Sea water mass-exchanges its water with the Arabian Sea, Indian Ocean via the Gulf of Aden. These physical factors reduce the effect of high salinity caused by evaporation in the north and relatively hot water in the south.
The climate of the Red Sea is the result of two monsoon seasons; a northeasterly monsoon and a southwesterly monsoon. Monsoon winds occur because of differential heating between the land and the sea. Very high surface temperatures and high salinities make this one of the warmest and saltiest bodies of seawater in the world. The average surface water temperature of the Red Sea during the summer is about 26 °C (79 °F) in the north and 30 °C (86 °F) in the south, with only about 2 °C (3.6 °F) variation during the winter months. The overall average water temperature is 22 °C (72 °F). Temperature and visibility remain good to around 200 m (656 ft). The sea is known for its strong winds and unpredictable local currents.
The rainfall over the Red Sea and its coasts is extremely low, averaging 0.06 m (2.36 in) per year. The rain is mostly short showers, often with thunderstorms and occasionally with dust storms. The scarcity of rainfall and no major source of fresh water to the Red Sea result in excess evaporation as high as 205 cm (81 in) per year and high salinity with minimal seasonal variation. A recent underwater expedition to the Red Sea offshore from Sudan and Eritrea[19] found surface water temperatures 28 °C in winter and up to 34 °C in the summer, but despite that extreme heat the coral was healthy with much fish life with very little sign of coral bleaching, with only 9% infected by Thalassomonas loyana, the 'white plague' agent. Favia favus coral there harbours a virus, BA3, which kills T. loyana.[20] Plans are afoot to use samples of these corals' apparently heat-adapted commensal algae to salvage bleached coral elsewhere.
Salinity
The Red Sea is one of the saltiest bodies of water in the world, owing to high evaporation. Salinity ranges from between ~36 ‰ in the southern part because of the effect of the Gulf of Aden water and reaches 41 ‰ in the northern part, owing mainly to the Gulf of Suez water and the high evaporation. The average salinity is 40 ‰. (Average salinity for the world's seawater is ~35 ‰ on the Practical Salinity Scale, or PPS; that translates to 3.5% actual dissolved salts.)
The salinity of the Red Sea is greater than the world average, approximately 4 percent. This is due to several factors:

High rate of evaporation and very little precipitation.
Lack of significant rivers or streams draining into the sea.
Limited connection with the Indian Ocean, which has lower water salinity.

Tidal range
In general tide ranges between 0.6 m (2.0 ft) in the north, near the mouth of the Gulf of Suez and 0.9 m (3.0 ft) in the south near the Gulf of Aden but it fluctuates between 0.20 m (0.66 ft) and 0.30 m (0.98 ft) away from the nodal point. The central Red Sea (Jeddah area) is therefore almost tideless, and as such the annual water level changes are more significant. Because of the small tidal range the water during high tide inundates the coastal sabkhas as a thin sheet of water up to a few hundred metres rather than flooding the sabkhas through a network of channels. However, south of Jeddah in the Shoiaba area the water from the lagoon may cover the adjoining sabkhas as far as 3 km (2 mi), whereas, north of Jeddah in the Al-Kharrar area the sabkhas are covered by a thin sheet of water as far as 2 km (1.2 mi). The prevailing north and northeast winds influence the movement of water in the coastal inlets to the adjacent sabkhas, especially during storms. Winter mean sea level is 0.5 m (1.6 ft) higher than in summer. Tidal velocities passing through constrictions caused by reefs, sand bars and low islands commonly exceed 1–2 m/s (3–6.5 ft/s). Coral reefs in the Red Sea are near Egypt, Eritrea, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and Sudan.
Current
In the Red Sea detailed current data is lacking, partially because they are weak and variable both spatially and temporally. Temporal and spatial currents variation is as low as 0.5 m (1.6 ft) and are governed all by wind. During the summer, NW winds drive surface water south for about four months at a velocity of 15–20 cm/s (6–8 in/s), whereas in winter the flow is reversed resulting in the inflow of water from the Gulf of Aden into the Red Sea. The net value of the latter predominates, resulting in an overall drift to the north end of the Red Sea. Generally, the velocity of the tidal current is between 50–60 cm/s (20–23.6 in/s) with a maximum of 1 m/s (3.3 ft/s) at the mouth of the al-Kharrar Lagoon. However, the range of the north-northeast current along the Saudi coast is 8–29 cm/s (3–11.4 in/s).
Wind regime
The north part of the Red Sea is dominated by persistent north-west winds, with speeds ranging between 7 km/h (4.3 mph) and 12 km/h (7.5 mph). The rest of the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden are subjected to regular and seasonally reversible winds. The wind regime is characterized by seasonal and regional variations in speed and direction with average speed generally increasing northward.
Wind is the driving force in the Red Sea to transport material as suspension or as bedload. Wind-induced currents play an important role in the Red Sea in resuspending bottom sediments and transferring materials from sites of dumping to sites of burial in quiescent environment of deposition. Wind-generated current measurement is therefore important in order to determine the sediment dispersal pattern and its role in the erosion and accretion of the coastal rock exposure and the submerged coral beds.
Geology




Dust storm over the Red Sea


The Red Sea was formed by the Arabian peninsula being split from the Horn of Africa by movement of the Red Sea Rift. This split started in the Eocene and accelerated during the Oligocene. The sea is still widening, and it is considered that it will become an ocean in time (as proposed in the model of John Tuzo Wilson). In 1949, a deep water survey reported anomalously hot brines in the central portion of the Red Sea. Later work in the 1960s confirmed the presence of hot, 60 °C (140 °F), saline brines and associated metalliferous muds. The hot solutions were emanating from an active subseafloor rift. The high salinity of the waters was not hospitable to living organisms.[21]
Sometime during the Tertiary period, the Bab el Mandeb closed and the Red Sea evaporated to an empty hot dry salt-floored sink. Effects causing this would have been:

A "race" between the Red Sea widening and Perim Island erupting filling the Bab el Mandeb with lava.
The lowering of world sea level during the Ice Ages because of much water being locked up in the ice caps.

A number of volcanic islands rise from the center of the sea. Most are dormant. However, in 2007, Jabal al-Tair island in the Bab el Mandeb strait erupted violently. Two new islands were formed in 2011 and 2013 in the Zubair Archipelago, a small chain of islands owned by Yemen. The first island, Sholan Island, emerged in an eruption in December 2011, the second island, Jadid, emerged in September 2013.[22][23][24]
Mineral resources




Red Sea coast in Taba, Egypt


In terms of mineral resources the major constituents of the Red Sea sediments are as follows:

Biogenic constituents:


Nanofossils, foraminifera, pteropods, siliceous fossils


Volcanogenic constituents:


Tuffites, volcanic ash, montmorillonite, cristobalite, zeolites


Terrigenous constituents:


Quartz, feldspars, rock fragments, mica, heavy minerals, clay minerals


Authigenic minerals:


Sulfide minerals, aragonite, Mg-calcite, protodolomite, dolomite, quartz, chalcedony.


Evaporite minerals:


Magnesite, gypsum, anhydrite, halite, polyhalite


Brine precipitate:


Fe-montmorillonite, goethite, hematite, siderite, rhodochrosite, pyrite, sphalerite, anhydrite.

Ecosystem
See also: Persian Gulf § Wildlife




Ain Sukhna beach, Suez - Mollusca collection


The Red Sea is a rich and diverse ecosystem. More than 1200 species of fish[25] have been recorded in the Red Sea, and around 10% of these are found nowhere else.[26] This also includes 42 species of deepwater fish.[25]




Red Sea coral and marine fish


The rich diversity is in part due to the 2,000 km (1,240 mi) of coral reef extending along its coastline; these fringing reefs are 5000–7000 years old and are largely formed of stony acropora and porites corals. The reefs form platforms and sometimes lagoons along the coast and occasional other features such as cylinders (such as the Blue Hole (Red Sea) at Dahab). These coastal reefs are also visited by pelagic species of Red Sea fish, including some of the 44 species of shark.
The Red Sea also contains many offshore reefs including several true atolls. Many of the unusual offshore reef formations defy classic (i.e., Darwinian) coral reef classification schemes, and are generally attributed to the high levels of tectonic activity that characterize the area.
The special biodiversity of the area is recognized by the Egyptian government, who set up the Ras Mohammed National Park in 1983. The rules and regulations governing this area protect local marine life, which has become a major draw for diving enthusiasts.
Divers and snorkellers should be aware that although most Red Sea species are innocuous, a few are hazardous to humans: see Red Sea species hazardous to humans.[27]
Other marine habitats include sea grass beds, salt pans, mangroves and salt marshes.
Desalination plants
There is extensive demand for desalinated water to meet the needs of the population and the industries along the Red Sea.
There are at least 18 desalination plants along the Red Sea coast of Saudi Arabia which discharge warm brine and treatment chemicals (chlorine and anti-scalants) that bleach and kill corals and cause diseases to the fish. This is only localized, but it may intensify with time and profoundly impact the fishing industry.[28]
The water from the Red Sea is also used by oil refineries and cement factories for cooling. Used water drained back into the coastal zones may harm the nearshore environment of the Red Sea.
Security
The Red Sea is part of the sea roads between Europe, the Persian Gulf and East Asia, and as such has heavy shipping traffic. Government-related bodies with responsibility to police the Red Sea area include the Port Said Port Authority, Suez Canal Authority and Red Sea Ports Authority of Egypt, Jordan Maritime Authority, Israel Port Authority, Saudi Ports Authority and Sea Ports Corporation of Sudan.
Facts and figures



Length: ~2,250 km (1,398.1 mi) - 79% of the eastern Red Sea with numerous coastal inlets
Maximum Width: ~ 306–355 km (190–220 mi)– Massawa (Eritrea)
Minimum Width: ~ 26–29 km (16–18 mi)- Bab el Mandeb Strait (Yemen)
Average Width: ~ 280 km (174.0 mi)
Average Depth: ~ 490 m (1,607.6 ft)
Maximum Depth: ~2,211 m (7,253.9 ft)
Surface Area: 438-450 x 102 km2 (16,900–17,400 sq mi)
Volume: 215–251 x 103 km3 (51,600–60,200 cu mi)






Approximately 40% of the Red Sea is quite shallow (under 100 m/330 ft), and about 25% is under 50 m (164 ft) deep.
About 15% of the Red Sea is over 1,000 m (3,300 ft) depth that forms the deep axial trough.
Shelf breaks are marked by coral reefs
Continental slope has an irregular profile (series of steps down to ~500 m or 1,640 ft)
Centre of Red Sea has a narrow trough (Suakin Trough) (~ 1,000 m or 3,281 ft; with maximum depth 3,040 m or 9,974 ft)



Tourism




Hotels in Eilat, Israel








This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The sea is known for its recreational diving sites, such as Ras Mohammed, SS Thistlegorm (shipwreck), Elphinstone Reef, The Brothers, Daedalus Reef, St.John's Reef, Rocky Island in Egypt[29] and less known sites in Sudan such as Sanganeb, Abington, Angarosh and Shaab Rumi.
The Red Sea became a popular destination for diving after the expeditions of Hans Hass in the 1950s, and later by Jacques-Yves Cousteau. Popular tourist resorts include El Gouna, Hurghada, Safaga, Marsa Alam, on the west shore of the Red Sea, and Sharm-el-Sheikh, Dahab, and Taba on the Egyptian side of Sinaï, as well as Aqaba in Jordan and Eilat in Israel in an area known as the Red Sea Riviera.
The popular tourist beach of Sharm el-Sheikh was closed to all swimming in December 2010 due to several serious shark attacks, including a fatality. As of December 2010, scientists are investigating the attacks and have identified, but not verified, several possible causes including over-fishing which causes large sharks to hunt closer to shore, tourist boat operators who chum offshore for shark-photo opportunities, and reports of ships throwing dead livestock overboard. The sea's narrowness, significant depth, and sharp drop-offs, all combine to form a geography where large deep-water sharks can roam in hundreds of meters of water, yet be within a hundred meters of swimming areas.
Bordering countries
The Red Sea may be geographically divided into three sections: the Red Sea proper, and in the north, the Gulf of Aqaba and the Gulf of Suez. The six countries bordering the Red Sea proper are:

Eastern shore:

 Saudi Arabia
 Yemen


Western shore:

 Egypt
 Sudan
 Eritrea
 Djibouti



The Gulf of Suez is entirely bordered by Egypt. The Gulf of Aqaba borders Egypt, Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
In addition to the standard geographical definition of the six countries bordering the Red Sea cited above, areas such as Somalia are sometimes also described as Red Sea territories. This is primarily due to their proximity to and geological similarities with the nations facing the Red Sea and/or political ties with said areas.[30][31]
Towns and cities
Towns and cities on the Red Sea coast (including the coasts of the Gulfs of Aqaba and Suez) include:





 Al Hudaydah (الحديدة)
 Al Lith (الليِّث)
 Al Qunfudhah (القنفذة)
 Al-Qusair (القصير)
 Al Wajh (الوجه)
 Aqaba (العقبة)
 Asseb (ዓሳብ)
 Dahab (دهب)
 Duba (ضباء)
 Eilat (אילת ، ايلات)
 El Gouna (الجونة)




 El Suweis (السويس)
/ Hala'ib (حلايب) (disputed)
 Haql (حقل)
 Hirgigo (ሕርጊጎ)
 Hurghada (الغردقة)
 Jeddah (جدة)
 Jazan (جازان)
 Marsa Alam (مرسى علم)
 Massawa (ምጽዋ)
 Moulhoule (مول هولة )




 Nuweiba (نويبع)
 Port Safaga (ميناء سفاجا)
 Port Sudan (بورت سودان)
 Rabigh (رابغ)
 Sharm el Sheikh (شرم الشيخ)
 Soma Bay (سوما باي)
 Suakin (سواكن)
 Taba (طابا)
 Thuwal (ثول)
 Yanbu (ينبع)





See also

Benjamin Kahn
MS al-Salam Boccaccio 98 ferry disaster
Red Sea Dam
Robert Moresby

References


^ "The Red Sea". Retrieved 6 January 2009. 
^ "Red Sea" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 February 2009. Retrieved 6 January 2009. 
^ Robert Dinwiddie: Ocean_ The World's Last Wilderness Revealed. Dorling Kindersley, London 2008, p. 452
^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF). International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Retrieved 7 February 2010. 
^ "Red Sea". Encyclopædia Britannica Online Library Edition. Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2008-01-14. 
^ Smithsonianjourneys.org
^ Schmitt 1996
^ "Arabia". World Digital Library. Retrieved 11 August 2013. 
^ Michael D. Oblath (2004). The Exodus itinerary sites: their locations from the perspective of the biblical sources. Peter Lang. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-8204-6716-0. 
^ Herodotus, ed. George Rawlinson (2009), The histories, p.105
^ Andrew E. Hill, John H. Walton (2000), A survey of the Old Testament, p.32 [1]
^ Fernandez-Armesto, Felipe (2006). Pathfinders: A Global History of Exploration. W.W. Norton & Company. p. 24. ISBN 0-393-06259-7. 
^ Louis, Jaucourt de chevalier (1765). Red Sea. pp. 367–368. 
^ Tafsir, Saadia Gaon, s.v. Exodus 15:22, et al.
^ Fernandez-Armesto, Felipe (2006). Pathfinders: A Global History of Exploration. W.W. Norton & Company. pp. 32–33. ISBN 0-393-06259-7. 
^ East, W. Gordon (1965). The Geography behind History. W.W. Norton & Company. pp. 174–175. ISBN 0-393-00419-8. 
^ By M. D. D. Newitt, "A history of Portuguese overseas expansion, 1400-1668", p.87, Routledge, 2005, ISBN 0-415-23979-6
^ Egyptian Dust Plume, Red Sea
^ BBC 2 television program "Oceans 3/8 The Red Sea", 8 pm - 9 pm Wednesday 26 November 2008
^ 'Virus protects coral from 'white plague',' at New Scientist, 7 July 2012.p.17.
^ Degens, Egon T. (ed.), 1969, Hot Brines and Recent Heavy Metal Deposits in the Red Sea, 600 pp, Springer-Verlag
^ MSNBC (accessed 29 December 2011)
^ Israel, Brett (December 28, 2011). "New Island Rises in the Red Sea". LiveScience.com. Retrieved 2015-07-31. 
^ Oskin, Becky; SPACE.com (May 30, 2015). "Red Sea Parts for 2 New Islands". Scientific American. Retrieved 2015-07-31. 
^ a b Froese, Ranier; Pauly, Daniel (2009). "FishBase". Retrieved 2009-03-12. 
^ Siliotti, A. (2002). Verona, Geodia, ed. Fishes of the red sea. ISBN 88-87177-42-2. 
^ Lieske, E. and Myers, R.F. (2004) Coral reef guide; Red Sea London, HarperCollins ISBN 0-00-715986-2
^ Mabrook, B. "Environmental Impact of Waste Brine Disposal of Desalination Plants, Red Sea, Egypt", Desalination, 1994, Vol.97, pp.453-465.
^ Scuba Diving in Egypt - The Red Sea: Holidays in Sharm El Sheikh, Hurghada, The Brothers, Daedalus Reef and St. John's - Liveaboard and Day Trips
^ Barth, Hans-Jörg (2002). Sabkha ecosystems, Volume 2. Springer. p. 148. ISBN 1-4020-0504-0. 
^ Makinda, Samuel M. (1987). Superpower diplomacy in the Horn of Africa. Routledge. p. 37. ISBN 0-7099-4662-7. 


Further reading

Hamblin, W. Kenneth & Christiansen, Eric H. (1998). Earth's Dynamic Systems (8th ed.). Upper Saddle River: Prentice-Hall. ISBN 0-13-745373-6. 

External links

Find more aboutRed Seaat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Red Sea Coral Reefs
Red Sea Photography
Potts, D., R. Talbert, T. Elliott, S. Gillies. "Places: 39290 (Arabicus Sinus/Erythr(ae)um/Rubrum Mare)". Pleiades. Retrieved March 8, 2012. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)







v
t
e


African seas



Oceans
and seas



Alboran Sea
Atlantic Ocean
Indian Ocean
Levantine Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Red Sea
Southern Ocean





Gulfs
and bays



Abu Qir Bay
Acheïl Dakhlet
Al Hoceima Bay
Algiers Bay
Algoa Bay
Ambas Bay
Ana Chaves Bay
Angra de Cintra
Antongil Bay
Antsiranana Bay
Arab's Gulf
Baía Almeida
Baía da Condúcia
Baía da Corimba
Baía de Mocambo
Baía de Mossuril
Baía de Namibe
Baia de Porto Amboim
Baía de Santa Marta
Baía de Sucujaque
Baía de Tombua
Baía do Ambriz
Baía do Bengo
Baía do Dande
Baía do Govuro
Baía do Lúrio
Baía do Nzeto
Baía do Suto
Baia dos Tigres
Baie de Gorée
Baie de Sangareya
Baie de Yof
Bandombaai
Bay of Anfile
Bay of Arguin
Bay of Aseb
Bay of Arzew
Bight of Benin
Bay of Beylul
Bay of Edd
Bay of Hawakil
Bay of Langarano
Bay of Saint-Augustin
Bay of Tangier
Benguela Bay
Bera’esoli
Betty’s Bay
Bight of Biafra
Bocock’s Bay
Bombetoka Bay
Bootbaai
Bosluisbaai
Cape Cross Bay
Cape Negro Bay
Chake-Chake Bay
Chameis Bay
Chwaka Bay
Conception Bay
Cuio Bay
Dakhlet Nouadhibou
Dalwakteah Bay
Deurloopbaai
Doringbaai
Dungonab Bay
Durissa Bay
Elands Bay
Enseada das Pombas
Enseada de São Braz
Enseada do Catumbo
Enseada do Chalungo
Enseada do Quicombo
Enseada do Quitungo
Enseada dos Três Irmãos
Equimina Bay
False Bay
Farta Bay
Fernao Veloso Bay
Foul Bay
Frederik se Baai
Grosse Bucht
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of 'Agig
Gulf of Gabès
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Hammamet
Gulf of Sirte
Gulf of Suez
Gulf of Tadjoura
Gulf of Tunis
Gulf of Zula
Hafun Bay South
Hann Bay
Harrison Cove
Henties Bay
Hirghīgo Bahir Selat’ē
Horingbaai
Hottentotsbaai
Hurdiyo
Hydra Bay
Inhambane Bay
Jammer Bucht
John Owen Bay
Kalawy Bay
Kiwaiyu Bay
Lambert Bay
Lamu Bay
Langbaai
Loango Bay
Lobito Bay
Luanda Bay
Lüderitz Bay
McDougall Bay
Manza Bay
Maputo Bay
Markusbaai
Memba Bay
Menai Bay
Meob Bay
Mietjie Frans se Baai
Moraha Bahir Selat’ē
Mossel Bay
Möwebaai
Noopbaai
Oran Gulf
Pemba Bay
Pipas Bay
Platbaai
Plaatjieskraalbaai
Plettenbergbaai
Pointe-Noire Bay
Port Alexander, Angola
Prinzen Bucht
Río de Oro Bay
Rock Bay
Roode Bay
Rooiwalbaai
Saint Francis Bay
Saint Francis Bay (Eastern Cape)
St Helena Bay
Saint Sebastian Bay
Saldanha Bay
Sandwich Harbour
Sierra Bay
Skoonbergbaai
Skurfbaai
Slangbaai
Sodwana Bay
Sofala Bay
Somnaasbaai
Spencer Bay
Struisbaai
Spoegrivierbaai
Swartstraat
Table Bay
Thysbaai
Tietiesbaai
Ungama Bay
Walker Bay
Walvis Bay (bay)
Yawri Bay





Straits



Bab-el-Mandeb
Bab Iskender
Canal de Bolama
Canal de Bolola
Canal de Caió
Canal de São Vicente
Canal do Meio
Mafia Channel
Massawa Channel
Mozambique Channel‎
Pemba Channel
Shubuk Channel
Strait of Gibraltar
Strait of Sicily
Straits of Tiran
Zanzibar Channel





Historical
seas



Aethiopian Sea
Erythraean Sea
Sea of Zanj












v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category












v
t
e


Countries bordering the Red Sea






 Djibouti
 Egypt
 Eritrea
 Ethiopia
 Israel
 Jordan
 Saudi Arabia
 Somalia
 Sudan
 Yemen









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 155944421
GND: 4050664-2
NDL: 00634145











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Red_Sea&oldid=814117086"					Categories: Red SeaTourist attractions in EgyptEgypt–Sudan borderEritrea–Sudan borderGreat Rift ValleyMarine ecoregionsSaudi Arabia–Yemen borderSuez CanalUnderwater diving sitesMarginal seas of the Indian OceanGulfs of the Indian OceanGeography of East AfricaGeography of North AfricaGeography of the Middle EastGeography of Western AsiaHorn of AfricaSeas of AfricaSeas of AsiaBodies of water of EgyptBodies of water of EritreaBodies of water of IsraelBodies of water of JordanBodies of water of Saudi ArabiaBodies of water of SudanSeas of YemenHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesArticles needing additional references from December 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles to be expanded from August 2014Articles with multiple maintenance issuesCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia infobox body of water articles without imageArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing Arabic-language textArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles needing additional references from June 2008CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles containing video clips