For other uses, see Reef (disambiguation).






This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (October 2017)







Nusa Lembongan Reef, Bali, Indonesia.






Pamalican island with surrounding reef, Sulu Sea, Philippines.






A reef surrounding an islet.


A reef is a bar of rock, sand, coral or similar material, lying beneath the surface of water. Reefs may go as deep as 261 feet (80 m) below the surface.[citation needed]
Many reefs result from abiotic processes (i.e. deposition of sand, wave erosion planing down rock outcrops, and other natural processes), but the best known reefs are the coral reefs of tropical waters developed through biotic processes dominated by corals and calcareous algae.
Artificial reefs (e.g. shipwrecks) sometimes have a role in enhancing the physical complexity of featureless sand bottoms, in order to attract a diverse assemblage of organisms, especially algae, and fish.



Contents


1 Biotic reef
2 Geologic reef

2.1 Geologic reef structures


3 See also
4 References
5 Notes
6 External links



Biotic reef[edit]
There is a variety of biotic reef types, including oyster reefs, but the most massive and widely distributed are tropical coral reefs. Although corals are major contributors to the framework and bulk material comprising a coral reef, the organisms most responsible for reef growth against the constant assault from ocean waves are calcareous algae, especially, although not entirely, species of coralline algae.
These biotic reef types take on additional names depending upon how the reef lies in relation to the land, if any. Reef types include fringing reef, barrier reefs, as well as atolls. A fringing reef is a reef that is attached to an island. A barrier reef forms a calcareous barrier around an island resulting in a lagoon between the shore and the reef. An atoll is a ring reef with no land present. The reef front (ocean side) is a high energy locale whereas the internal lagoon will be at a lower energy with fine grained sediments.
Geologic reef[edit]
One useful definition distinguishes reefs from mounds as follows. Both are considered to be varieties of organosedimentary buildups: sedimentary features, built by the interaction of organisms and their environment, that have synoptic relief and whose biotic composition differs from that found on and beneath the surrounding sea floor. Reefs are held up by a macroscopic skeletal framework. Coral reefs are an excellent example of this kind. Corals and calcareous algae grow on top of one another and form a three-dimensional framework that is modified in various ways by other organisms and inorganic processes. By contrast, mounds lack a macroscopic skeletal framework. Mounds are built by microorganisms or by organisms that don't grow a skeletal framework. A microbial mound might be built exclusively or primarily by cyanobacteria. Excellent examples of biostromes formed by cyanobacteria occur in the Great Salt Lake of Utah (USA), and in Shark Bay, Western Australia.
Cyanobacteria do not have skeletons and individuals are microscopic. Cyanobacteria encourage the precipitation or accumulation of calcium carbonate and can produce distinct sediment bodies in composition that have relief on the seafloor. Cyanobacterial mounds were most abundant before the evolution of shelly macroscopic organisms, but they still exist today (stromatolites are microbial mounds with a laminated internal structure). Bryozoans and crinoids, common contributors to marine sediments during the Mississippian (for example), produced a very different kind of mound. Bryozoans are small and the skeletons of crinoids disintegrate. However, bryozoan and crinoid meadows can persist over time and produce compositionally distinct bodies of sediment with depositional relief.
The Proterozoic Belt Supergroup contains evidence of possible microbial mat and dome structures similar to stromatolite reef complexes.[1]
Geologic reef structures[edit]




Reefs off Vanatinai in the Louisiade Archipelago.


Ancient reefs buried within stratigraphic sections are of considerable interest to geologists because they provide paleo-environmental information about the location in Earth's history. In addition, reef structures within a sequence of sedimentary rocks provide a discontinuity which may serve as a trap or conduit for fossil fuels or mineralizing fluids to form petroleum or ore deposits.
Corals, including some major extinct groups Rugosa and Tabulata, have been important reef builders through much of the Phanerozoic since the Ordovician Period. However, other organism groups, such as calcifying algae, especially members of the red algae Rhodophyta, and molluscs (especially the rudist bivalves during the Cretaceous Period) have created massive structures at various times. During the Cambrian Period, the conical or tubular skeletons of Archaeocyatha, an extinct group of uncertain affinities (possibly sponges), built reefs. Other groups, such as the Bryozoa have been important interstitial organisms, living between the framework builders. The corals which build reefs today, the Scleractinia, arose after the Permian–Triassic extinction event that wiped out the earlier rugose corals (as well as many other groups), and became increasingly important reef builders throughout the Mesozoic Era. They may have arisen from a rugose coral ancestor. Rugose corals built their skeletons of calcite and have a different symmetry from that of the scleractinian corals, whose skeletons are aragonite. However, there are some unusual examples of well-preserved aragonitic rugose corals in the late Permian. In addition, calcite has been reported in the initial post-larval calcification in a few scleractinian corals. Nevertheless, scleractinian corals (which arose in the middle Triassic) may have arisen from a non-calcifying ancestor independent of the rugosan corals (which disappeared in the late Permian).
See also[edit]

Benjamin Kahn
Reef Hobbyist Magazine
Pseudo-atoll
Coral reef
Placer (geography)

References[edit]



^ Schieber, Jürgen (1998). "Possible indicators of microbial mat deposits in shales and sandstones: examples from the Mid-Proterozoic Belt Supergroup, Montana, U.S.A" (PDF). Sedimentary Geology. 120 (1–4): 105–124. doi:10.1016/S0037-0738(98)00029-3. 



Notes[edit]

Shears N.T. (2007) Biogeography, community structure and biological habitat types of subtidal reefs on the South Island West Coast, New Zealand. Science for Conservation 281. p 53. Department of Conservation, New Zealand. [1]

External links[edit]



The Wikibook Historical Geology has a page on the topic of: Reefs





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Reefs.



Reef Rescue - Smithsonian Ocean Portal
Coral Reefs of the Tropics: facts, photos and movies from The Nature Conservancy
NOAA Photo Library
Reef Environmental Education Foundation
NOS Data Explorer - A portal to obtain NOAA National Ocean Service data
Reef formation
Atolls – Distribution, Development and Architecture







v
t
e


Coastal geography



Landforms



Anchialine pool
Archipelago
Atoll
Avulsion
Ayre
Barrier island
Bay
Baymouth bar
Bight
Bodden
Brackish marsh
Cape
Channel
Cliff
Coast
Coastal plain
Coastal waterfall
Continental margin
Continental shelf
Coral reef
Cove
Dune

cliff-top


Estuary
Firth
Fjard
Fjord
Freshwater marsh
Fundus
Gat
Geo
Gulf
Gut
Headland
Inlet
Intertidal wetland
Island
Islet
Isthmus
Lagoon
Machair
Marine terrace
Mega delta
Mouth bar
Mudflat
Natural arch
Peninsula
Reef
Regressive delta
Ria
River delta
Salt marsh
Shoal
Shore
Skerry
Sound
Spit
Stack
Strait
Strand plain
Submarine canyon
Tidal island
Tidal marsh
Tide pool
Tied island
Tombolo
Windwatt










Beaches



Beach cusps
Beach evolution
Coastal morphodynamics
Beach ridge
Beachrock
Pocket beach
Raised beach
Recession
Shell beach
Shingle beach
Storm beach
Wash margin





Processes



Blowhole
Cliffed coast
Coastal biogeomorphology
Coastal erosion
Concordant coastline
Current
Cuspate foreland
Discordant coastline
Emergent coastline
Feeder bluff
Fetch
Flat coast
Graded shoreline
Headlands and bays
Ingression coast
Large-scale coastal behaviour
Longshore drift
Marine regression
Marine transgression
Raised shoreline
Rip current
Rocky shore
Sea cave
Sea foam
Shoal
Steep coast
Submergent coastline
Surf break
Surf zone
Surge channel
Swash
Undertow
Volcanic arc
Wave-cut platform
Wave shoaling
Wind wave
Wrack zone





Management



Accretion
Coastal management
Integrated coastal zone management
Submersion





Related



Bulkhead line
Grain size

boulder
clay
cobble
granule
pebble
sand
shingle
silt


Intertidal zone
Littoral zone
Physical oceanography
Region of freshwater influence








 Category
 Commons











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reef&oldid=811136902"					Categories: ReefsStratigraphyCoastal geographyCoastal and oceanic landformsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2016