This article is about a kind of publication. For the work that librarians perform at a library reference desk, see Library reference desk.








This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in German.  (May 2012) Click [show] for important translation instructions. 


View a machine-translated version of the German article.
Google's machine translation is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.
Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.
You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary (using German): Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Exact name of German article]]; see its history for attribution.
You should also add the template {{Translated|de|Nachschlagewerk}} to the talk page.
For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation.











The Brockhaus Enzyklopädie, the best known traditional reference book in German-speaking countries






The Lexikon des Mittelalters (Dictionary of the Middle Ages), a specialised German encyclopedia






Encyclopædia Britannica, 15th edition: volumes of the Propedia (green), Micropedia (red), Macropedia, and 2-volume Index (blue)


A reference work is a book or periodical (or its electronic equivalent) to which one can refer for information. The information is intended to be found quickly when needed. Reference works are usually referred to for particular pieces of information, rather than read beginning to end. The writing style used in these works is informative; the authors avoid use of the first person, and emphasize facts. Many reference works are compiled by a team of contributors whose work is coordinated by one or more editors rather than by an individual author. Indices are commonly provided in many types of reference work. Updated editions are usually published as needed, in some cases annually (e.g. Whitaker's Almanack, Who's Who). Reference works include dictionaries, thesauruses, encyclopedias, almanacs, bibliographies, and catalogs (e.g. catalogs of libraries, museums or the works of individual artists).[1] Many reference works are available in electronic form and can be obtained as application software, CD-ROMs, DVDs, or online through the Internet.
A reference work is useful to its users if they attribute some degree of trust.



Contents


1 Reference book
2 Electronic resources
3 References
4 Further reading



Reference book[edit]
In comparison, a reference book or reference-only book in a library is one that may only be used in the library and may not be borrowed from the library. Many such books are reference works (in the first sense), which are, usually, used briefly or photocopied from, and therefore, do not need to be borrowed. Keeping reference books in the library assures that they will always be available for use on demand. Some reference-only books are too valuable to permit borrowers to take them out. Reference-only items may be shelved in a reference collection located separately from circulating items. Some libraries consist entirely, or to a large extent, of books which may not be borrowed.
Electronic resources[edit]
An electronic resource is a piece of information that is stored electronically, which is usually found on a computer, including information that is available on the internet.[2] Libraries offer numerous types of electronic resources, such as subject research guides, indices, electronic books and texts, electronic journals, library catalogs, reference sources, statistical sources, sound recordings, and image databases.[3]
References[edit]


^ The University of Santo Tomas Miguel de Benavides Library. "The Reference Materials". Retrieved 3 May 2012. 
^ AllWords.com. "Electronic Resources". 
^ The University of Chicago Library. "Types of Electronic Resources". Retrieved 3 May 2012. 


Further reading[edit]

General


American Reference Books Annual: ARBA. Littleton, Col.: Libraries Unlimited, 1970-
Bergenholtz, H., Nielsen, S., Tarp, S. (eds.): Lexicography at a Crossroads: Dictionaries and Encyclopedias Today, Lexicographical Tools Tomorrow. Peter Lang 2009. ISBN 978-3-03911-799-4
Higgens, G., ed. (1980) Printed Reference Material (Handbooks on Library Practice.) London: Library Association
Katz, W. A. (1978) Introduction to Reference Work; 3rd ed. 2 vols. New York: McGraw-Hill
Nielsen, Sandro "The Effect of Lexicographical Information Costs on Dictionary Making and Use". In: Lexikos 18 (2008), 170-189.


Guides to reference works

Sheehy's Guide is less international in its scope than Walford: "It seems that Walford is a somewhat better balanced work than Winchell, and is certainly much more comprehensive"--American Reference Books Annual, quoted in Walford, A. J. (1981) Walford's Concise Guide to Reference Material. London: Library Association ISBN 0-85365-882-X; p. 19.

Heeks, P., comp. (1968) Books of Reference for School Libraries: an annotated list; 2nd ed. London: Library Association (a basic list of 301 annotated entries useful for any small library)
Malclès, L.-N. (1950) Les sources du travail bibligraphique. 3 vols. in 4. Geneva: Droz, 1950-58 (reissued by Minard, Paris, & French & European Publications, New York, 1966)
Sheehy, E. P. et al., comps. (1976) Guide to Reference Books; 9th ed. Chicago: American Library Association; Supplement, 1980 (began with a guide compiled by A. B. Kroeger, 1917; 3rd-6th eds. by I. G. Mudge; 7th & 8th by C. M. Winchell)
Totok, W. & Weitzel, R. (1972) Handbuch der bibliographischen Nachschlagewerke; 4. Aufl., hrg. von W. Totok, K.-H. Weimann, R. Weitzel. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann (1st ed. 1954)
Day, Alan (editor) (1998). Walford's Guide to Reference Material (3 vols.)|format= requires |url= (help). London: Library Association Publishing. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Walford, A. J. (1980–82). Walford's Guide to Reference Material (4th ed.). London: Library Association. 







v
t
e


Lexicography



Types of reference works



Dictionary
Glossary
Lexicon
Phrase book
Thesaurus





Types of dictionaries



Advanced learner's
Anagram
Bilingual
Biographical
Conceptual
Defining
Electronic
Encyclopedic
Etymological
Explanatory
Idiom
Language for specific purposes dictionary
Machine-readable
Maximizing
Medical
Minimizing
Monolingual learner's
Multi-field
Phonetic
Picture
Reverse
Rhyming
Rime
Single-field
Specialized
Spelling
Sub-field
Visual





Lexicographic projects



Lexigraf
WordNet





Other



List of lexicographers
List of online dictionaries









Authority control



GND: 4041070-5
BNF: cb119329264 (data)
NDL: 00570164
BNE: XX524886











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reference_work&oldid=789698693"					Categories: Reference worksHidden categories: Articles to be expanded from May 2012All articles to be expandedArticles needing translation from German WikipediaPages using citations with format and no URLCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersUse dmy dates from April 2017