For other uses, see Regent (disambiguation), Regents (disambiguation), and Regency (disambiguation).


Part of a series of articles on


Monarchy







Central concepts





Monarch
Monarchism






Divine right of kings
Mandate of Heaven











Types



Absolute
Composite
Constitutional
Diarchy
Dual
Elective
Emirate
Ethnarch
Federal
Hereditary
Legalist (Chinese)
Non-sovereign
Popular
Regency
Tetrarch
Universal









History


Birth of the Roman Empire
Magna Carta
Foundation of the Ottoman Empire



Glorious Revolution
French Revolution






Trienio Liberal
First French Empire






Liberal Wars
Second French Empire






Italian unification
Meiji Restoration



German unification
5 October 1910 Revolution
Proclamation of the Republic in Brazil



Xinhai Revolution
Russian Revolution



Siamese revolution of 1932
Birth of the Italian Republic
Spanish transition to democracy



Iranian Revolution
Modern Cambodia



Nepalese Civil War








Related topics



Aristocracy
Autocracy
Crowned republic
Conservatism
Thomas Hobbes
Legitimists
Oligarchy
Philosopher king
Primogeniture
Royalism
Regicide
Regnal number
Royal family
Ultra-royalist







Politics portal





v
t
e











This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A regent (from the Latin regens,[1] "[one] ruling"[2]) is "a person appointed to administer a state because the monarch is a minor, is absent or is incapacitated."[3] The rule of a regent or regents is called a regency. A regent or regency council may be formed ad hoc or in accordance with a constitutional rule. "Regent" is sometimes a formal title. If the regent is holding his position due to his position in the line of succession, the compound term prince regent is often used; if the regent of a minor is his mother, she is often referred to as "queen regent".
If the formally appointed regent is unavailable or cannot serve on a temporary basis, a Regent ad interim may be appointed to fill the gap.
In a monarchy, a regent usually governs due to one of these reasons, but may also be elected to rule during the interregnum when the royal line has died out. This was the case in the Kingdom of Finland and the Kingdom of Hungary, where the royal line was considered extinct in the aftermath of World War I. In Iceland, the regent represented the King of Denmark as sovereign of Iceland until the country became a republic in 1944. In the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth (1569–1795), kings were elective, which often led to a fairly long interregnum. In the interim, it was the Roman Catholic Primate (the Archbishop of Gniezno) who served as the regent, termed the "interrex" (Latin: ruler "between kings" as in ancient Rome). In the small republic of San Marino, the two Captains Regent, or Capitani Reggenti, are elected semi-annually (they serve a six-month term) as joint heads of state and of government.
Famous regency periods include that of the Prince Regent, later George IV of the United Kingdom, giving rise to many terms such as Regency era and Regency architecture. Strictly this period lasted from 1811 to 1820, when his father George III was insane, though when used as a period label it generally covers a wider period. Philippe II, Duke of Orléans was Regent of France from the death of Louis XIV in 1715 until Louis XV came of age in 1723; this is also used as a period label for many aspects of French history, as "Régence" in French, again tending to cover a rather wider period than the actual regency.
As of 2017, Liechtenstein (under Alois, Hereditary Prince of Liechtenstein) is the only country with an active regency.
Other uses[edit]




Regentesses of the Old Men's Almshouse in Haarlem, Frans Hals, 1664


The term regent may refer to positions lower than the ruler of a country. The term may be used in the governance of organisations, typically as an equivalent of "director", and held by all members of a governing board rather than just the equivalent of the chief executive. Some university managers in North America are called regents and a management board for a college or university may be titled the "Board of Regents". In New York State, all activities related to public and private education (P-12 and postsecondary) and professional licensure are administered by the Board of Regents of the University of the State of New York, the appointed members of which are called regents. The term "regent" is also used for members of governing bodies of institutions such as the national banks of France and Belgium.
In the Dutch Republic, the members of the ruling class, not formally hereditary but forming a de facto patrician class, were informally known collectively as regenten (the Dutch plural for regent) because they typically held positions as "regent" on the boards of town councils, as well as charitable and civic institutions. The regents group portrait, regentenstuk or regentessenstuk for female boards in Dutch, literally "regents' piece", is a group portrait of the board of trustees, called regents or regentesses, of a charitable organization or guild. This type of group portrait was popular in Dutch Golden Age painting during the 17th century, and in the 18th century. In the Dutch East Indies, a regent was a native prince allowed to rule de facto colonized 'state' as a regentschap (see that term). Consequently, in the successor state of Indonesia, the term regent is used in English to mean a bupati, the head of a kabupaten (second level local government).
Again in Belgium and France[citation needed], (Régent in French, or in Dutch) Regent is the official title of a teacher in a lower secondary school (junior high school), who does not require a college degree but is trained in a specialized école normale (normal school). In the Philippines, specifically, the University of Santo Tomas, the Father Regent, who must be a Dominican priest and is often also a teacher, serves as the institution's spiritual head. They also form the Council of Regents that serves as the highest administrative council of the university. In the Society of Jesus, a regent is an individual training to be a Jesuit and who has completed his Novitiate and Philosophy studies but has not yet progressed to Theology studies. A regent in the Jesuits is often assigned to teach in a school or some other academic institution as part of the formation toward final vows.
See also[edit]

List of regents
Regency Acts
Viceroy, an individual who, in a colony or province, exercised the power of a monarch on his behalf

References[edit]



^ Harper, Douglas. "regency". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2014-08-18.  "early 15c., "government by regents," from Medieval Latin regentia, from Latin regens (see regent). Notable instances were: France 1715-1723 (under Philip, Duke of Orleans), Britain 1811-1820 (under George, Prince of Wales, Prince Regent)..."
^ Harper, Douglas. "regent". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2014-08-18.  ""one who rules during the minority or absence of a sovereign," c.1400, from the adjective (now archaic, attested in English late 14c.), from Old French regent and directly from Medieval Latin regentem (nominative regens), from Latin regens "ruler, governor," noun use of present participle of regere "to rule, direct"..."
^ Oxford English Dictionary









v
t
e


Monarchies






List of current sovereign monarchs
List of current constituent monarchs





Type



Absolute
Constitutional
Diarchy
Elective
Federal
Hereditary





By region
or entity




Africa



Lesotho
Morocco
Swaziland





Asia



Bahrain
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Malaysia
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Thailand
United Arab Emirates





Europe



Andorra
Belgium
Denmark
Luxembourg
Liechtenstein
Monaco
Netherlands
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Vatican City
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
Tonga
New Zealand

Cook Islands
Niue


Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu





Americas



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Grenada
Jamaica
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regent&oldid=815923947"					Categories: Regency (government)RegentsHeads of stateTitlesMonarchyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2015All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2014