For other uses, see Regulation (disambiguation).






This article is incomplete. Please help to improve it, or discuss the issue on the talk page. (April 2014)



Regulation is an abstract concept of management of complex systems according to a set of rules and trends. In systems theory, these types of rules exist in various fields of biology and society, but the term has slightly different meanings according to context. For example:

in biology, gene regulation and metabolic regulation allow living organisms to adapt to their environment and maintain homeostasis
in government, typically a regulation specifically means a piece of the delegated legislation drafted by subject matter experts to enforce a statutory instrument (primary legislation)
in business, industry self-regulation occurs through self-regulatory organizations and trade associations which allow industries to set rules with less government involvement
in psychology, self-regulation theory is the study of how individuals regulate their thoughts and behaviors to reach goals




Contents


1 Social

1.1 Reasons
1.2 History


2 See also
3 References
4 External links

4.1 Wikibooks





Social[edit]
Regulation can take many forms: legal restrictions promulgated by a government authority, contractual obligations (for example, contracts between insurers and their insureds[1]), social regulation (e.g. norms), co-regulation, third-party regulation, certification, accreditation or market regulation.[2]
State-mandated regulation is government intervention in the private market in an attempt to implement policy and produce outcomes which might not otherwise occur,[3] ranging from consumer protection to faster growth or technological advancement. The regulations may prescribe or proscribe conduct ("command-and-control" regulation), calibrate incentives ("incentive" regulation), or change preferences ("preferences shaping" regulation"). Common examples of regulation include controls on market entries, prices, wages, development approvals, pollution effects, employment for certain people in certain industries, standards of production for certain goods, the military forces and services. The economics of imposing or removing regulations relating to markets is analysed in regulatory economics.
In some countries (in particular the Scandinavian countries) industrial relations are to a very high degree regulated by the labour market parties themselves (self-regulation) in contrast to state regulation of minimum wages etc.[4]
Reasons[edit]






This article contains weasel words: vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or removed. (October 2013)



Regulations may create costs as well as benefits and may produce unintended reactivity effects, such as defensive practice.[5] Efficient regulations can be defined as those where total benefits exceed total costs.
Regulations can be advocated for a variety of reasons, including:[citation needed]

Market failures - regulation due to inefficiency. Intervention due to what economists call market failure.

To constrain sellers' options in markets characterized by monopoly
As a means to implement collective action, in order to provide public goods
To assure adequate information in the market
To mitigate undesirable externalities


Collective desires - regulation about collective desires or considered judgments on the part of a significant segment of society[vague]
Diverse experiences - regulation with a view of eliminating or enhancing opportunities for the formation of diverse preferences and beliefs[vague]
Social subordination - regulation aimed to increase or reduce social subordination of various social groups[citation needed]
Endogenous preferences - regulation intended to affect the development of certain preferences on an aggregate level[vague]
Professional conduct - the regulation of members of professional bodies, either acting under statutory or contractual powers.[6]
Interest group transfers - regulation that results from efforts by self-interest groups to redistribute wealth in their favor, which may be disguised as one or more of the justifications above.

The study of formal (legal and/or official) and informal (extra-legal and/or unofficial) regulation constitutes one of the central concerns of the sociology of law.
History[edit]
Regulation of businesses existed in the ancient early Egyptian, Indian, Greek, and Roman civilizations. Standardized weights and measures existed to an extent in the ancient world, and gold may have operated to some degree as an international currency. In China, a national currency system existed and paper currency was invented. Sophisticated law existed in Ancient Rome. In the European Early Middle Ages, law and standardization declined with the Roman Empire, but regulation existed in the form of norms, customs, and privileges; this regulation was aided by the unified Christian identity and a sense of honor in regard to contracts.[7]:5
Beginning in the late 19th and 20th century, much of regulation in the United States was administered and enforced by regulatory agencies which produced their own administrative law and procedures under the authority of statutes. Legislators created these agencies to allow experts in the industry to focus their attention on the issue. At the federal level, one of the earliest institutions was the Interstate Commerce Commission which had its roots in earlier state-based regulatory commissions and agencies. Later agencies include the Federal Trade Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, Civil Aeronautics Board, and various other institutions. These institutions vary from industry to industry and at the federal and state level. Individual agencies do not necessarily have clear life-cycles or patterns of behavior, and they are influenced heavily by their leadership and staff as well as the organic law creating the agency. In the 1930s, lawmakers believed that unregulated business often led to injustice and inefficiency; in the 1960s and 1970s, concern shifted to regulatory capture, which led to extremely detailed laws creating the United States Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
See also[edit]

Consumer protection
Rulemaking
Regulatory state
Deregulation
Environmental law
Public administration
Regulation of science
Regulatory capture
Regulatory economics
Tragedy of the commons
Public choice theory
Precautionary principle

References[edit]



^ Marcos Antonio Mendoza, "Reinsurance as Governance: Governmental Risk Management Pools as a Case Study in the Governance Role Played by Reinsurance Institutions", 21 Conn. Ins. L.J. 53, (2014) http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2573253
^ Levi-Faur, David, Regulation and Regulatory Governance, Jerusalem Papers in Regulation and Governance, No.1, 2010
^ Orbach, Barak, What Is Regulation? 30 Yale Journal on Regulation Online 1 (2012)
^ Anders Kjellberg (2017) ”Self-regulation versus State Regulation in Swedish Industrial Relations” In Mia Rönnmar and Jenny Julén Votinius (eds.) Festskrift till Ann Numhauser-Henning. Lund: Juristförlaget i Lund 2017, pp. 357-383
^ McGivern, Gerry; Fischer, Michael Daniel (1 February 2012). "Reactivity and reactions to regulatory transparency in medicine, psychotherapy and counselling". Social Science & Medicine. 74 (3): 289–296. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2011.09.035. PMID 22104085. 
^ Harris, Brian; Andrew Carnes (February 2011). Disciplinary and Regulatory Proceedings. Jordans. ISBN 978-1-84661-270-1. 
^ John Braithwaite, Péter Drahos. (2000). Global Business Regulation. Cambridge University Press.



External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Regulation





Look up regulation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Centre on Regulation in Europe (CERRE)
New Perspectives on Regulation (2009) and Government and Markets: Toward a New Theory of Regulation (2009)
US/Canadian Regulatory Cooperation: Schmitz on Lessons from the European Union, Canadian Privy Council Office Commissioned Study
A Comparative Bibliography: Regulatory Competition on Corporate Law

Wikibooks[edit]

Legal and Regulatory Issues in the Information Economy
Lawrence A. Cunningham, A Prescription to Retire the Rhetoric of 'Principles-Based Systems' in Corporate Law, Securities Regulation and Accounting (2007)







v
t
e


Law



Core subjects



Administrative law
Constitutional law
Contract
Criminal law
Deed
Equity
Evidence
International law
Law of obligations
Procedure

Civil
Criminal


Property law
Public law
Restitution
Statutory law
Tort





Other subjects



Agricultural law
Aviation law
Banking law
Bankruptcy
Commercial law
Competition law
Conflict of laws
Construction law
Consumer protection
Corporate law
Cyberlaw
Election law
Energy law
Entertainment law
Environmental law
Family law
Financial regulation
Health law
Immigration law
Intellectual property
International criminal law
International human rights
International slavery laws
Labour
Law of war
Legal archaeology
Legal fiction
Maritime law
Media law
Military law
Probate

Estate
Will and testament


Product liability
Public international law
Space law
Sports law
Tax law
Transport law
Trust law
Women in law





Sources of law



Charter
Constitution
Custom
Divine right
Human rights
Natural and legal rights
Case law

Precedent







Law making



Ballot measure
Codification
Decree

Edict
Executive order
Proclamation


Legislation

Delegated legislation
Regulation
Rulemaking


Promulgation
Repeal
Treaty
Statutory law

Statute
Act of Parliament
Act of Congress (US)







Legal systems



Civil law
Common law
Chinese law
Legal pluralism
Religious law

Canon law
Hindu law
Jain law
Jewish law
Sharia


Roman law
Socialist law
Statutory law
Xeer
Yassa





Legal theory



Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Feminist
Law and economics
Legal formalism
History
Natural law
International legal theory
Principle of legality
Rule of law
Sociology





Jurisprudence



Adjudication
Administration of justice
Criminal justice
Court-martial
Dispute resolution
Fiqh
Lawsuit/Litigation
Legal opinion
Legal remedy
Judge

Justice of the peace
Magistrate


Judgment
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Jury
Justice
Practice of law

Attorney
Barrister
Counsel
Lawyer
Legal representation
Prosecutor
Solicitor


Question of fact
Question of law
Trial
Trial advocacy
Trier of fact
Verdict





Legal institutions



Bureaucracy
The bar
The bench
Civil society
Court
Election commission
Executive
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legal education

Law school


Legislature
Military
Police
Political party
Tribunal








Category
Index
Outline
Portal












v
t
e


Public policy



Fields



Agricultural
Commercial
Cultural
Domestic
Drug

reform


Economic

Fiscal
Incomes
Industrial
Investment
Monetary
Tax


Education
Energy

Nuclear energy
Renewable energy


Environmental
Food
Foreign
Health

Pharmaceutical
Vaccination


Housing
Immigration
Knowledge
Language
Military
Science

Climate change
Stem cell
Space
Technology


Social





Other topics



Public administration
Public policy doctrine
Public policy school
Policy analysis
Policy studies
Regulation
Public policy by country












v
t
e


Aspects of capitalism
(academic views)



General



Business cycle
Competition
Economic bubble
Economic development
Entrepreneurship
Ecoprenuership
Externalities
Financial Revolution
Globalization
History of capitalist theory
Industrial Revolution
Innovation
Invention
Market failure
Merit
Multinational corporation
Oligopoly
Privatization
Profit
Property rights
Regulation
Wage labour
Wealth





Ideology



American Dream
Bipartisanship
Democracy
Free market
Individualism
Laissez-faire
Libertarianism
Neoliberalism





Cultural aspects



Culture of capitalism
Advertising
Consumerism
Decentralization
Economic mobility
Liberty
Mainstream
Philanthropy
Private foundation
Rule of law
Social alienation
Spontaneous order





Social aspects



Economic inequality
Employment
Freedom of association
Labour market flexibility
Labour supply
Productivity
Prosperity
Social venture capital
Unemployment





Criticism



Criticism
Anti-capitalism
Market fundamentalism
Marxism
Wage slavery





Antithesis



Anarchism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Communism
Eco-socialism
Libertarian socialism
Mercantilism
Post-scarcity economy
Sharing economy
Social anarchism
Socialism
Syndicalism











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regulation&oldid=809639280"					Categories: RegulationEconomics of regulationLegal researchPublic policyNon Tariff barriers to tradeHidden categories: Articles to be expanded from April 2014Articles with weasel words from October 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2013All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2013Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013