This article is about the reproductive system of all types of animals, including humans. For information specific to the human reproductive system, see Human reproductive system.


Reproductive system


Details


Identifiers


Latin
systema reproductionis


TA
A09.0.00.000


FMA
7160 75572, 7160


Anatomical terminology
[edit on Wikidata]



The reproductive system or genital system is a system of sex organs within an organism which work together for the purpose of sexual reproduction. Many non-living substances such as fluids, hormones, and pheromones are also important accessories to the reproductive system.[1] Unlike most organ systems, the sexes of differentiated species often have significant differences. These differences allow for a combination of genetic material between two individuals, which allows for the possibility of greater genetic fitness of the offspring.[2]



Contents


1 Animals

1.1 Vertebrates

1.1.1 Humans

1.1.1.1 Male
1.1.1.2 Female


1.1.2 Other mammals

1.1.2.1 Dogs
1.1.2.2 Horses


1.1.3 Birds
1.1.4 Reptiles
1.1.5 Amphibians
1.1.6 Fish


1.2 Invertebrates

1.2.1 Cephalopods
1.2.2 Insects
1.2.3 Arachnids




2 Plants
3 Fungi
4 See also
5 References

5.1 Cited literature


6 External links



Animals[edit]
See also: Sexual reproduction § Animals
In mammals, the major organs of the reproductive system include the external genitalia (penis and vulva) as well as a number of internal organs including the gamete producing gonads (testicles and ovaries). Diseases of the human reproductive system are very common and widespread, particularly communicable sexually transmitted diseases.[3]
Most other vertebrate animals have generally similar reproductive systems consisting of gonads, ducts, and openings. However, there is a great diversity of physical adaptations as well as reproductive strategies in every group of vertebrates.
Vertebrates[edit]
Vertebrate animals all share key elements of their reproductive systems. They all have gamete-producing organs or gonads. In females, these gonads are then connected by oviducts to an opening to the outside of the body, typically the cloaca, but sometimes to a unique pore such as a vagina or intromittent organ.
Humans[edit]
Main article: Human reproductive system
The human reproductive system usually involves internal fertilization by sexual intercourse. During this process, the male inserts his erect penis into the female's vagina and ejaculates semen, which contains sperm. The sperm then travels through the vagina and cervix into the uterus or fallopian tubes for fertilization of the ovum. Upon successful fertilization and implantation, gestation of the fetus then occurs within the female's uterus for approximately nine months, this process is known as pregnancy in humans. Gestation ends with birth, the process of birth is known as labor. Labor consists of the muscles of the uterus contracting, the cervix dilating, and the baby passing out the vagina (the female genital organ). Human's babies and children are nearly helpless and require high levels of parental care for many years. One important type of parental care is the use of the mammary glands in the female breasts to nurse the baby.[4]
The female reproductive system has two functions: The first is to produce egg cells, and the second is to protect and nourish the offspring until birth. The male reproductive system has one function, and it is to produce and deposit sperm. Humans have a high level of sexual differentiation. In addition to differences in nearly every reproductive organ, numerous differences typically occur in secondary sexual characteristics.
Male[edit]
Main article: Male reproductive system
The male reproductive system is a series of organs located outside of the body and around the pelvic region of a male that contribute towards the reproduction process. The primary direct function of the male reproductive system is to provide the male sperm for fertilization of the ovum.
The major reproductive organs of the male can be grouped into three categories. The first category is sperm production and storage. Production takes place in the testes which are housed in the temperature regulating scrotum, immature sperm then travel to the epididymis for development and storage. The second category are the ejaculatory fluid producing glands which include the seminal vesicles, prostate, and the vas deferens. The final category are those used for copulation, and deposition of the spermatozoa (sperm) within the female, these include the penis, urethra, vas deferens, and Cowper's gland.
Major secondary sexual characteristics includes: larger, more muscular stature, deepened voice, facial and body hair, broad shoulders, and development of an adam's apple. An important sexual hormone of males is androgen, and particularly testosterone.
The testes release a hormone that controls the development of sperm. This hormone is also responsible for the development of physical characteristics in men such as facial hair and a deep voice.
Female[edit]
Main article: Female reproductive system
The human female reproductive system is a series of organs primarily located inside of the body and around the pelvic region of a female that contribute towards the reproductive process. The human female reproductive system contains three main parts: the vulva, which leads to the vagina, the vaginal opening, to the uterus; the uterus, which holds the developing fetus; and the ovaries, which produce the female's ova. The breasts are involved during the parenting stage of reproduction, but in most classifications they are not considered to be part of the female reproductive system.
The vagina meets the outside at the vulva, which also includes the labia, clitoris and urethra; during intercourse this area is lubricated by mucus secreted by the Bartholin's glands. The vagina is attached to the uterus through the cervix, while the uterus is attached to the ovaries via the fallopian tubes. Each ovary contains hundreds of egg cells or ova (singular ovum).
Approximately every 28 days, the pituitary gland releases a hormone that stimulates some of the ova to develop and grow. One ovum is released and it passes through the fallopian tube into the uterus. Hormones produced by the ovaries prepare the uterus to receive the ovum. It sita her and awaits the sperm for fertilization to occur. When this does not occur i.e no sperm for fertilization, the lining of the uterus, called the endometrium, and unfertilized ova are shed each cycle through the process of menstruation. If the ovum is fertilized by sperm, it attaches to the endometrium and the fetus develops.
Other mammals[edit]
Main article: Mammalian reproductive system




A newborn joey suckles from a teat found within its mother's pouch






Didactic model of a mammal urogenital system.


Most mammal reproductive systems are similar, however, there are some notable differences between the non-human mammals and humans. For instance, most male mammals have a penis which is stored internally until erect, and most have a penis bone or baculum. Additionally, males of most species do not remain continually sexually fertile as humans do. Like humans, most groups of mammals have descended testicles found within a scrotum, however, others have descended testicles that rest on the ventral body wall, and a few groups of mammals, such as elephants, have undescended testicles found deep within their body cavities near their kidneys.[5]
The reproductive system of marsupials is unique in that the female has two vaginae, both of which open externally through one orifice but lead to different compartments within the uterus; males usually have a two-pronged penis which corresponds to the females' two vaginae. Marsupials typically develop their offspring in an external pouch containing teats to which their newborn young (joeys) attach themselves for post uterine development. Also, marsupials have a unique prepenial scrotum.[6] The 15mm (5/8 in) long newborn joey instinctively crawls and wriggles the several inches (15 cm), while clinging to fur, on the way to its mother's pouch.
The uterus and vagina are unique to mammals with no homologue in birds, reptiles, amphibians, or fish.[citation needed] In place of the uterus the other vertebrate groups have an unmodified oviduct leading directly to a cloaca, which is a shared exit-hole for gametes, urine, and feces. Monotremes (i.e. platypus and echidnas), a group of egg-laying mammals, also lack a uterus and vagina, and in that respect have a reproductive system resembling that of a reptile.
Dogs[edit]
Main article: Canine reproduction
In domestic canines, sexual maturity (puberty) occurs between the ages of 6 to 12 months for both males and females, although this can be delayed until up to two years of age for some large breeds.
Horses[edit]
Main article: Equine anatomy § Reproductive system
The mare's reproductive system is responsible for controlling gestation, birth, and lactation, as well as her estrous cycle and mating behavior. The stallion's reproductive system is responsible for his sexual behavior and secondary sex characteristics (such as a large crest).
Birds[edit]
Main article: Bird anatomy § Reproductive system
Male and female birds have a cloaca, an opening through which eggs, sperm, and wastes pass. Intercourse is performed by pressing the lips of the cloacae together, which is sometimes known as intromittent organ which is known as a phallus that is analogous to the mammals' penis. The female lays amniotic eggs in which the young fetus continues to develop after it leaves the female's body. Unlike most vertebrates female birds typically have only one functional ovary and oviduct.[7] As a group, birds, like mammals, are noted for their high level of parental care.
Reptiles[edit]
Main article: Reptiles § Reproduction
Reptiles are almost all sexually dimorphic, and exhibit internal fertilization through the cloaca. Some reptiles lay eggs while others are viviparous (animals that deliver live young). Reproductive organs are found within the cloaca of reptiles. Most male reptiles have copulatory organs, which are usually retracted or inverted and stored inside the body. In turtles and crocodilians, the male has a single median penis-like organ, while male snakes and lizards each possess a pair of penis-like organs.




A male common frog in nuptial colors waiting for more females to come in a mass of spawn


Amphibians[edit]
Main article: Amphibian § Reproduction
Most amphibians exhibit external fertilization of eggs, typically within the water, though some amphibians such as caecilians have internal fertilization.[8] All have paired, internal gonads, connected by ducts to the cloaca.
Fish[edit]
Main article: Fish reproduction
Fish exhibit a wide range of different reproductive strategies. Most fish however are oviparous and exhibit external fertilization. In this process, females use their cloaca to release large quantities of their gametes, called spawn into the water and one or more males release "milt", a white fluid containing many sperm over the unfertilized eggs. Other species of fish are oviparous and have internal fertilization aided by pelvic or anal fins that are modified into an intromittent organ analogous to the human penis.[9] A small portion of fish species are either viviparous or ovoviviparous, and are collectively known as livebearers.[10]
Fish gonads are typically pairs of either ovaries or testes. Most fish are sexually dimorphic but some species are hermaphroditic or unisexual.[11]
Invertebrates[edit]
See also: Reproductive system of gastropods and Reproductive system of planarians
Invertebrates have an extremely diverse array of reproductive systems, the only commonality may be that they all lay eggs. Also, aside from cephalopods, and arthropods, nearly all other invertebrates are hermaphroditic and exhibit external fertilization.
Cephalopods[edit]
Main article: Cephalopod § Reproduction and life cycle
All cephalopods are sexually dimorphic and reproduce by laying eggs. Most cephalopods have semi-internal fertilization, in which the male places his gametes inside the female's mantle cavity or pallial cavity to fertilize the ova found in the female's single ovary.[12] Likewise, male cephalopods have only a single testicle. In the female of most cephalopods the nidamental glands aid in development of the egg.
The "penis" in most unshelled male cephalopods (Coleoidea) is a long and muscular end of the gonoduct used to transfer spermatophores to a modified arm called a hectocotylus. That in turn is used to transfer the spermatophores to the female. In species where the hectocotylus is missing, the "penis" is long and able to extend beyond the mantle cavity and transfer the spermatophores directly to the female.
Insects[edit]
Main article: Insect reproductive system
Most insects reproduce oviparously, i.e. by laying eggs. The eggs are produced by the female in a pair of ovaries. Sperm, produced by the male in one testis or more commonly two, is transmitted to the female during mating by means of external genitalia. The sperm is stored within the female in one or more spermathecae. At the time of fertilization, the eggs travel along oviducts to be fertilized by the sperm and are then expelled from the body ("laid"), in most cases via an ovipositor.
Arachnids[edit]
Main article: Arachnids § Reproduction
See also: Opiliones penis
Arachnids may have one or two gonads, which are located in the abdomen. The genital opening is usually located on the underside of the second abdominal segment. In most species, the male transfers sperm to the female in a package, or spermatophore. Complex courtship rituals have evolved in many arachnids to ensure the safe delivery of the sperm to the female.[13]
Arachnids usually lay yolky eggs, which hatch into immatures that resemble adults. Scorpions, however, are either ovoviviparous or viviparous, depending on species, and bear live young.
Plants[edit]
Main article: Plant reproductive morphology
Among all living organisms, flowers, which are the reproductive structures of angiosperms, are the most varied physically and show a correspondingly great diversity in methods of reproduction.[14] Plants that are not flowering plants (green algae, mosses, liverworts, hornworts, ferns and gymnosperms such as conifers) also have complex interplays between morphological adaptation and environmental factors in their sexual reproduction. The breeding system, or how the sperm from one plant fertilizes the ovum of another, depends on the reproductive morphology, and is the single most important determinant of the genetic structure of nonclonal plant populations. Christian Konrad Sprengel (1793) studied the reproduction of flowering plants and for the first time it was understood that the pollination process involved both biotic and abiotic interactions.
Fungi[edit]
Main article: Fungi § Reproduction
Fungal reproduction is complex, reflecting the differences in lifestyles and genetic makeup within this diverse kingdom of organisms.[15] It is estimated that a third of all fungi reproduce using more than one method of propagation; for example, reproduction may occur in two well-differentiated stages within the life cycle of a species, the teleomorph and the anamorph.[16] Environmental conditions trigger genetically determined developmental states that lead to the creation of specialized structures for sexual or asexual reproduction. These structures aid reproduction by efficiently dispersing spores or spore-containing propagules.
See also[edit]

Major systems of the human body
Reproductive system disease
Human sexuality
Human sexual behavior
Plant sexuality
Meiosis

References[edit]


^ Introduction to the Reproductive System, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Program. Archived October 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Reproductive System 2001 Body Guide powered by Adam
^ STD's Today National Prevention Network, Center for Disease Control, United States Government, retrieving 2007
^ Sexual Reproduction in Humans. 2006. John W. Kimball. Kimball's Biology Pages, and online textbook.
^ Werdelin L, Nilsonne A (January 1999). "The evolution of the scrotum and testicular descent in mammals: a phylogenetic view". J. Theor. Biol. 196 (1): 61–72. doi:10.1006/jtbi.1998.0821. PMID 9892556. 
^ Renfree, Marilyn; Tyndale-Biscoe, C. H. (1987). Reproductive physiology of marsupials. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-33792-5. 
^ Ritchison. BIO 554/754 Ornithology. Eastern Kentucky University.
^ Grzimek, B. (1974). Grzimek's Animal Life Encyclopedia: Volume 5 Fishes II & Amphibians. New York: Van Nostrand Reihnhold Co. pp. 301–302. ASIN B000HHFY52. 
^ Fish Reproduction
^ Science, Biology, and Terminology of Fish reproduction: Reproductive modes and strategies-part 1. 2002. MARTIN MOE. THE BREEDER'S NET Online Magazine
^ Bony Fish Reproduction 2002. SeaWorld/Busch Gardens Animal Information Database.
^ Cephalopods. The Living World of Molluscs. Robert Nordsieck.
^ Robert D. Barnes (1982). Invertebrate Zoology. Philadelphia, PA: Holt-Saunders International. pp. 596–604. ISBN 0-03-056747-5. 
^ Barrett, S.C.H. (2002). "The evolution of plant sexual diversity" (PDF). Nature Reviews Genetics. 3 (4): 274–284. doi:10.1038/nrg776. 
^ Alexopoulos et al., pp. 48–56.
^ Kirk et al., p. 633.


Cited literature[edit]

Alexopoulos CJ, Mims CW, Blackwell M (1996). Introductory Mycology. John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 0-471-52229-5. 
Kirk PM, Cannon PF, Minter DW, Stalpers JA (2008). Dictionary of the Fungi (10th ed.). Wallingford, UK: CAB International. ISBN 0-85199-826-7. 

External links[edit]



The Wikibook Human Physiology has a page on the topic of: The male reproductive system





The Wikibook Human Physiology has a page on the topic of: The female reproductive system





The Wikibook Anatomy and Physiology of Animals has a page on the topic of: Reproductive System




Library resources about
Reproductive system





Resources in your library










v
t
e


Sex



Biological terms



Sexual dimorphism

Male
Female


Sexual differentiation

Feminization
Virilization


Sex-determination system

XY
ZW
XO
Temperature-dependent
Haplodiploidy


Heterogametic sex
Homogametic sex
Sex chromosome

X chromosome
Y chromosome


Testis-determining factor
Hermaphrodite

Sequential hermaphroditism


Intersex





Sexual reproduction



Evolution of sexual reproduction

Anisogamy
Isogamy


Germ cell
Reproductive system
Sex organ
Meiosis
Gametogenesis

Spermatogenesis
Oogenesis


Gamete

spermatozoon
ovum


Fertilization

External
Internal


Sexual selection
Plant reproduction
Fungal reproduction
Sexual reproduction in animals

Sexual intercourse
Human reproduction







Sexuality



Plant sexuality
Animal sexuality
Human sexuality

Mechanics
Differentiation
Activity










 Sex portal
 Biology portal












v
t
e


Animal sexual behaviour



General



Sexual selection
Sexual reproduction

evolution
reproductive system


Courtship display

sexual ornamentation
handicap principle
sexy son hypothesis
Fisherian runaway


Mating systems

mate choice
mating call
mating plug
lek mating


Copulation

pseudocopulation


Fertilisation

internal
external
sperm competition
traumatic insemination
penile spines


Modes

monogamy
promiscuity
polyandry
polygyny
polygynandry
semelparity and iteroparity
opportunistic
hermaphroditism
cuckoldry
seasonal
synchrony
synchronous spawning


Sexual dimorphism

anisogamy
oogamy
Bateman's principle
bimaturism
cannibalism
coercion


Sexual conflict

interlocus
intralocus


Interspecies breeding
Non-reproductive behavior
Fisher's principle





Invertebrates



Arthropods

crab
spider
scorpion
beetle
insect

butterfly




Cephalopods

octopus


Cnidaria

sea anemone
jellyfish
coral


Echinoderms
Gastropods

apophallation
love dart


Sponge
Worms

earthworm
penis fencing







Fish



Fish reproduction
Spawning strategies
Polyandry in fish
Eels
Salmon run
Seahorse
Sharks





Amphibians



Sexual selection

frogs


Frog reproduction
Salamanders





Reptiles



Sexual selection in scaled reptiles

lizards
snakes
side-blotched lizard


Crocodilians
Tuatara





Birds



Sexual selection
Breeding behaviour

golden eagle
seabirds


Homosexual behavior





Mammals



Sexual selection

rut


Lordosis behavior
Homosexual behavior
Canid

African wild dog
coyote
dingo
domestic dog
gray wolf
red fox
spotted hyena


Dolphin
Elephant
European badger
Felid

lion
tiger
cheetah
domestic cat


Fossa
Hippopotamus
Marsupial

kangaroo


Pinnipeds

walrus


Primates

human
bonobo
gorilla
olive baboon
mandrill
ringtailed lemur
sexual swelling


Raccoon
Rodent
Short-beaked echidna












v
t
e


Human systems and organs



Musculoskeletal




Skeletal system



Bone

Carpus
Collar bone (clavicle)
Thigh bone (femur)
Fibula
Humerus
Mandible
Metacarpus
Metatarsus
Ossicles
Patella
Phalanges
Radius
Skull
Tarsus
Tibia
Ulna
Rib
Vertebra
Pelvis
Sternum


Cartilage





Joints



Fibrous joint
Cartilaginous joint
Synovial joint





Muscular system



Muscle
Tendon
Diaphragm








Circulatory system




Cardiovascular system



peripheral

Artery
Vein
Lymphatic vessel


Heart





Lymphatic system



primary

Bone marrow
Thymus


secondary

Spleen
Lymph node


CNS equivalent

Glymphatic system










Nervous system





Brain
Spinal cord
Nerve


Sensory system

Ear
Eye







Integumentary system



Skin
Subcutaneous tissue
Breast

Mammary gland







Immune system



Myeloid

Myeloid immune system


Lymphoid

Lymphoid immune system







Respiratory system



Upper

Nose
Nasopharynx
Larynx


Lower

Trachea
Bronchus
Lung







Digestive system



Mouth

Salivary gland
Tongue


upper GI

Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Stomach


lower GI

Small intestine
Appendix
Colon
Rectum
Anus


accessory

Liver
Biliary tract
Pancreas







Urinary system



Genitourinary system
Kidney
Ureter
Bladder
Urethra





Reproductive system



Female

Uterus
Vagina
Vulva
Ovary
Placenta


Male

Scrotum
Penis
Prostate
Testicle
Seminal vesicle







Endocrine system



Pituitary
Pineal
Thyroid
Parathyroid
Adrenal
Islets of Langerhans









Authority control



NDL: 00570440











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reproductive_system&oldid=812280744"					Categories: Reproductive systemFertilityEndocrine systemHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2013