This article is about the sovereign state. For the revolutionary republic of 1919–22, see Irish Republic. For other uses, see Ireland (disambiguation).


Ireland[a]
Éire  (Irish)







Flag



Coat of arms






Anthem: "Amhrán na bhFiann"
"The Soldiers' Song"

















Location of  Ireland  (dark green)
– in Europe  (green & dark grey)
– in the European Union  (green)





Capital
and largest city
Dublin
53°20.65′N 6°16.05′W﻿ / ﻿53.34417°N 6.26750°W﻿ / 53.34417; -6.26750


Official languages



Irish
English[1]





National language
Irish[1]


Ethnic groups (2016[2])



82.2% White Irish
9.5% Other White
2.6% Not stated
1.7% Other Asian / Asian Irish
1.5% Other
1.2% Black Irish / Black African
0.7% Irish Traveller
0.4% Chinese
0.1% Other Black





Demonym
Irish


Government
Unitary parliamentary republic



• President

Michael D. Higgins



• Taoiseach

Leo Varadkar



• Tánaiste

Simon Coveney


Legislature
Oireachtas



• Upper house

Seanad



• Lower house

Dáil


Independence from the United Kingdom



• Proclamation

24 April 1916



• Declaration

21 January 1919



• Anglo-Irish Treaty

6 December 1921



• 1922 constitution

6 December 1922



• 1937 constitution

29 December 1937



• Republic Act

18 April 1949



• Joined the EEC

1 January 1973


Area



• Total

70,273 km2 (27,133 sq mi) (118th)



• Water (%)

2.00


Population



• 2016 census

 4,761,865[3] (120th)



• Density

67.7/km2 (175.3/sq mi) (142nd)


GDP (PPP)
2017 estimate



• Total

$345 billion[4] (56th)



• Per capita

$72,632[4] (7th)


GDP (nominal)
2017 estimate



• Total

$326 billion[4] (42nd)



• Per capita

$68,604[4] (4th)


Gini (2014)
 30.0[5]
medium · 23rd


HDI (2015)
 0.923[6]
very high · 8th


Currency
Euro (€)[note 1] (EUR)


Time zone
GMT/WET (UTC⁠)



• Summer (DST)

IST/WEST (UTC+1)


Date format
dd/mm/yyyy


Drives on the
left


Calling code
+353


ISO 3166 code
IE


Internet TLD
.ie[b]





^ Article 4 of the Constitution of Ireland declares that the name of the state is Ireland; Section 2 of the Republic of Ireland Act 1948 declares that Republic of Ireland is "the description of the State".[7]
^ The .eu domain is also used, as it is shared with other European Union member states.





Ireland (/ˈaɪərlənd/ ( listen); Irish: Éire [ˈeːɾʲə] ( listen)), also known as the Republic of Ireland (Poblacht na hÉireann), is a sovereign state in north-western Europe occupying 26 of 32 counties of the island of Ireland. The capital and largest city is Dublin, which is located on the eastern part of the island, and whose metropolitan area is home to around a third of the country's 4.75 million inhabitants. The state shares its only land border with Northern Ireland, a part of the United Kingdom. It is otherwise surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the Celtic Sea to the south, Saint George's Channel to the south-east, and the Irish Sea to the east. It is a unitary, parliamentary republic.[8] The legislature, the Oireachtas, consists of a lower house, Dáil Éireann, an upper house, Seanad Éireann, and an elected President (Uachtarán) who serves as the largely ceremonial head of state, but with some important powers and duties. The head of government is the Taoiseach (Prime Minister, literally 'Chief', a title not used in English), who is elected by the Dáil and appointed by the President; the Taoiseach in turn appoints other government ministers.
The state was created as the Irish Free State in 1922 as a result of the Anglo-Irish Treaty. It had the status of dominion until 1937 when a new constitution was adopted, in which the state was named "Ireland" and effectively became a republic, with an elected non-executive president as head of state. It was officially declared a republic in 1949, following the Republic of Ireland Act 1948. Ireland became a member of the United Nations in December 1955. It joined the European Economic Community (EEC), the predecessor of the European Union, in 1973. The state had no formal relations with Northern Ireland for most of the twentieth century, but during the 1980s and 1990s the British and Irish governments worked with the Northern Ireland parties towards a resolution to "the Troubles". Since the signing of the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, the Irish government and Northern Ireland Executive have co-operated on a number of policy areas under the North-South Ministerial Council created by the Agreement.
Ireland ranks among the top twenty-five wealthiest countries in the world in terms of GDP per capita,[9] and as the tenth most prosperous country in the world according to The Legatum Prosperity Index 2015.[10] After joining the EEC, Ireland enacted a series of liberal economic policies that resulted in rapid economic growth. The country achieved considerable prosperity between the years of 1995 and 2007, which became known as the Celtic Tiger period. This was halted by an unprecedented financial crisis that began in 2008, in conjunction with the concurrent global economic crash.[11][12] However, as the Irish economy was the fastest growing in the EU in 2015,[13] Ireland is again quickly ascending league tables comparing wealth and prosperity internationally. For example, in 2015, Ireland was ranked as the joint sixth (with Germany) most developed country in the world by the United Nations Human Development Index.[14] It also performs well in several national performance metrics, including freedom of the press, economic freedom and civil liberties. Ireland is a member of the European Union and is a founding member of the Council of Europe and the OECD. The Irish government has followed a policy of military neutrality through non-alignment since immediately prior to World War II and the country is consequently not a member of NATO,[15] although it is a member of Partnership for Peace.



Contents


1 Name
2 History

2.1 Home-rule movement
2.2 Revolution and steps to independence
2.3 Irish Civil War
2.4 1937 Constitution
2.5 Recent history


3 Geography

3.1 Climate


4 Politics

4.1 Local government
4.2 Law
4.3 Foreign relations
4.4 Military


5 Economy

5.1 Development
5.2 Trade
5.3 Energy
5.4 Transport


6 Demographics

6.1 Functional urban areas
6.2 Languages
6.3 Healthcare
6.4 Education
6.5 Religion


7 Culture

7.1 Literature
7.2 Music and dance
7.3 Architecture
7.4 Media
7.5 Cuisine
7.6 Sports
7.7 Society
7.8 State symbols


8 See also
9 Notes
10 References

10.1 Bibliography


11 Further reading
12 External links



Name
Main article: Names of the Irish state
The 1922 state, comprising 26 of the 32 counties of Ireland, was "styled and known as the Irish Free State".[16] The Constitution of Ireland, adopted in 1937, provides that "the name of the State is Éire, or, in the English language, Ireland". Section 2 of the Republic of Ireland Act 1948 states, "It is hereby declared that the description of the State shall be the Republic of Ireland." The 1948 Act does not name the state as "Republic of Ireland", because to have done so would have put it in conflict with the Constitution.[17]
The government of the United Kingdom used the name "Eire" (without the diacritic) and, from 1949, "Republic of Ireland", for the state;[18] it was not until the 1998 Good Friday Agreement that it used the name "Ireland".[19]
As well as "Ireland", "Éire" or "the Republic of Ireland", the state is also referred to as "the Republic", "Southern Ireland" or "the South".[20] In an Irish republican context it is often referred to as "the Free State" or "the 26 Counties".[21]
History






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: History of the Republic of Ireland
For the history of the entire island, see History of Ireland.
Home-rule movement
Main article: Home Rule movement
From the Act of Union on 1 January 1801, until 6 December 1922, the island of Ireland was part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. During the Great Famine, from 1845 to 1849, the island's population of over 8 million fell by 30%. One million Irish died of starvation and/or disease and another 1.5 million emigrated, mostly to the United States.[22] This set the pattern of emigration for the century to come, resulting in a constant population decline up to the 1960s.




The Irish Parliamentary Party was formed in 1882 by Charles Stewart Parnell (1846–1891).


From 1874, and particularly under Charles Stewart Parnell from 1880, the Irish Parliamentary Party gained prominence. This was firstly through widespread agrarian agitation via the Irish Land League, that won land reforms for tenants in the form of the Irish Land Acts, and secondly through its attempts to achieve Home Rule, via two unsuccessful bills which would have granted Ireland limited national autonomy. These led to "grass-roots" control of national affairs, under the Local Government Act 1898, that had been in the hands of landlord-dominated grand juries of the Protestant Ascendancy.
Home Rule seemed certain when the Parliament Act 1911 abolished the veto of the House of Lords, and John Redmond secured the Third Home Rule Act in 1914. However, the Unionist movement had been growing since 1886 among Irish Protestants after the introduction of the first home rule bill, fearing discrimination and loss of economic and social privileges if Irish Catholics achieved real political power. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century unionism was particularly strong in parts of Ulster, where industrialisation was more common in contrast to the more agrarian rest of the island. It was feared that any tariff barriers would heavily affect that region. In addition, the Protestant population was more prominent in Ulster, with a majority in four counties.[23] Under the leadership of the Dublin-born Sir Edward Carson of the Irish Unionist Party and the Ulsterman Sir James Craig of the Ulster Unionist Party, unionists became strongly militant in order to oppose "the Coercion of Ulster". After the Home Rule Bill passed parliament in May 1914, to avoid rebellion with Ulster, the British Prime Minister H. H. Asquith introduced an Amending Bill reluctantly conceded to by the Irish Party leadership. This provided for the temporary exclusion of Ulster from the workings of the bill for a trial period of six years, with an as yet undecided new set of measures to be introduced for the area to be temporarily excluded.
Revolution and steps to independence




Easter Proclamation, 1916


Though it received the Royal Assent and was placed on the statute books in 1914, the implementation of the Third Home Rule Act was suspended until after the First World War which defused the threat of civil war in Ireland. With hope of ensuring the implementation of the Act at the end of the war through Ireland's engagement in the war, Redmond and his Irish National Volunteers supported Britain and its Allies. 175,000 men joined Irish regiments of the 10th (Irish) and 16th (Irish) divisions of the New British Army, while Unionists joined the 36th (Ulster) divisions.[24]
The remainder of the Irish Volunteers, who opposed any support of Britain, launched an armed insurrection against British rule in the 1916 Easter Rising, together with the Irish Citizen Army. This commenced on 24 April 1916 with the declaration of independence. After a week of heavy fighting, primarily in Dublin, the surviving rebels were forced to surrender their positions. The majority were imprisoned but fifteen of the prisoners (including most of the leaders) were executed as traitors to Britain. This included Patrick Pearse, the spokesman for the rising and who provided the signal to the volunteers to start the rising, as well as James Connolly, socialist and founder of the Industrial Workers of the World union and both the Irish and Scottish Labour movements. These events, together with the Conscription Crisis of 1918, had a profound effect on changing public opinion in Ireland.
In January 1919, after the December 1918 general election, 73 of Ireland's 106 Members of Parliament (MPs) elected were Sinn Féin members who refused to take their seats in the British House of Commons. Instead, they set up an Irish parliament called Dáil Éireann. This first Dáil in January 1919 issued a Declaration of Independence and proclaimed an Irish Republic. The Declaration was mainly a restatement of the 1916 Proclamation with the additional provision that Ireland was no longer a part of the United Kingdom. The new Irish Republic was recognised internationally only by the Russian Soviet Republic.[25] The Irish Republic's Aireacht (Ministry) sent a delegation under Ceann Comhairle (Head of Council, or Speaker, of the Daíl) Seán T. O'Kelly to the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, but it was not admitted.




In 1922 a new parliament called the Oireachtas was established, of which Dáil Éireann became the lower house.


After the War of Independence and truce called in July 1921, representatives of the British government and the Irish treaty delegates, led by Arthur Griffith, Robert Barton and Michael Collins, negotiated the Anglo-Irish Treaty in London from 11 October to 6 December 1921. The Irish delegates set up headquarters at Hans Place in Knightsbridge and it was here in private discussions that the decision was taken on 5 December to recommend the treaty to Dáil Éireann. The Second Dáil Éireann narrowly ratified the Treaty.
In accordance with the treaty, on 6 December 1922 the entire island of Ireland became a self-governing dominion called the Irish Free State (Saorstát Éireann). Under the Constitution of the Irish Free State, the Parliament of Northern Ireland had the option to leave the Irish Free State one month later and return to the United Kingdom. During the intervening period, the powers of the Parliament of the Irish Free State and Executive Council of the Irish Free State did not extend to Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland exercised its right under the treaty to leave the new dominion and rejoined the United Kingdom on 8 December 1922. It did so by making an address to the King requesting, "that the powers of the Parliament and Government of the Irish Free State shall no longer extend to Northern Ireland."[26] The Irish Free State was a constitutional monarchy sharing a monarch with the United Kingdom and other dominions of the British Commonwealth. The country had a governor-general (representing the monarch), a bicameral parliament, a cabinet called the "Executive Council", and a prime minister called the President of the Executive Council.
Irish Civil War




Éamon de Valera (1882–1975)


The Irish Civil War was the consequence of the creation of the Irish Free State. Anti-treaty forces, led by Éamon de Valera, objected to the fact that acceptance of the treaty abolished the Irish Republic of 1919 to which they had sworn loyalty, arguing in the face of public support for the settlement that the "people have no right to do wrong".[27] They objected most to the fact that the state would remain part of the British Empire and that members of the Free State Parliament would have to swear what the Anti-treaty side saw as an oath of fidelity to the British King. Pro-treaty forces, led by Michael Collins, argued that the treaty gave "not the ultimate freedom that all nations aspire to and develop, but the freedom to achieve it".[28]
At the start of the war, the Irish Republican Army (IRA) split into two opposing camps: a pro-treaty IRA and an anti-treaty IRA. The pro-treaty IRA disbanded and joined the new National Army. However, because the anti-treaty IRA lacked an effective command structure and because of the pro-treaty forces' defensive tactics throughout the war, Michael Collins and his pro-treaty forces were able to build up an army with many tens of thousands of World War I veterans from the 1922 disbanded Irish regiments of the British Army, capable of overwhelming the anti-treatyists. British supplies of artillery, aircraft, machine-guns and ammunition boosted pro-treaty forces, and the threat of a return of Crown forces to the Free State removed any doubts about the necessity of enforcing the treaty. The lack of public support for the anti-treaty forces (often called the Irregulars) and the determination of the government to overcome the Irregulars contributed significantly to their defeat.
1937 Constitution
Following a national referendum, on 29 December 1937 the new Constitution of Ireland (Bunreacht na hÉireann) came into force. This replaced the Constitution of the Irish Free State and called the state Ireland, or Éire in Irish.[29] Articles 2 and 3 of the constitution asserted a nominal territorial claim over the whole island, considering the partition of Ireland under the 1922 Anglo-Irish Treaty illegitimate. The former Irish Free State government had taken steps to abolish the Office of Governor-General some months before the new Constitution came into force.[30] Although the constitution established the office of President of Ireland, the question over whether Ireland was a republic remained open. Diplomats were accredited to the king, but the president exercised the internal functions of a head of state.[31] For instance, the President gave assent to new laws with his own authority, without reference to King George VI who was only an "organ", that was provided for by statute law.
Ireland remained neutral during World War II, a period it described as the Emergency. Ireland's link with the Commonwealth was terminated with the passage of the Republic of Ireland Act 1948, which came into force on 18 April 1949 and declared that the state was a republic. At the time, a declaration of a republic terminated Commonwealth membership. This rule was changed 10 days after Ireland declared itself a republic, with the London Declaration of 28 April 1949. Ireland did not reapply when the rules were altered to permit republics to join. Later, the Crown of Ireland Act was repealed in Ireland by the Statute Law Revision (Pre-Union Irish Statutes) Act, 1962.
Recent history




In 1973 Ireland joined the European Economic Community along with the United Kingdom and Denmark. The country signed the Lisbon Treaty in 2007.


Ireland became a member of the United Nations in December 1955, after having been denied membership because of its neutral stance during the Second World War and not supporting the Allied cause.[32] At the time, joining the UN involved a commitment to using force to deter aggression by one state against another if the UN thought it was necessary.[33]
Interest towards membership of the European Economic Community (EEC) developed in Ireland during the 1950s, with consideration also given to membership of the European Free Trade Area. As the United Kingdom intended on EEC membership, Ireland applied for membership in July 1961 due to the substantial economic linkages with the United Kingdom. However, the founding EEC members remained skeptical regarding Ireland's economic capacity, neutrality, and unattractive protectionist policy.[34] Many Irish economists and politicians realised that economic policy reform was necessary. The prospect of EEC membership became doubtful in 1963 when French President General Charles de Gaulle stated that France opposed Britain's accession, which ceased negotiations with all other candidate countries. However, in 1969 his successor, Georges Pompidou, was not opposed to British and Irish membership. Negotiations began and in 1972 the Treaty of Accession was signed. A referendum held in 1972 confirmed Ireland's entry, and it finally joined the EEC in 1973.[35]
The economic crisis of the late 1970s was fuelled by the Fianna Fáil government's budget, the abolition of the car tax, excessive borrowing, and global economic instability including the 1979 oil crisis.[36] There were significant policy changes from 1989 onwards, with economic reform, tax cuts, welfare reform, an increase in competition, and a ban on borrowing to fund current spending. This policy began in 1989–1992 by the Fianna Fáil/Progressive Democrat government, and continued by the subsequent Fianna Fáil/Labour government and Fine Gael/Labour/Democratic Left government. Ireland became one of the world's fastest growing economies by the late 1990s in what was known as the Celtic Tiger period, which lasted until the global Financial crisis of 2007–08. However, since 2014, Ireland has experienced strong economic growth.
In the Northern Ireland question, the British and Irish governments started to seek a peaceful resolution to the violent conflict involving many paramilitaries and the British Army in Northern Ireland known as "The Troubles". A peace settlement for Northern Ireland, known as the Good Friday Agreement, was approved in 1998 in referendums north and south of the border. As part of the peace settlement, the territorial claim to Northern Ireland in Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland was removed by referendum. In its white paper on Brexit the United Kingdom government reiterated its commitment to the Good Friday Agreement. With regard to Northern Ireland's status, it said that the UK Government's "clearly-stated preference is to retain Northern Ireland’s current constitutional position: as part of the UK, but with strong links to Ireland".[37]
Geography
Main article: Geography of Ireland




The Cliffs of Moher on the Atlantic coast


The state extends over an area of about five-sixths (70,273 km2 or 27,133 sq mi) of the island of Ireland (84,421 km2 or 32,595 sq mi), with Northern Ireland constituting the remainder. The island is bounded to the north and west by the Atlantic Ocean and to the northeast by the North Channel. To the east, the Irish Sea connects to the Atlantic Ocean via St George's Channel and the Celtic Sea to the southwest.
The western landscape mostly consists of rugged cliffs, hills and mountains. The central lowlands are extensively covered with glacial deposits of clay and sand, as well as significant areas of bogland and several lakes. The highest point is Carrauntoohil (1,038 m or 3,406 ft), located in the Macgillycuddy's Reeks mountain range in the southwest. River Shannon, which traverses the central lowlands, is the longest river in Ireland at 386 kilometres or 240 miles in length. The west coast is more rugged than the east, with numerous islands, peninsulas, headlands and bays.




Macgillycuddy's Reeks, mountain range in County Kerry includes the highest peaks in Ireland


Before the arrival of the first settlers in Ireland about 9,000 years ago, the land was largely covered by forests of oak, ash, elm, hazel, yew, and other native trees.[38] The growth of blanket bog and the extensive clearing of woodland to facilitate farming are believed to be the main causes of deforestation during the following centuries. Today, about 12% of Ireland is forested, of which a significant majority is composed of mainly non-native coniferous plantations for commercial use.[39] Ideal soil conditions, high rainfall and a mild climate give Ireland the highest growth rates for forests in Europe. Hedgerows, which are traditionally used to define land boundaries, are an important substitute for woodland habitat, providing refuge for native wild flora and a wide range of insect, bird and mammal species.[40]




Glendalough valley in County Wicklow


Agriculture accounts for about 64% of the total land area.[41] This has resulted in limited land to preserve natural habitats, in particular for larger wild mammals with greater territorial requirements.[42] The long history of agricultural production coupled with modern agricultural methods, such as pesticide and fertiliser use, has placed pressure on biodiversity.[43]
Climate
Main article: Climate of Ireland
The Atlantic Ocean and the warming influence of the Gulf Stream affect weather patterns in Ireland.[44] Temperatures differ regionally, with central and eastern areas tending to be more extreme. However, due to a temperate oceanic climate, temperatures are seldom lower than −5 °C (23 °F) in winter or higher than 26 °C (79 °F) in summer.[45] The highest temperature recorded in Ireland was 33.3 °C (91.9 °F) on 26 June 1887 at Kilkenny Castle in Kilkenny, while the lowest temperature recorded was −19.1 °C (−2.4 °F) at Markree Castle in Sligo.[46] Rainfall is more prevalent during winter months and less so during the early months of summer. Southwestern areas experience the most rainfall as a result of south westerly winds, while Dublin receives the least. Sunshine duration is highest in the southeast of the country.[44] The far north and west are two of the windiest regions in Europe, with great potential for wind energy generation.[47] Ireland normally gets between 1100 and 1600 hours of sunshine each year, most areas averaging between 3.25 and 3.75 hours a day. The sunniest months are May and June, which average between 5 and 6.5 hours per day over most of the country. The extreme southeast gets most sunshine, averaging over 7 hours a day in early summer. December is the dullest month, with an average daily sunshine ranging from about 1 hour in the north to almost 2 hours in the extreme southeast. The sunniest summer in the 100 years from 1881 to 1980 was 1887, according to measurements made at the Phoenix Park in Dublin; 1980 was the dullest.[48]
Politics
Main article: Politics of the Republic of Ireland
Ireland is a constitutional republic with a parliamentary system of government. The Oireachtas is the bicameral national parliament composed of the President of Ireland and the two Houses of the Oireachtas: Seanad Éireann (Senate) and Dáil Éireann (House of Representatives).[49] Áras an Uachtaráin is the official residence of the President of Ireland, while the houses of the Oireachtas meet at Leinster House in Dublin.




President Michael D. Higgins


The President serves as head of state, and is elected for a seven-year term and may be re-elected once. The President is primarily a figurehead, but is entrusted with certain constitutional powers with the advice of the Council of State. The office has absolute discretion in some areas, such as referring a bill to the Supreme Court for a judgment on its constitutionality.[50] Michael D. Higgins became the ninth President of Ireland on 11 November 2011.[51]
The Taoiseach (Prime Minister) serves as the head of government and is appointed by the President upon the nomination of the Dáil. Most Taoisigh have served as the leader of the political party that gains the most seats in national elections. It has become customary for coalitions to form a government, as there has not been a single-party government since 1989.[52] Leo Varadkar succeeded Enda Kenny as Taoiseach on 14 June 2017.




Taoiseach Leo Varadkar


The Seanad is composed of sixty members, with eleven nominated by the Taoiseach, six elected by two universities, and 43 elected by public representatives from panels of candidates established on a vocational basis. The Dáil has 158 members (Teachtaí Dála) elected to represent multi-seat constituencies under the system of proportional representation and by means of the single transferable vote.
The Government is constitutionally limited to fifteen members. No more than two members can be selected from the Seanad, and the Taoiseach, Tánaiste (Deputy Prime Minister) and Minister for Finance must be members of the Dáil. The Dáil must be dissolved within five years after its first meeting following the previous election,[53] and a general election for members of the Dáil must take place no later than thirty days after the dissolution. According to the Constitution of Ireland, parliamentary elections must be held at least every seven years, though a lower limit may be set by statute law. The current government is a Fine Gael led minority government led by Leo Varadkar as Taoiseach and Simon Coveney as Tánaiste. It is supported by a number of independents including Shane Ross and former Senator Katherine Zappone. The minority government is held in place by a confidence and supply deal with Fianna Fáil. Opposition parties in the current Dáil are Fianna Fáil, Sinn Féin, the Labour Party, Solidarity–People Before Profit, Social Democrats, Workers and Unemployed Action, the Green Party as well as a number of independents.
Ireland has been a member state of the European Union since 1973, but has chosen to remain outside the Schengen Area. Citizens of the United Kingdom can freely enter the country without a passport due to the Common Travel Area, which is a passport-free zone comprising the islands of Ireland, Great Britain, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. However, some identification is required at airports and seaports.
Local government




Government Buildings


Main article: Local government in the Republic of Ireland
The Local Government Act 1898[54] is the founding document of the present system of local government, while the Twentieth Amendment to the constitution of 1999 provided for its constitutional recognition. The twenty-six traditional counties of Ireland are not always coterminous with administrative divisions although they are generally used as a geographical frame of reference by the population of Ireland. The Local Government Reform Act 2014 provides for a system of thirty-one local authorities - twenty-six county councils, two city and county councils and three city councils.[54] Below this (with the exception of the Dublin Region and the three city councils) are municipal districts, replacing a previous system of town councils.











Fingal
Dublin City
Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown
South Dublin
Wicklow
Wexford
Carlow
Kildare
Meath
Louth
Monaghan
Cavan
Longford
Westmeath
Offaly
Laois




Kilkenny
Waterford
Cork City
Cork
Kerry
Limerick
Tipperary
Clare
Galway
Galway City
Mayo
Roscommon
Sligo
Leitrim
Donegal








Local authorities are responsible for matters such as planning, local roads, sanitation, and libraries. Dáil constituencies are required to follow county boundaries as much as possible. Counties with greater populations have multiple constituencies, some of more than one county, but generally do not cross county boundaries. The counties are grouped into eight regions, each with a Regional Authority composed of members delegated by the various county and city councils in the region. The regions do not have any direct administrative role as such, but they serve for planning, coordination and statistical purposes.
Law
Main articles: Law of Ireland, Courts of Ireland, and Law enforcement in the Republic of Ireland




The Four Courts, completed in 1802, is the location of the Supreme Court, the High Court and the Dublin Circuit Court.


Ireland has a common law legal system with a written constitution that provides for a parliamentary democracy. The court system consists of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, the High Court, the Circuit Court and the District Court, all of which apply the law of Ireland. Trials for serious offences must usually be held before a jury. The High Court and the Supreme Court have authority, by means of judicial review, to determine the compatibility of laws and activities of other institutions of the state with the constitution and the law. Except in exceptional circumstances, court hearings must occur in public. The Criminal Courts of Justice is the principal building for the criminal courts.[55][56] It includes the Dublin Metropolitan District Court, Court of Criminal Appeal, Dublin Circuit Criminal Court and Central Criminal Court.[55]




The Criminal Courts of Justice is the principal building for criminal courts.


Garda Síochána na hÉireann (Guardians of the Peace of Ireland), more commonly referred to as the Gardaí, is the state's civilian police force. The force is responsible for all aspects of civil policing, both in terms of territory and infrastructure. It is headed by the Garda Commissioner, who is appointed by the Government. Most uniformed members do not routinely carry firearms. Standard policing is traditionally carried out by uniformed officers equipped only with a baton and pepper spray.[57]
The Military Police is the corps of the Irish Army responsible for the provision of policing service personnel and providing a military police presence to forces while on exercise and deployment. In wartime, additional tasks include the provision of a traffic control organisation to allow rapid movement of military formations to their mission areas. Other wartime roles include control of prisoners of war and refugees.[58]
Ireland's citizenship laws relate to "the island of Ireland", including islands and seas, thereby extending them to Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom. Therefore, anyone born in Northern Ireland who meets the requirements for being an Irish citizen, such as birth on the island of Ireland to an Irish or British citizen parent or a parent who is entitled to live in Northern Ireland or the Republic without restriction on their residency,[59] may exercise an entitlement to Irish citizenship, such as an Irish passport.[60]
Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of the Republic of Ireland
See also: Ireland–NATO relations
Foreign relations are substantially influenced by membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United Kingdom and United States are also important.[61] It held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union on six occasions, most recently from January to June 2013.[62]




Ireland has been a member state of the European Union since 1973.


Ireland tends towards independence in foreign policy, thus the country is not a member of NATO and has a longstanding policy of military neutrality. This policy has helped the Irish Defence Forces to be successful in their contributions to peace-keeping missions with the United Nations since 1960, during the Congo Crisis and subsequently in Cyprus, Lebanon and Bosnia and Herzegovina.[63][disputed – discuss]
Despite Irish neutrality during World War II, Ireland had more than 50,000 participants in the war through enlistment in the British armed forces. During the Cold War, Irish military policy, while ostensibly neutral, was biased towards NATO.[64] During the Cuban Missile Crisis, Seán Lemass authorised the search of Cuban and Czechoslovak aircraft passing through Shannon and passed the information to the CIA.[65] Ireland's air facilities were used by the United States military for the delivery of military personnel involved in the 2003 invasion of Iraq through Shannon Airport. The airport had previously been used for the invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, as well as the First Gulf War.[66]
Since 1999, Ireland has been a member of NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) program and NATO's Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC), which is aimed at creating trust between NATO and other states in Europe and the former Soviet Union.[67][68]
Military
Main article: Defence Forces (Ireland)




Soldiers of the Garda Onór


The Defence Forces are made up of the Army, Naval Service, Air Corps and Reserve Defence Force. It is small but well equipped, with almost 10,000 full-time military personnel and over 2,000 in reserve.[69][70] Ireland is a neutral country,[71] and has "triple-lock" rules governing the participation of Irish troops in conflict zones, whereby approval must be given by the UN, the Dáil and Government.[72] Daily deployments of the Defence Forces cover aid to civil power operations, protection and patrol of Irish territorial waters and EEZ by the Irish Naval Service, and UN, EU and PfP peace-keeping missions. By 1996, over 40,000 Irish service personnel had served in international UN peacekeeping missions.[73]
The Irish Air Corps is the air component of the Defence Forces and operates sixteen fixed wing aircraft and eight helicopters. The Irish Naval Service is Ireland's navy, and operates eight patrol ships, and smaller numbers of inflatable boats and training vessels, and has armed boarding parties capable of seizing a ship and a special unit of frogmen. The military includes the Reserve Defence Forces (Army Reserve and Naval Service Reserve) for part-time reservists. Ireland's special forces include the Army Ranger Wing, which trains and operates with international special operations units. The President is the formal Supreme Commander of the Defence Forces, but in practice answers to the Government via the Minister for Defence.
Economy
Main article: Economy of the Republic of Ireland




Ireland is part of the EU (dark blue & light blue) and Eurozone (dark blue).


Development
The Irish economy has transformed since the 1980s from being predominantly agricultural to a modern knowledge economy focused on high technology industries and services. Ireland adopted the euro currency in 2002 along with eleven other EU member states.[43] The country is heavily reliant on Foreign Direct Investment and has attracted several multinational corporations due to a highly educated workforce and a low corporation tax rate.[74]
Companies such as Intel invested in Ireland during the late 1980s, later followed by Microsoft and Google. Ireland is ranked as the ninth most economically free economy in the world, according to the Index of Economic Freedom. In terms of GDP per capita, Ireland is one of the wealthiest countries in the OECD and EU. However, the country ranks below the OECD average in terms of GNP per capita. GDP is significantly greater than GNP due to the large number of multinational corporations based in Ireland.[74]
Beginning in the early 1990s, the country experienced unprecedented economic growth fuelled by a dramatic rise in consumer spending, construction and investment, which became known as the Celtic Tiger period. The pace of growth slowed during 2007 and led to the burst of a major property bubble which had developed over time.[75] The dramatic fall in property prices highlighted the over-exposure of the economy to construction and contributed to the Irish banking crisis. Ireland officially entered a recession in 2008 following consecutive months of economic contraction.[76] GNP contracted by 11.3% in 2009 alone, the largest annual decline in GNP since 1950.[77]
The country officially exited recession in 2010, assisted by a strong growth in exports.[78] However, due to a significant rise in the cost of public borrowing due to government guarantees of private banking debt, the Irish government accepted an €85 billion programme of assistance from the EU, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and bilateral loans from the United Kingdom, Sweden and Denmark.[79] Following three years of contraction, the economy grew by 0.7% in 2011 and 0.9% in 2012.[80] The unemployment rate was 14.7% in 2012, including 18.5% among recent immigrants.[81] In March 2016 the unemployment rate was reported by the Central Statistics Office (Ireland) to be 8.6%, down from a peak unemployment rate of 15.1% in February 2012.[82] In addition to unemployment, net emigration from Ireland between 2008 and 2013 totalled 120,100,[83] or some 2.6% of the total population according to the Census of Ireland 2011. One-third of the emigrants were aged between 15 and 24.[83]
In 2013, Ireland was named the "best country for business" by Forbes.[84] Ireland exited its EU-IMF bailout programme on 15 December 2013.[85] Having implemented budget cuts, reforms and sold assets, Ireland was again able to access debt markets. Since then, Ireland has been able to sell long term bonds at record rates.[86]
Trade




The International Financial Services Centre in Dublin


Although multinational corporations dominate Ireland's export sector, exports from other sources also contribute significantly to the national income. The activities of multinational companies based in Ireland have made it one of the largest exporters of pharmaceutical agents, medical devices and software-related goods and services in the world. Ireland's exports also relate to the activities of large Irish companies (such as Ryanair, Kerry Group and Smurfit Kappa Group) and exports of mineral resources: Ireland is the seventh largest producer of zinc concentrates, and the twelfth largest producer of lead concentrates. The country also has significant deposits of gypsum, limestone, and smaller quantities of copper, silver, gold, barite, and dolomite.[43] Tourism in Ireland contributes about 4% of GDP and is a significant source of employment.
Other goods exports include agri-food, cattle, beef, dairy products, and aluminum. Ireland's major imports include data processing equipment, chemicals, petroleum and petroleum products, textiles, and clothing. Financial services provided by multinational corporations based at the Irish Financial Services Centre also contribute to Irish exports. The difference between exports (€89.4 billion) and imports (€45.5 billion) resulted an annual trade surplus of €43.9 billion in 2010, which is the highest trade surplus relative to GDP achieved by any EU member state.[87]
The EU is by far the country's largest trading partner, accounting for 57.9% of exports and 60.7% of imports. The United Kingdom is the most important trading partner within the EU, accounting for 15.4% of exports and 32.1% of imports. Outside the EU, the United States accounted for 23.2% of exports and 14.1% of imports in 2010.[87]
Energy




A wind farm in County Wexford


Main article: Energy in Ireland
ESB, Ervia and Airtricity are the three main electricity and gas suppliers in Ireland. There are 19.82 billion cubic metres of proven reserves of gas.[43][88] Natural gas extraction previously occurred at the Kinsale Head until its exhaustion. The Corrib gas field was due to come on stream in 2013/14. In 2012, the Barryroe field was confirmed to have up to 1.6 billion barrels of oil in reserve, with between 160 and 600 million recoverable.[89] That could provide for Ireland's entire energy needs for up to 13 years, when it is developed in 2015/16. There have been significant efforts to increase the use of renewable and sustainable forms of energy in Ireland, particularly in wind power, with 3,000 MegaWatts[90] of wind farms being constructed, some for the purpose of export.[91] The Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) has estimated that 6.5% of Ireland's 2011 energy requirements were produced by renewable sources.[92] The SEAI has also reported an increase in energy efficiency in Ireland with a 28% reduction in carbon emissions per house from 2005 to 2013.[93]
Transport
Main articles: Transport in Ireland, Rail transport in Ireland, and Roads in Ireland




Terminal 1 and 2 at Dublin Airport


The country's three main international airports at Dublin, Shannon and Cork serve many European and intercontinental routes with scheduled and chartered flights. The London and Dublin route is the second busiest international air route in Europe, with 3.6 million people flying between the two cities in 2013[94] down from the 4.4 million who flew in 2003.[95][96] Aer Lingus is the flag carrier of Ireland, although Ryanair is the country's largest airline. Ryanair is Europe's largest low-cost carrier,[97] the second largest in terms of passenger numbers, and the world's largest in terms of international passenger numbers.[98]




InterCity Mark IV train at Heuston station


Railway services are provided by Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail), which operates all internal intercity, commuter and freight railway services in the country. Dublin is the centre of the network with two main stations, Heuston station and Connolly station, linking to the country's cities and main towns. The Enterprise service, which runs jointly with Northern Ireland Railways, connects Dublin and Belfast. The whole of Ireland's mainline network operates on track with a gauge of 5 ft 3 in (1,600 mm), which is unique in Europe and has resulted in distinct rolling stock designs. Dublin has a steadily improving public transport network including the DART, Luas, Dublin Bus, and dublinbikes.
Motorways, national primary roads and national secondary roads are managed by the National Roads Authority, while regional roads and local roads are managed by the local authorities in each of their respective areas. The road network is primarily focused on the capital, but motorways have been extended to other cities as part of the Transport 21 capital investment programme, as a result motorways have been completed between Dublin and a number of other major Irish cities including Cork, Limerick, Waterford and Galway.[99]
Dublin has been the focus of major projects such as the East-Link and West-Link toll-bridges, as well as the Dublin Port Tunnel. The Jack Lynch Tunnel, under the River Lee in Cork, and the Limerick Tunnel, under the River Shannon, were two major projects outside Dublin. Several by-pass projects are underway in other urban areas.
Demographics
Main article: Demographics of the Republic of Ireland
See also: Irish population analysis




Population of Ireland since 1951.


Genetic research suggests that the earliest settlers migrated from Iberia following the most recent ice age.[100] After the Mesolithic, Neolithic and Bronze Age, migrants introduced a Celtic language and culture. Migrants from the two latter eras still represent the genetic heritage of most Irish people.[101][102] Gaelic tradition expanded and became the dominant form over time. Irish people are a combination of Gaelic, Norse, Anglo-Norman, French, and British ancestry.
The population of Ireland stood at 4,588,252 in 2011, an increase of 8.2% since 2006.[103] As of 2011[update], Ireland had the highest birth rate in the European Union (16 births per 1,000 of population).[104] In 2014, 36.3% of births were to unmarried women.[105] Annual population growth rates exceeded 2% during the 2002-2006 intercensal period, which was attributed to high rates of natural increase and immigration.[106] This rate declined somewhat during the subsequent 2006-2011 intercensal period, with an average annual percentage change of 1.6%.
At the time of the 2011 census, the number of non-Irish nationals was recorded at 544,357, comprising 12% of the total population. This is nearly 2.5 times the number of non-Irish nationals recorded in the 2002 census (224,261), when the question of nationality was asked for the first time. The five largest non-national cohorts were Polish (122,585), UK (112,259), Lithuanian (36,683), Latvian (20,593) and Nigerian (17,642) respectively.[107]
See also: List of urban areas in the Republic of Ireland by population


Largest urban centres by population (2016 census)




Dublin

Limerick

#
Settlement
Population
#
Settlement
Population


Cork

Galway



1
Dublin
1,173,179[108]
11
Kilkenny
26,512


2
Cork
208,669[109]
12
Ennis
25,276


3
Limerick
94,192[110]
13
Carlow
24,272


4
Galway
79,934[111]
14
Tralee
23,691


5
Waterford
53,504[112]
15
Newbridge
22,742


6
Drogheda
40,956[113]
16
Portlaoise
22,050


7
Swords
39,248[114]
17
Balbriggan
21,722


8
Dundalk
39,004[115]
18
Naas
21,393


9
Bray
32,600[116]
19
Athlone
21,349


10
Navan
30,173[117]
20
Mullingar
20,928



Functional urban areas
The following is a list of functional urban areas in Ireland and their population as of 2011.[118]


Functional urban areas
Population
2011


Dublin
1,794,000


Cork
406,000


Galway
179,000


Limerick
162,000


Languages
Main articles: Languages of Ireland, Irish language, Hiberno-English, and Mid Ulster English




The percentage who said they spoke Irish daily outside the education system in the 2011 census.


The Irish Constitution describes Irish as the "national language", but English is the dominant language. In the 2006 census, 39% of the population regarded themselves as competent in Irish. Irish is spoken as a community language only in a small number of rural areas mostly in the west and south of the country, collectively known as the Gaeltacht. Except in Gaeltacht regions, road signs are usually bilingual.[119] Most public notices and print media are in English only. While the state is officially bilingual, citizens can often struggle to access state services in Irish and most government publications are not available in both languages, even though citizens have the right to deal with the state in Irish. Irish language media include the TV channel TG4, the radio station RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta and online newspaper Tuairisc.ie. In the Irish Defence Forces, all foot and arms drill commands are given in the Irish language.
As a result of immigration, Polish is the most widely spoken language in Ireland after English, with Irish as the third most spoken.[120] Several other Central European languages (namely Czech, Hungarian and Slovak), as well as Baltic languages (Lithuanian and Latvian) are also spoken on a day-to-day basis. Other languages spoken in Ireland include Shelta, spoken by Irish Travellers, and a dialect of Scots is spoken by some Ulster Scots people in Donegal.[121] Most secondary school students choose to learn one or two foreign languages. Languages available for the Junior Certificate and the Leaving Certificate include French, German, Italian and Spanish; Leaving Certificate students can also study Arabic, Japanese and Russian. Some secondary schools also offer Ancient Greek, Hebrew and Latin. The study of Irish is compulsory for Leaving Certificate students, but some may qualify for an exemption in some circumstances, such as learning difficulties or entering the country after age 11.[122]
Healthcare
Main article: Healthcare in the Republic of Ireland




RCSI Disease and Research Centre at Beaumont Hospital in Dublin city.


Although the Irish healthcare system comes under constant criticism from politicians and the public, Ireland has one of the most developed systems of healthcare in the world and healthcare professionals who are highly trained. Healthcare in Ireland is provided by both public and private healthcare providers.[123]
The Minister for Health has responsibility for setting overall health service policy. Every resident of Ireland is entitled to receive health care through the public health care system, which is managed by the Health Service Executive and funded by general taxation. A person may be required to pay a subsidised fee for certain health care received; this depends on income, age, illness or disability. All maternity services are provided free of charge and children up to the age of 6 months. Emergency care is provided to patients who present to a hospital emergency department. However, visitors to emergency departments in non-emergency situations who are not referred by their GP may incur a fee of €100. In some circumstances this fee is not payable or may be waived.[124]
Anyone holding a European Health Insurance Card is entitled to free maintenance and treatment in public beds in Health Service Executive and voluntary hospitals. Outpatient services are also provided for free. However, the majority of patients on median incomes or above are required to pay subsidised hospital charges. Private health insurance is available to the population for those who want to avail of it.
The average life expectancy in Ireland in 2012 is 81 years (OECD average life expectancy in 2012 was 80 years), with 78.2 years for men and 83.6 years for women.[125] It has the highest birth rate in the EU (16.8 births per 1,000 inhabitants, compared to an EU average of 10.7)[126] and a very low infant mortality rate (3.5 per 1,000 live births). The Irish healthcare system ranked 13th out of 34 European countries in 2012 according to the European Health Consumer Index produced by Health Consumer Powerhouse.[127] The same report ranked The Irish healthcare system as having the 8th best health outcomes but only the 21st most accessible system in Europe.
Education
Main article: Education in the Republic of Ireland




University College Cork was founded in 1845 and is a constituent university of the National University of Ireland.


Ireland has three levels of education: primary, secondary and higher education. The education systems are largely under the direction of the Government via the Minister for Education and Skills. Recognised primary and secondary schools must adhere to the curriculum established by the relevant authorities. Education is compulsory between the ages of six and fifteen years, and all children up to the age of eighteen must complete the first three years of secondary, including one sitting of the Junior Certificate examination.[128]
There are approximately 3,300 primary schools in Ireland.[129] The vast majority (92%) are under the patronage of the Catholic Church. Schools run by religious organisations, but receiving public money and recognition, cannot discriminate against pupils based upon religion or lack thereof. A sanctioned system of preference does exist, where students of a particular religion may be accepted before those who do not share the ethos of the school, in a case where a school's quota has already been reached.




Longroom at the Trinity College Library


The Leaving Certificate, which is taken after two years of study, is the final examination in the secondary school system. Those intending to pursue higher education normally take this examination, with access to third-level courses generally depending on results obtained from the best six subjects taken, on a competitive basis.[130] Third-level education awards are conferred by at least 38 Higher Education Institutions - this includes the constituent or linked colleges of seven universities, plus other designated institutions of the Higher Education and Training Awards Council.
The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, currently ranks Ireland as having the fourth highest reading score, ninth highest science score and thirteenth highest mathematics score, among OECD countries, in its 2012 assessment.[131] In 2012, Irish students aged 15 years had the second highest levels of reading literacy in the EU.[132] Ireland also has 0.747 of the World's top 500 Universities per capita, which ranks the country in 8th place in the world.[133] Primary, secondary and higher (university/college) level education are all free in Ireland for all EU citizens.[134] There are charges to cover student services and examinations.
In addition, 37 percent of Ireland population has a university or college degree, which is among the highest percentages in the world.[135][136]
Religion
Main article: Religion in the Republic of Ireland




Religion in the Republic of Ireland


Religion


Percent



Roman Catholic

 

78.3%


Non-religious

 

9.8%


Protestant

 

4.2%


Muslim

 

1.3%


Other

 

6.4%




Religious freedom is constitutionally provided for in Ireland. Christianity is the predominant religion, and while Ireland remains a predominantly Catholic country, the percentage of the population who identified as Catholic on the census has fallen sharply from 84.2 percent in the 2011 census to 78.3 percent in the most recent 2016 census. Other results from the 2016 census are : 4.2% Protestant, 1.3% as Muslim, and 9.8% as having no religion.[3] According to a Georgetown University study, before 2000 the country had one of the highest rates of regular Mass attendance in the Western world.[137] While daily attendance was 13% in 2006, there was a reduction in weekly attendance from 81% in 1990 to 48% in 2006, although the decline was reported as stabilising.[138] In 2011, it was reported that weekly Mass attendance in Dublin was just 18%, with it being even lower among younger generations.[139]




Saint Finbarre's Cathedral in Cork is a Church of Ireland cathedral






Christ Church Cathedral in Dublin is a Church of Ireland cathedral


The Church of Ireland is the second largest Christian denomination. Membership declined throughout the twentieth century, but experienced an increase early in the 21st century, as have other small Christian denominations. Significant Protestant denominations are the Presbyterian Church and Methodist Church. Immigration has contributed to a growth in Hindu and Muslim populations. In percentage terms, Orthodox Christianity and Islam were the fastest growing religions, with increases of 100% and 70% respectively.[140]
Ireland's patron saints are Saint Patrick, Saint Bridget and Saint Columba. Saint Patrick is the only one commonly recognised as the patron saint. Saint Patrick's Day is celebrated on 17 March in Ireland and abroad as the Irish national day, with parades and other celebrations.
As with other predominantly Catholic European states, Ireland underwent a period of legal secularisation in the late twentieth century. In 1972, the article of the Constitution naming specific religious groups was deleted by the Fifth Amendment in a referendum. Article 44 remains in the Constitution: "The State acknowledges that the homage of public worship is due to Almighty God. It shall hold His Name in reverence, and shall respect and honour religion." The article also establishes freedom of religion, prohibits endowment of any religion, prohibits the state from religious discrimination, and requires the state to treat religious and non-religious schools in a non-prejudicial manner.
Religious studies was introduced as an optional Junior Certificate subject in 2001. Although many schools are run by religious organisations, a secularist trend is occurring among younger generations.[141]
Culture
Main article: Culture of Ireland
Ireland's culture was for centuries predominantly Gaelic, and it remains one of the six principal Celtic nations. Following the Anglo-Norman invasion in the 12th century, and gradual British conquest and colonisation beginning in the 16th century, Ireland became influenced by English and Scottish culture. Subsequently, Irish culture, though distinct in many aspects, shares characteristics with the Anglosphere, Catholic Europe, and other Celtic regions. The Irish diaspora, one of the world's largest and most dispersed, has contributed to the globalisation of Irish culture, producing many prominent figures in art, music, and science.
Literature
Main article: Irish literature




Jonathan Swift (1667–1745)


Ireland has made a significant contribution to world literature in both the English and Irish languages. Modern Irish fiction began with the publishing of the 1726 novel Gulliver's Travels by Jonathan Swift. Other writers of importance during the 18th century and their most notable works include Laurence Sterne with the publication of The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman and Oliver Goldsmith's The Vicar of Wakefield. Numerous Irish novelists emerged during the 19th century, including Maria Edgeworth, John Banim, Gerald Griffin, Charles Kickham, William Carleton, George Moore, and Somerville and Ross. Bram Stoker is best known as the author of the 1897 novel Dracula.
James Joyce (1882–1941) published his most famous work Ulysses in 1922, which is an interpretation of the Odyssey set in Dublin. Edith Somerville continued writing after the death of her partner Martin Ross in 1915. Dublin's Annie M. P. Smithson was one of several authors catering for fans of romantic fiction in the 1920s and 1930s. After the Second World War, popular novels were published by, among others, Brian O'Nolan, who published as Flann O'Brien, Elizabeth Bowen, and Kate O'Brien. During the final decades of the 20th century, Edna O'Brien, John McGahern, Maeve Binchy, Joseph O'Connor, Roddy Doyle, Colm Tóibín, and John Banville came to the fore as novelists.




W. B. Yeats (1865–1939)


Patricia Lynch (1898–1972) was a prolific children's author, while Eoin Colfer has been particularly successful in this genre in recent years. In the genre of the short story, which is a form favoured by many Irish writers, the most prominent figures include Seán Ó Faoláin, Frank O'Connor and William Trevor. Well known Irish poets include Patrick Kavanagh, Thomas McCarthy, Dermot Bolger, and Nobel Prize in Literature laureates William Butler Yeats and Seamus Heaney (born in Northern Ireland but resided in Dublin). Prominent writers in the Irish language are Pádraic Ó Conaire, Máirtín Ó Cadhain, Séamus Ó Grianna, and Nuala Ní Dhomhnaill.
The history of Irish theatre begins with the expansion of the English administration in Dublin during the early 17th century, and since then, Ireland has significantly contributed to English drama. In its early history, theatrical productions in Ireland tended to serve political purposes, but as more theatres opened and the popular audience grew, a more diverse range of entertainments were staged. Many Dublin-based theatres developed links with their London equivalents, and British productions frequently found their way to the Irish stage. However, most Irish playwrights went abroad to establish themselves. In the 18th century, Oliver Goldsmith and Richard Brinsley Sheridan were two of the most successful playwrights on the London stage at that time. At the beginning of the 20th century, theatre companies dedicated to the staging of Irish plays and the development of writers, directors and performers began to emerge, which allowed many Irish playwrights to learn their trade and establish their reputations in Ireland rather than in Britain or the United States. Following in the tradition of acclaimed practitioners, principally Oscar Wilde, Literature Nobel Prize laureates George Bernard Shaw (1925) and Samuel Beckett (1969), playwrights such as Seán O'Casey, Brian Friel, Sebastian Barry, Brendan Behan, Conor McPherson and Billy Roche have gained popular success.[142] Other Irish playwrights of the 20th century include Denis Johnston, Thomas Kilroy, Tom Murphy, Hugh Leonard, Frank McGuinness, and John B. Keane.
Music and dance
Main articles: Irish music and Irish dance
Irish traditional music has remained vibrant, despite globalising cultural forces, and retains many traditional aspects. It has influenced various music genres, such as American country and roots music, and to some extent modern rock. It has occasionally been blended with styles such as rock and roll and punk rock. Ireland has also produced many internationally known artists in other genres, such as rock, pop, jazz, and blues. Ireland's best selling musical act is the rock band U2, who have sold 170 million copies of their albums worldwide since their formation in 1976.[143]




Dublin-based rock group U2.


There are a number of classical music ensembles around the country, such as the RTÉ Performing Groups.[144] Ireland also has three opera organisations. Opera Ireland produces large-scale operas in Dublin, the Opera Theatre Company tours its chamber-style operas throughout the country, and the annual Wexford Opera Festival, which promotes lesser-known operas, takes place during October and November.
Ireland has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest since 1965.[145] Its first win was in 1970, when Dana won with All Kinds of Everything.[146] It has subsequently won the competition six more times,[147][148] the highest number of wins by any competing country. The phenomenon Riverdance originated as an interval performance during the 1994 contest.[149]
Irish dance can broadly be divided into social dance and performance dance. Irish social dance can be divided into céilí and set dancing. Irish set dances are quadrilles, danced by 4 couples arranged in a square, while céilí dances are danced by varied formations of couples of 2 to 16 people. There are also many stylistic differences between these two forms. Irish social dance is a living tradition, and variations in particular dances are found across the country. In some places dances are deliberately modified and new dances are choreographed. Performance dance is traditionally referred to as stepdance. Irish stepdance, popularised by the show Riverdance, is notable for its rapid leg movements, with the body and arms being kept largely stationary. The solo stepdance is generally characterised by a controlled but not rigid upper body, straight arms, and quick, precise movements of the feet. The solo dances can either be in "soft shoe" or "hard shoe".
Architecture
Main article: Architecture of Ireland




The ruins of Monasterboice in County Louth are of early Christian settlement.


Ireland has a wealth of structures,[150] surviving in various states of preservation, from the Neolithic period, such as Brú na Bóinne, Poulnabrone dolmen, Castlestrange stone, Turoe stone, and Drombeg stone circle.[151] As the Romans never conquered Ireland, architecture of Greco-Roman origin is extremely rare. The country instead had an extended period of Iron Age architecture.[152] The Irish round tower originated during the Early Medieval period.
Christianity introduced simple monastic houses, such as Clonmacnoise, Skellig Michael and Scattery Island. A stylistic similarity has been remarked between these double monasteries and those of the Copts of Egypt.[153] Gaelic kings and aristocrats occupied ringforts or crannógs.[154] Church reforms during the 12th century via the Cistercians stimulated continental influence, with the Romanesque styled Mellifont, Boyle and Tintern abbeys.[155] Gaelic settlement had been limited to the Monastic proto-towns, such as Kells, where the current street pattern preserves the original circular settlement outline to some extent.[156] Significant urban settlements only developed following the period of Viking invasions.[154] The major Hiberno-Norse Longphorts were located on the coast, but with minor inland fluvial settlements, such as the eponymous Longford.




Dublin Custom House is a neoclassical building from the late 18th century.


Castles were built by the Anglo-Normans during the late 12th century, such as Dublin Castle and Kilkenny Castle,[157] and the concept of the planned walled trading town was introduced, which gained legal status and several rights by grant of a Charter under Feudalism. These charters specifically governed the design of these towns.[158] Two significant waves of planned town formation followed, the first being the 16th and 17th century plantation towns, which were used as a mechanism for the Tudor English kings to suppress local insurgency, followed by 18th century landlord towns.[159] Surviving Norman founded planned towns include Drogheda and Youghal; plantation towns include Portlaoise and Portarlington; well-preserved 18th century planned towns include Westport and Ballinasloe. These episodes of planned settlement account for the majority of present-day towns throughout the country.




Brick architecture of multi-storey buildings in Dame Street in Dublin


Gothic cathedrals, such as St Patrick's, were also introduced by the Normans.[160] Franciscans were dominant in directing the abbeys by the Late Middle Ages, while elegant tower houses, such as Bunratty Castle, were built by the Gaelic and Norman aristocracy.[161] Many religious buildings were ruined with the Dissolution of the Monasteries.[162] Following the Restoration, palladianism and rococo, particularly country houses, swept through Ireland under the initiative of Edward Lovett Pearce, with the Houses of Parliament being the most significant.[163]
With the erection of buildings such as The Custom House, Four Courts, General Post Office and King's Inns, the neoclassical and Georgian styles flourished, especially in Dublin.[163] Georgian townhouses produced streets of singular distinction, particularly in Dublin, Limerick and Cork. Following Catholic Emancipation, cathedrals and churches influenced by the French Gothic Revival emerged, such as St Colman's and St Finbarre's.[163] Ireland has long been associated with thatched roof cottages, though these are nowadays considered quaint.[164]




The Elysian tower in Cork is the tallest storeyed building in the Republic of Ireland.


Beginning with the American designed art deco church at Turner's Cross in 1927, Irish architecture followed the international trend towards modern and sleek building styles since the 20th century.[165] Recent developments include the regeneration of Ballymun and an urban extension of Dublin at Adamstown.[166] Since the establishment of the Dublin Docklands Development Authority in 1997, the Dublin Docklands area underwent large-scale redevelopment, which included the construction of the Convention Centre Dublin and Grand Canal Theatre.[167] Completed in 2008, the Elysian tower in Cork is the tallest storeyed building in the Republic of Ireland (the Obel Tower in Belfast, Northern Ireland being the tallest in Ireland), at a height of 71 metres (233 feet), surpassing Cork County Hall. The Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland regulates the practice of architecture in the state.[168]
Media
Main article: Media of the Republic of Ireland
Raidió Teilifís Éireann (RTÉ) is Ireland's public service broadcaster, funded by a television licence fee and advertising.[169] RTÉ operates two national television channels, RTÉ One and RTÉ Two. The other independent national television channels are TV3, 3e, UTV Ireland and TG4, the latter of which is a public service broadcaster for speakers of the Irish language. All these channels are available on Saorview, the national free-to-air digital terrestrial television service.[170] Additional channels included in the service are RTÉ News Now, RTÉjr, and RTÉ One +1. Subscription-based television providers operating in Ireland include Virgin Media and Sky.
Supported by the Irish Film Board, the Irish film industry grew significantly since the 1990s, with the promotion of indigenous films as well as the attraction of international productions like Braveheart and Saving Private Ryan.[171]
A large number of regional and local radio stations are available countrywide. A survey showed that a consistent 85% of adults listen to a mixture of national, regional and local stations on a daily basis.[172] RTÉ Radio operates four national stations, Radio 1, 2fm, Lyric fm, and RnaG. It also operates four national DAB radio stations. There are two independent national stations: Today FM and Newstalk.
Ireland has a traditionally competitive print media, which is divided into daily national newspapers and weekly regional newspapers, as well as national Sunday editions. The strength of the British press is a unique feature of the Irish print media scene, with the availability of a wide selection of British published newspapers and magazines.[171]
Eurostat reported that 82% of Irish households had Internet access in 2013 compared to the EU average of 79% but only 67% had broadband access.[173]
Cuisine
Main article: Irish cuisine
Further information: List of Irish dishes




A pint of Guinness


Irish cuisine was traditionally based on meat and dairy products, supplemented with vegetables and seafood. Examples of popular Irish cuisine include boxty, colcannon, coddle, stew, and bacon and cabbage. Ireland is famous for the full Irish breakfast, which involves a fried or grilled meal generally consisting of bacon, egg, sausage, pudding, and fried tomato. Apart from the significant influence by European and international dishes, there has been a recent emergence of a new Irish cuisine based on traditional ingredients handled in new ways. This cuisine is based on fresh vegetables, fish, oysters, mussels and other shellfish, and the wide range of hand-made cheeses that are now being produced across the country. Shellfish have increased in popularity, especially due to the high quality shellfish available from the country's coastline. The most popular fish include salmon and cod. Traditional breads include soda bread and wheaten bread. Barmbrack is a yeasted bread with added sultanas and raisins.
Popular everyday beverages among the Irish include tea and coffee. Alcoholic drinks associated with Ireland include Poitín and the world-famous Guinness, which is a dry stout that originated in the brewery of Arthur Guinness at St. James's Gate in Dublin. Irish whiskey is also popular throughout the country, and comes in various forms, including single malt, single grain and blended whiskey.[174]
Sports
Main article: Sport in Ireland




Croke Park stadium is the headquarters of the Gaelic Athletic Association.


Gaelic football and hurling are the traditional sports of Ireland as well as most popular spectator sports.[175] They are administered by the Gaelic Athletics Association on an all-Ireland basis. Other Gaelic games organised by the association include Gaelic handball and rounders.[176]
Soccer is the third most popular spectator sport and has the highest level of participation.[177] Although the League of Ireland is the national league, the English Premier League is the most popular among the public.[178] The Republic of Ireland national football team plays at international level and is administered by the Football Association of Ireland.[179]
The Irish Rugby Football Union is the governing body of rugby union, which is played at local and international levels on an all-Ireland basis, and has produced players such as Brian O'Driscoll and Ronan O'Gara, who were on the team that won the Grand Slam in 2009.[180]
The success of the Irish Cricket Team in the 2007 Cricket World Cup has led to an increase in the popularity of cricket, which is also administered on an all-Ireland basis by Cricket Ireland.[181]
Netball is represented by the Ireland national netball team.
Golf is another popular sport in Ireland, with over 300 courses countrywide.[182] The country has produced several internationally successful golfers, such as Pádraig Harrington and Paul McGinley.
Horse Racing has a very large presence in Ireland, with one of the most influential breeding and racing operations based in the country. Racing takes place at courses at The Curragh Racecourse in County Kildare and at Leopardstown Racecourse, racing taking place since the 1860s, but racing taking place as early as the early 1700s. Popular race meetings also take place at Galway. Operations include Coolmore Stud and Ballydoyle, the base of Aidan O'Brien arguably one of the world's most successful horse trainers. Ireland has produced champion horses such as Galileo, Montjeu, and Sea the Stars.
Boxing is Ireland's most successful sport at an Olympic level. Administered by the Irish Athletic Boxing Association on an all-Ireland basis, it has gained in popularity as a result of the international success of boxers such as Bernard Dunne, Andy Lee and Katie Taylor.
Some of Ireland's highest performers in athletics have competed at the Olympic Games, such as Eamonn Coghlan and Sonia O'Sullivan. The annual Dublin Marathon and Dublin Women's Mini Marathon are two of the most popular athletics events in the country.[183]
Rugby league is represented by the Ireland national rugby league team and administered by Rugby League Ireland (who are full member of the Rugby League European Federation) on an all-Ireland basis. The team compete in the European Cup (rugby league) and the Rugby League World Cup. Ireland reached the quarter finals of the 2000 Rugby League World Cup as well as reaching the semi finals in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup.[184] The Irish Elite League is a domestic competition for rugby league teams in Ireland.[185]
The profile of Australian rules football has increased in Ireland due to the International rules series that take place annually between Australia and Ireland. Baseball and basketball are also emerging sports in Ireland, both of which have an international team representing the island of Ireland. Other sports which retain a strong following in Ireland include cycling, greyhound racing, horse riding, motorsport, and softball.
Society
See also: Abortion in the Republic of Ireland and LGBT rights in the Republic of Ireland
Ireland ranks fifth in the world in terms of gender equality.[186] In 2011, Ireland was ranked the most charitable country in Europe, and second most charitable in the world.[187] Contraception was controlled in Ireland until 1979, however, the receding influence of the Catholic Church has led to an increasingly secularised society.[188] In 1983, the Eighth Amendment recognised "the right to life of the unborn", subject to qualifications concerning the "equal right to life" of the mother. The case of Attorney General v. X subsequently prompted passage of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments, guaranteeing the right to have an abortion performed abroad, and the right to learn about "services" that are illegal in Ireland but legal abroad. The prohibition on divorce in the 1937 Constitution was repealed in 1995 under the Fifteenth Amendment. Divorce rates in Ireland are very low compared to European Union averages (0.7 divorced people per 1,000 population in 2011) while the marriage rate in Ireland is slightly above the European Union average (4.6 marriages per 1,000 population per year in 2012).
Capital punishment is constitutionally banned in Ireland, while discrimination based on age, gender, sexual orientation, marital or familial status, religion, race or membership of the travelling community is illegal. The legislation which outlawed homosexual acts was repealed in 1993.[189][190] In 2010, the Dáil and the Seanad passed the Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act, which recognised civil partnerships between same-sex couples.[191] It permits same-sex couples to register their relationship before a registrar.[192] A Sunday Times poll carried out in March 2011 showed that 73% of people believe that same-sex couples should be allowed to marry, while 60% believe that same-sex couples should be allowed to adopt children.[193] In April 2012, the Constitutional Convention voted overwhelmingly in favour of extending marriage rights to same-sex couples.[194] On 23 May 2015, Ireland became the first country to legalise same-sex marriage by popular vote.[195]
Ireland became the first country in the world to introduce an environmental levy for plastic shopping bags in 2002 and a public smoking ban in 2004. Recycling in Ireland is carried out extensively and Ireland has the second highest rate of packaging recycling in the European Union. It was the first country in Europe to ban incandescent lightbulbs in 2008 and the first EU country to ban in-store tobacco advertising and product display in 2009.[196][197] In 2015 Ireland became the second country in the world to introduce plain cigarette packaging.[198] Despite the above measures to discourage tobacco use, smoking rates in Ireland remain above 20% of the adult population and above those in other developed countries.[199]
State symbols
Further information: Symbols of the Republic of Ireland




The seal of the President of Ireland, incorporating a harp


The state shares many symbols with the island of Ireland. These include the colours green and blue, animals such as the Irish wolfhound and stags, structures such as round towers and celtic crosses, and designs such as Celtic knots and spirals. The shamrock, a type of clover, has been a national symbol of Ireland since the 17th century when it became customary to wear it as a symbol on St. Patrick's Day. These symbols are used by state institutions as well as private bodies in the Republic of Ireland.
The flag of Ireland is a tricolour of green, white and orange. The flag originates with the Young Ireland movement of the mid-19th century but was not popularised until its use during the Easter Rising of 1916.[200] The colours represent the Gaelic tradition (green) and the followers of William of Orange in Ireland (orange), with white representing the aspiration for peace between them.[201] It was adopted as the flag of the Irish Free State in 1922 and continues to be used as the sole flag and ensign of the state. A naval jack, a green flag with a yellow harp, is set out in Defence Forces Regulations and flown from the mast head of ships in addition to the national flag in limited circumstances (e.g. when a ship is not underway). It is based on the unofficial green ensign of Ireland used in the 18th and 19th centuries and the traditional green flag of Ireland dating from the 16th century.[202]
Like the national flag, the national anthem, Amhrán na bhFiann (English: A Soldier's Song), has its roots in the Easter Rising, when the song was sung by the rebels. Although originally published in English in 1912,[203] the song was translated into Irish in 1923 and the Irish-language version is more commonly sung today.[203] The song was officially adopted as the anthem of the Irish Free State in 1926 and continues as the national anthem of the state.[204] The first four bars of the chorus followed by the last five comprise the presidential salute.
The arms of Ireland originate as the arms of the monarchs of Ireland and was recorded as the arms of the King of Ireland in the 12th century. From the union of the crowns of England, Scotland and Ireland in 1603, they have appeared quartered on the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom. Today, they are the personal arms of the President of Ireland whilst he or she is in office and are flown as the presidential standard. The harp symbol is used extensively by the state to mark official documents, Irish coinage and on the seal of the President of Ireland.
See also


Ireland portal
Celtic Studies portal
European Union portal



Ireland and the IMF
Outline of the Republic of Ireland
List of Ireland-related topics
List of Irish people


Notes



^ Prior to 2002, Ireland used the punt (Irish pound) as its circulated currency. The euro was introduced as an accounting currency in 1999.



References


^ a b "Official Languages Act 2003". Office of the Attorney-General. Retrieved 18 February 2012. 
^ "CSO Census 2016 Chaper 6 - Ethnicity and Irish Travellers" (PDF). Retrieved 28 April 2017. 
^ a b "Census 2016 Summary Results - Part 1" (PDF). 6 April 2017. 
^ a b c d "Ireland". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 1 October 2017. 
^ "Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income (source: SILC)". Eurostat Data Explorer. Retrieved 4 December 2015. 
^ "2016 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. Retrieved 23 March 2017. 
^ John Coakley (20 August 2009). Politics in the Republic of Ireland. Taylor & Francis. p. 76. ISBN 978-0-415-47672-0. Retrieved 2 May 2011. 
^ L. Prakke; C. A. J. M. Kortmann; J. C. E. van den Brandhof (2004), Constitutional Law of 15 EU Member States, Deventer: Kluwer, p. 429, ISBN 9013012558, Since 1937 Ireland has been a parliamentary republic, in which ministers appointed by the president depend on the confidence of parliament 
^ "Country Comparison: GDP – per capita (PPP)". World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 29 August 2011. 
^ "Legatum Prosperity Index" (PDF). The Legatum Institute. Retrieved 7 June 2016. 
^ "EU: Causes of Growth differentials in Europe", WAWFA think tank
^ Nicoll, Ruaridh (16 May 2009). "Ireland: As the Celtic Tiger roars its last". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 30 March 2010. 
^ "Financial Times". ft.com. FT. Retrieved 7 June 2016. 
^ "Human Development Report 2015" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. Retrieved 17 February 2016. 
^ "NATO - Member countries". NATO. NATO. Retrieved 29 December 2014. 
^ Coleman, Marie (2013). The Irish Revolution, 1916-1923. Routledge. p. 230. ISBN 1317801466. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ Gallagher, Michael, "The changing constitution", in Gallagher, Michael; Coakley, John, eds. (2010). Politics in the Republic of Ireland. 0415476712. ISBN 0415476712. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ Oliver, J.D.B., What's in a Name, in Tiley, John, ed. (2004). Studies in the History of Tax Law. Hart Publishing. pp. 181–3. ISBN 1841134732. Retrieved 12 February 2015.  Note: the author incorrectly uses "Éire", with the diacritic
^ Oliver (2004), p. 178; Daly (2007), p. 80
^ Acciano, Reuben (2005). Western Europe. Lonely Planet. p. 616. ISBN 1740599276. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ Smith, M.L.R (2002). Fighting for Ireland?: The Military Strategy of the Irish Republican Movement. Routledge. p. 2. ISBN 1134713975. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ Mokyr, Joel (1984). "New Developments in Irish Population History 1700–1850". Irish Economic and Social History. XI: 101–121. hdl:10197/1406. 
^ Bardon, Jonathan (1992). A History of Ulster. Blackstaff Press. pp. 402, 405. ISBN 0856404985. 
^ "Irish Soldiers in the First World War". 1916 Commemorations. Department of the Taoiseach. 2010. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011. 
^ Fennell, Desmond (1993). Heresy: the Battle of Ideas in Modern Ireland. Belfast: Blackstaff Press. p. 33. ISBN 0-85640-513-2. Both the new Irish Republic and the labour movement were sympathetic to the new soviet regime in Russia. The government of the Soviet Union recognised the Republic, and the Dáil authorised the establishment of diplomatic relations. 
^ "Northern Ireland Parliamentary Report, 7 December 1922". Stormontpapers.ahds.ac.uk. 7 December 1922. Retrieved 9 July 2009. 
^ Coogan, Tim Pat (1993). "21 de Valera Stands Tall". De Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow. 
^ "Dáil Éireann - Volume T - 19 December, 1921 (DEBATE ON TREATY)". Dáil Éireann. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. 
^ T. Garvin, 1922: the birth of Irish democracy, Gill & Macmillan: Dublin, 2005.
Peter Cottrell (2008). The Irish Civil War 1922–23. Osprey Publishing. p. 85. ISBN 978-1-84603-270-7. Irish voters approved a new constitution, Bunreacht na hÉireann, in 1937 renaming the country Éire or simply Ireland. 
Dr. Darius Whelan (June 2005). "Guide to Irish Law". Retrieved 11 September 2009. This Constitution, which remains in force today, renamed the state Ireland (Article 4) and established four main institutions – the President, the Oireachtas (Parliament), the Government and the Courts. 
John T. Koch, Celtic culture: a historical encyclopedia, ABC-CLIO: Santa Barbara, 2006.
^ and the Governor-General's office was finally abolished under the Executive Powers (Consequential Provisions) Act, 1937 with effect from December 1936
^ Daly, Mary E. (January 2007). "The Irish Free State/Éire/Republic of Ireland/Ireland: "A Country by Any Other Name"?". Journal of British Studies. 46 (1): 72–90. doi:10.1086/508399. JSTOR 10.1086/508399. After the enactment of the 1936 External Relations Act and the 1937 Constitution, Ireland's only remaining link with the crown had been the accreditation of diplomats. The president of Ireland was the head of state. When opposition deputies asked de Valera whether Ireland was a republic—a favorite pastime in the mid-1940s—he tended to resort to dictionary definitions showing that Ireland had all the attributes of a republic. 
^ November getaways (22 August 2010). "Ireland at the UN". Independent.ie. Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ November getaways (26 June 2010). "Ireland's UN affairs". Independent.ie. Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ "National Archives – Ireland and European Unity". Nationalarchives.ie. Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ "Joining the European Community". Ec.europa.eu. 31 July 1961. Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ O'Toole, Francis; Warrington. "Taxations And savings in Ireland" (PDF). Trinity Economic Papers Series. Trinity College, Dublin. p. 19. Retrieved 17 June 2008. 
^ HM Government The United Kingdom's exit from and new partnership with the European Union; Cm 9417, February 2017
^ "History of Forestry in Ireland". Retrieved 15 June 2011. 
^ "Forests cover around 40% of the EU27 land area" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 June 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2011. 
^ "Hedgerows". Retrieved 15 June 2011. 
^ "Agriculture in Ireland". Teagasc.ie. Archived from the original on 4 October 1999. Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ "Land cover and land use". Environmental Protection Agency. 2000. Retrieved 30 July 2007. 
^ a b c d "Ireland". CIA World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 28 August 2011. 
^ a b "Climate in Ireland". Met.ie. Retrieved 22 October 2009. 
^ "The Ireland Climate and What to Wear". TravelInIreland.com. Retrieved 22 October 2009. 
^ "Temperature in Ireland". Met.ie. Retrieved 22 October 2009. 
^ "Wind over Ireland". Met.ie. Retrieved 22 October 2009. 
^ "Sunshine". Met.ie. Retrieved 22 May 2016. 
^ Article 15.2 of the Constitution of Ireland.
^ "Office of the President – Powers and Functions". Retrieved 4 January 2011. 
^ "President Michael D promises seven years of new ideas". Irish Independent. 11 November 2011. Retrieved 11 November 2011. 
^ McGrath, Conor; Eoin O'Malley (2007). Conor McGrath, Eoin O'Malley, ed. Irish political studies reader: key contributions. Routledge. p. 54. ISBN 978-0-415-44648-8. Retrieved 15 March 2011. 
^ Section 33 of the Electoral Act, 1992 (Public Act No. 23 of 1992). Act of the Irish Parliament.
^ a b "Local Government Reform Act 2014" (PDF). Environ.ie. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 June 2014. Retrieved 2 June 2014. 
^ a b Coulter, Carol (24 November 2009). "First case set for new criminal courts". Irish Times via HighBeam Research. Retrieved 3 July 2014.  (subscription required)
^ New order in court as €140m legal 'Pantheon' opens doors, Dearbhail McDonald, Irish Independent, 24 November 2009
^ "Poll: Should the Garda Síochána be armed?". TheJournal.ie. 4 July 2011. Retrieved 20 November 2012. 
^ "The Defence Forces". Rdf.ie. Archived from the original on 6 June 2009. Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ "Irish citizenship through birth or descent". Citizensinformation.ie. Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ Irish Nationality & Citizenship Acts 1956–2004 (unofficial consolidated version) – pdf format Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ See Michael J. Geary, An Inconvenient Wait: Ireland's Quest for Membership of the EEC, 1957–73 (Institute of Public Administration, 2009) (ISBN 978-1-904541-83-7)
^ "Official Journal of the European Union". Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ "Ireland and the United Nations". Archived from the original on 14 April 2010. Retrieved 15 July 2010. 
^ Kennedy, Michael (8 October 2014). "Ireland's Role in Post-War Transatlantic Aviation and Its Implications for the Defence of the North Atlantic Area". Royal Irish Academy. Retrieved 10 October 2007. 
^ Irish Times, 28 December 2007 p. 1 Archived 7 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine..
^ "Private Members' Business. – Foreign Conflicts: Motion (Resumed)". Government of Ireland. 30 January 2003. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 10 October 2007.  – Tony Gregory speaking in Dáil Éireann
^ Patrick Smyth (29 November 1999). "State joins Partnership for Peace on Budget day". The Irish Times. Retrieved 6 May 2008. 
^ "Signatures of Partnership for Peace Framework Document". NATO website. 21 April 2008. Retrieved 6 May 2008. 
^ Lally, Conor (25 November 2009). "Numbers in Defence Forces hit 40-year low". Irish Times. Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ "Written Replies Nos. 437 to 450 - Defence Forces Reserve". Office of the Houses of the Oireachtas (Hansard). 13 January 2016. 
^ Gilland 2001, p. 143.
^ "Minister for Defence, Mr. Willie O'Dea TD secures formal Cabinet approval today for Ireland's participation in an EU Battlegroup". Department of Defense. Retrieved 26 August 2008. 
^ United States. National Archives and Records Administration, United States. Office of the Federal Register (1996). Weekly compilation of Presidential documents, Volume 32, Issue 2. Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Service, General Services Administration. p. 1050. Retrieved 29 August 2012. 
^ a b "Annual Competitiveness Report 2008, Volume One: Benchmarking Ireland's Performance" (PDF). NCC. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 1 July 2009. 
^ "ESRI – Irish Economy". Esri.ie. Archived from the original on 24 June 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ "CSO – Central Statistics Office Ireland". Central Statistics Office Ireland. 9 November 2004. Retrieved 9 July 2009. 
^ "Irish Gross Domestic Product and Gross National Product fell 7.1% and 11.3% in 2009". Fin Facts. 25 March 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2015. 
^ Fottrell, Quentin (30 June 2010). "Ireland Officially Exits Recession". Wall Street Journal. Online.wsj.com. Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ "Ireland to receive €85 billion bailout at 5.8% interest rate". Irishtimes.com. 28 November 2010. Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ "Irish economy grew by 0.9% in 2012 - CSO". RTÉ. 21 March 2013. Retrieved 30 May 2013. 
^ Crosbie, Judith (26 June 2013). "Irish anti-immigrant attitudes growing, report shows". The Irish Times. 
^ "Monthly Unemployment March 2016 - CSO - Central Statistics Office". www.cso.ie. Retrieved 30 July 2017. 
^ a b "One Irish person emigrates every six minutes". Financial Times. 29 August 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2015. 
^ Gleeson, Collin (5 December 2013). "Forbes names Ireland as 'best country for business'". Irish Times. irishtimes.com. Retrieved 5 December 2013. 
^ McDonald, Henry (13 December 2013). "Ireland becomes first country to exit eurozone bailout programme". Retrieved 30 July 2017 – via The Guardian. 
^ "Republic of Ireland raises €3.75 billion from sale of new 10-year benchmark bond". cbonds.com. Retrieved 2 February 2017. 
^ a b "CSO – Main Trading Partners 2010". Cso.ie. Archived from the original on 11 February 2005. Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ Bord Gáis (2006). Natural Gas In Ireland. Archived 27 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Gas and the Environment. Retrieved on 8 August 2006.
^ Providence hits high as potential oil yield revised. The Irish Times (26 July 2012). Retrieved on 16 July 2013. Archived 21 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Staff, Fora. "Ireland's state power supplier is planning a major leap into solar energy". thejournal.ie. Retrieved 30 July 2017. 
^ Wind farm firm to create 2,000 jobs by 2018 - RTÉ News. RTÉ.ie. Retrieved on 16 July 2013.
^ Energy Policy Statistical Support Unit (June 2012), "Renewable Energy in Ireland 2011" (PDF), 2012 Report, Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland, p. 3, archived from the original (PDF) on 15 November 2013, retrieved 5 August 2013 
^ date December 2013 accessdate=19 December 2013 Archived 19 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ O'Dwyer, Peter (12 August 2014). "Dublin to London the world's second busiest international air route". Business News. Irish Examiner. Retrieved 27 August 2015. 
^ McCárthaigh, Seán (31 March 2003). "Dublin–London busiest air traffic route within EU". Irish Examiner. Retrieved 27 August 2015. 
^ Mark Frary (19 March 2007). "Heathrow dominates top 20". The Times. London. Retrieved 4 July 2007. (subscription required)
^ Ash makes Ryanair cancel flights until Monday Archived 19 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine.. Forbes. 16 April 2010.
^ "WATS Scheduled Passengers Carried 53rd Edition". International Air Transport Association. 2008. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010. 
^ "Transport 21 Website – What is Transport 21?". Transport21.ie. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ "Myths of British ancestry" Prospect magazine
^ Origins of the British, Stephen Oppenheimer, 2006
^ McEvoy, B; Richards, M; Forster, P; Bradley, DG (October 2004). "The Longue Durée of genetic ancestry: multiple genetic marker systems and Celtic origins on the Atlantic facade of Europe". Am. J. Hum. Genet. 75: 693–702. doi:10.1086/424697. PMC 1182057 . PMID 15309688. 
^ "This is Ireland - Highlights from Census 2011, part 1" (PDF). Central Statistics Office Ireland. March 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 21 February 2013. 
^ BBC News - Ireland continues to have highest birth rate in the European Union. Bbc.co.uk (20 December 2012). Retrieved on 16 July 2013.
^ "Vital Statistics Yearly Summary 2014 - CSO - Central Statistics Office". www.cso.ie. Retrieved 30 July 2017. 
^ "Ireland's population still fastest-growing in EU". Thomas Crosbie Media. 18 December 2007. Retrieved 9 July 2009. 
^ "Profile 6 - Migration and Diversity" (PDF). Central Statistics Office Ireland. October 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 21 February 2013. 
^ "Settlement Dublin City And Suburbs". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2017. 
^ "Settlement Cork City And Suburbs". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2017. 
^ "Settlement Limerick City And Suburbs". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2017. 
^ "Settlement Galway City And Suburbs". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2017. 
^ "Settlement Waterford City And Suburbs". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2017. 
^ "Settlement Drogheda". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ "Settlement Swords". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ "Settlement Dundalk". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ "Settlement Bray". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ "Settlement Navan (An Uaimh)". Central Statistics Office. 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ "Population on 1 January by age groups and sex - functional urban areas". europa.eu. Retrieved 30 July 2017. 
^ "S.I. No. 164/1970: ROAD TRAFFIC (SIGNS) (AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS, 1970". Irish Statute Book. 16 July 1970. Retrieved 9 July 2009. 
^ "Irish is third most used language - Census". rte.ie. 29 March 2012. Retrieved 30 July 2017. 
^ An introduction to the Ulster-Scots Language, Ulster-Scots Agency.
^ "Pupils exempt from the study of the Irish language (per Circular M10/94 – Revision of Rule 46 of the "Rules and Programme for Secondary Schools" in relation to exemption from Irish)". Department of Education and Skills. Retrieved 27 October 2010. 
^ "Health care". Irish Citizens Information Board. Retrieved 29 December 2014. 
^ Charges for hospital services, Citizens Information board, 26 July 2011 
^ "OECD Better Life Index". www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org. Retrieved 30 July 2017. 
^ "Ireland has EU's highest birth rate". Irishtimes.com. 7 July 2010. Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ "Euro Health Consumer Index 2012" (PDF). Health Consumer Powerhouse. 15 May 2012. Retrieved 23 November 2016. 
^ Education (Welfare) Act, 2000 (Section 17) Archived 30 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Minister Hanafin announces intention to pilot new additional model of Primary School Patronage". Department of Education and Skills. 17 February 2007. Retrieved 7 September 2010. 
^ "Education Ireland – Leaving Certificate". Educationireland.ie. Archived from the original on 29 October 2010. Retrieved 12 November 2010. 
^ "Irish teens perform significantly above average in maths, reading and science - OECD". Education. RTÉ News. 3 December 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2015. 
^ "CSO – Measuring Ireland's Progress 2013". Central Statistics Office. 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2015. 
^ "World's top 500 Universities per capita". Nationmaster.com. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ "Third-level student fees". Free fees. Citizens Information Board. Retrieved 25 July 2010. 
^ Michael B. Sauter and Alexander E. M. Hess, The Most Educated Countries in the World, 24/7 Wall St., 21 September 2012
^ Samantha Grossman, And the World's Most Educated Country Is…, Time, 27 September 2012
^ Weekly Mass Attendance of Catholics in Nations with Large Catholic Populations, 1980–2000 – World Values Survey (WVS)
^ Irish Mass attendance below 50% Catholic World News 1 June 2006
^ Smyth, Jamie (30 May 2011). "Fewer than one in five attend Sunday Mass in Dublin'". Irishtimes.com. Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ Final Principal Demographic Results 2006 (PDF). Central Statistics Office. 2007. pp. 31 (Table Q). ISBN 0-7557-7169-9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ Daniszewski, John (17 April 2005). "Catholicism Losing Ground in Ireland". LA Times. Retrieved 29 August 2011.  Lawler, Phil (17 September 2007). "Ireland threatened by secularism, Pope tells new envoy". Catholic World News. Retrieved 29 August 2011.  "Irish poll shows parents no longer want to force religion on to children". United Kingdom: National Secular Society. 13 April 2007. Retrieved 29 August 2011. 
^ Houston, Eugenie (2001). Working and Living in Ireland. Working and Living Publications. ISBN 0-9536896-8-9. 
^ Mason, Anthony (24 May 2015). "U2: What they're still looking for". CBS News. Retrieved 25 May 2015. 
^ "Contemporary Music Ireland". Contemporary Music Centre – Links. Archived from the original on 24 February 2009. Retrieved 9 July 2009. 
^ "Showband legend Butch Moore dies". RTÉ. 4 April 2001. Archived from the original on 11 August 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2012. 
^ "Dana". The Daily Show: Celebrity Guests. RTÉ Television. 11 March 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2012. 
^ "Eurovision Song Contest Statistics". eurovisioncovers.co.uk. 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2012. 
^ "A Little Bit Eurovision". RTÉ Television. 6 July 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2012. 
^ "On The Road with Riverdance". RTÉ Radio 1. 1 December 2004. Archived from the original on 24 November 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2012. 
^ "The Megalithic Monuments of Ireland". Megalithomania. Retrieved 19 November 2011. 
^ "The Prehistoric Monuments of Ireland". About.com. Retrieved 19 October 2009. 
^ "AD 43–410 Roman Iron Age". WorldTimelines.org.uk. Archived from the original on 13 October 2010. Retrieved 19 October 2009. 
^ Meinardus 2002, p. 130.
^ a b "AD 410–1066 Early medieval". WorldTimelines.org.uk. Archived from the original on 12 October 2010. Retrieved 19 October 2009. 
^ Moody 2005, p. 735.
^ "Altman 2007 Unpublished thesis". Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 5 November 2010. 
^ "Irish Castles". Castles.me.uk. Retrieved 19 October 2009. 
^ Butlin RA (1977): The Development of the Irish Town, Croom Helm
^ Butlin RA: op cit
^ Greenwood 2003, p. 813.
^ "The Later Middle Ages: 1350 to 1540". AskAboutIreland.ie. Retrieved 19 October 2009. 
^ "Early Tudor Ireland: 1485 to 1547". AskAboutIreland.ie. Retrieved 19 October 2009. 
^ a b c Greenwood 2003, p. 815.
^ "Thatching in Ireland". BallyBegVillage.com. Retrieved 19 October 2009. 
^ "Exterior of Church of Christ the King, Turner's Cross". Parish of Turner's Cross. Retrieved 9 November 2008. 
^ "About Adamstown". South Dublin County Council. Retrieved 13 August 2010. 
^ "Docklands Authority – About Us". Retrieved 31 August 2011. 
^ "About the RIAI". Archived from the original on 28 September 2010. Retrieved 17 November 2010. 
^ "About RTÉ". RTÉ. Retrieved 30 August 2011. 
^ "What is Saorview?". Saorview official website. Retrieved 30 August 2011. 
^ a b "Media landscape: Ireland". European Journalism Centre. 5 November 2010. Archived from the original on 24 August 2011. Retrieved 30 August 2011. 
^ "Listenership 2011/1 Summary Results" (PDF). JNLR/Ipsos MRB. 28 July 2011. Retrieved 30 August 2011. 
^ Ireland still lags behind EU counterparts in access to broadband The Irish Times, 18 December 2013 (accessed on 19 December 2013) Archived 29 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Food & Drink in Ireland". Retrieved 19 January 2011. 
^ "GAA attendances hold firm". GAA official website. 21 July 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 December 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2011. 
^ "About the GAA". GAA official website. Archived from the original on 27 August 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2011. 
^ "Social and Economic Value of Sport in Ireland" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2009. 
^ Whelan, Daire (2006). Who Stole Our Game?. Gill & Macmillan Ltd. ISBN 0-7171-4004-0. 
^ "About FAI". FAI official website. Retrieved 28 August 2011. 
^ "Ireland Are Grand Slam Champions!". IRFU. 21 March 2009. Retrieved 23 February 2015. 
^ Selvey, Mike (17 March 2011). "Ireland is learning to love cricket and deserves more visits from the elite". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 28 August 2011. 
^ "Golf courses of Ireland". WorldGolf. Retrieved 28 August 2011. 
^ "A long and winding road". Dublin Marathon official website. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2011. 
^ "Ireland rugby league nation overview". Rugby League Planet. Retrieved 28 August 2011. 
^ "Irish Eye Super League". Sky Sports. Retrieved 2 September 2011. 
^ "Iceland 'best country for gender equality'". BBC News. 12 October 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2010. 
^ "Ireland 'most charitable' country in Europe". RTÉ News. 20 December 2010. Retrieved 20 December 2010. 
^ "Health (Family Planning) Act, 1979". Office of the Attorney General. 23 July 1979. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 7 June 2007. 
^ "NORRIS v. IRELAND – 10581/83 [1988] ECHR 22". European Court of Human Rights. 26 October 2007. Retrieved 7 June 2007. 
^ Though Senator David Norris challenged the law in the European Court of Human Rights in 1988, but the Irish Government were tardy in not legislating to rectify the issue until 1993.
^ "Civil partnership bill backed by Irish politicians". BBC News. 1 July 2010. Retrieved 11 July 2010. 
^ O'Brien, Carl (2 July 2010). "'Historic advance' for equality as Civil Partnership Bill passed". The Irish Times. Dublin, Ireland. p. 1. 
^ "Nearly three-quarters of Irish people in favour of gay marriage". Irish Times. 5 March 2011. Retrieved 5 March 2011. 
^ "Constitutional convention backs extension of marriage rights to same-sex couples". Irish Times. 15 April 2013. Retrieved 27 May 2013. 
^ "Ireland becomes first country to approve same-sex marriage by popular vote". Irish Times. 23 May 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2015. 
^ "Traditional light bulbs to be scrapped". RTÉ. 10 October 2008. Retrieved 9 July 2009. 
^ "Ban on in-store tobacco advertising". RTÉ. 30 June 2009. Retrieved 9 July 2009. 
^ Hilliard, Mark (10 March 2015), "Plain packaging for cigarettes signed into law in Ireland", Irishtimes.com, retrieved 13 March 2015 
^ accessed 10 December 2013
^ "Flags Used in Northern Ireland". cain.ulst.ac.uk. Cain Web Service. 
^ "National Flag". taoiseach.gov.ie. Department of the Taoiseach. 
^ "Ireland: The Naval Service". crwflags.com. CRW Flags. 
^ a b Sherry, Ruth (Spring 1996). "The Story of the National Anthem". History Ireland. Dublin. 4 (1): 39–43. 
^ "Ceisteannea—Questions. Oral answers. – Saorstát National Anthem". Dáil Éireann – Volume 16. 20 July 1926. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 15 April 2015. 


Bibliography


Gilland, Karin (2001). Ireland: Neutrality and the International Use of Force. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-21804-7. 
Greenwood, Margaret (2003). Rough guide to Ireland. Rough Guides. ISBN 1-84353-059-7. 
Mangan, James Clarence (2007). James Clarence Mangan – His Selected Poems. Read Books. ISBN 1-4086-2700-0. 
Meinardus, Otto Friedrich August (2002). Two thousand years of Coptic Christianity. American Univ in Cairo Press. ISBN 977-424-757-4. 
Moody, Theodore William (2005). A New History of Ireland: Prehistoric and early Ireland. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-821737-4. 


Further reading


Bunreacht na hÉireann (the 1937 constitution)
The Irish Free State Constitution Act, 1922
J. Anthony Foley and Stephen Lalor (ed), Gill & Macmillan Annotated Constitution of Ireland (Gill & Macmillan, 1995) (ISBN 0-7171-2276-X)
FSL Lyons, Ireland Since the Famine
Alan J. Ward, The Irish Constitutional Tradition: Responsible Government and Modern Ireland 1782–1992 (Irish Academic Press, 1994) (ISBN 0-7165-2528-3)
Michael J. Geary, An Inconvenient Wait: Ireland's Quest for Membership of the EEC, 1957–73 (Institute of Public Administration, 2009) (ISBN 978-1-904541-83-7)


External links

Find more aboutIrelandat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Government


Irish State – Official governmental portal
Áras an Uachtaráin – Official presidential site
Taoiseach – Official prime ministerial site


General information


"Ireland". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
Ireland information from the United States Department of State
Portals to the World at the Wayback Machine (archived 29 July 2010) from the United States Library of Congress (Archived by the WayBackMachine)
Ireland at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Ireland at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Ireland profile from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of Ireland
 Geographic data related to Republic of Ireland at OpenStreetMap
Key Development Forecasts for Ireland from International Futures





Articles related to the Republic of Ireland











v
t
e


Ireland topics






Republic of Ireland topics
Northern Ireland topics










History







Timeline



Prehistory
Protohistory
Early history
Gaelic Ireland / Lordship of Ireland

800–1169
1169–1536


Kingdom of Ireland

1536–1691
1691–1801


United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland

1801–1923


United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

since 1922


Irish Free State (1922–1937)
Ireland (since 1922)





Events



Battles of Tara / Glenmama / Clontarf
Norman invasion
Bruce campaign
Black Death
Tudor conquest
Desmond Rebellions
Spanish Armada
Tyrone's Rebellion
Flight of the Earls
Plantation of Ulster
1641 Rebellion / Confederate War
Cromwellian conquest / Settlement of 1652
Williamite War
Penal Laws
First Great Famine
1798 Rebellion
Act of Union (1800)
1803 Rebellion
Tithe War
Second Great Famine
Land War
Fenian Rising
Dublin Lock-out
Home Rule crisis
Easter Rising
War of Independence
Anglo-Irish Treaty
Civil War
The Emergency
IRA Northern Campaign
IRA Border Campaign
The Troubles
Peace process
Economy of the Republic of Ireland
Celtic Tiger
Post-2008 Irish economic downturn
Post-2008 Irish banking crisis





Other topics



List of conflicts in Ireland
List of Irish tribes
List of High Kings
Gaelic clothing and fashion
List of World Heritage Sites in the Republic of Ireland
















Geography







Natural



Climate
Coastline
Extreme points
Fauna
Islands
Loughs
Mountains
Rivers

list


List of national parks of the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland





Human



Architecture

Notable buildings
Tallest buildings and structures


Cities
Counties
Demographics of the Republic of Ireland / of Northern Ireland
Ports
Provinces
ROI–UK border
Towns
Tourist attractions
Transport
















Politics







Ideologies



Nationalism
Republicanism
Ulster loyalism
Unionism





Republic of Ireland



Constitution
Economy
Education
Foreign relations
Government

local


Oireachtas parliament

Dáil Éireann (lower house)
Seanad Éireann (upper house)
President







Northern Ireland



Assembly

D'Hondt method


Economy
Education
Government

local


Peace process
















Culture







Cuisine




Food



List of dishes
Barmbrack
Boxty
Champ
Coddle
Colcannon
Drisheen
Goody
Skirts and kidneys
Soda bread
Stew
Ulster fry





Drinks



Coffee
Cream
Guinness
Mist
Poitín
Whiskey








Dance



Jig
Sean-nós
Set dancing
Stepdance





Festivals



Imbolc
Saint Patrick's Day
Bealtaine
The Twelfth
Lúnasa
Rose of Tralee
Samhain / Halloween
Wren Day





Languages



Hiberno-English
Irish
Shelta
Ulster Scots





Literature



Annals
Fiction
Gaeilge
Poetry
Theatre
Triads





Music



Ballads
Céilí
Folk music

session


Instruments
Rock music
Traditional singing





Mythology



Cycles

Fenian
Mythological
Ulster


Aos Sí
Echtrai
Immrama
Tuatha Dé Danann
Legendary creatures





People



Anglo-Irish
Gaels

Gaelic Ireland


Hiberno-Normans
Irish diaspora
List of Irish people
Travellers
Ulster Scots





Sport



Association football
Camogie
Gaelic football
Gaelic handball
Hurling
Martial arts
Road bowling
Rounders
Rugby union





Symbols



Brighid's Cross
Cláirseach
County coats of arms
Flags

N. Ireland flags issue


Irish Wolfhound
National coat of arms
Red Hand
Shamrock





Other



Calendar
Homelessness
Names
Place names in Ireland / outside Ireland
Prostitution (Republic) / in Northern Ireland
Public holidays in the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland
Public houses












Ireland portal










v
t
e


Gaels



General history



Gaelic Ireland
High King of Ireland
Gaelic Irish kingdoms
Dál Riata
Alba
Nine Years' War
Statutes of Iona
Flight of the Earls
Plantation of Ulster
1641 Rebellion
Act for the Settlement of Ireland 1652
Jacobite risings
Bliadhna Theàrlaich
Penal Laws
Great Hunger
Irish diaspora
Highland Clearances
Gaelic Revival
Gaeltacht
Gàidhealtachd





Gaelic culture



Ogham
Brehon law
Gaelic mythology
Lebor Gabála Érenn
Gaelic warfare
Gaelic astrology
Gaelic kinship
Bardic poetry
Gaelic literature (Early Irish, Modern Irish, Scottish Gaelic & Manx)
Gaelic type
Insular script
Fáinne
Gaelic music
Sean-nós song
Oireachtas na Gaeilge
Am Mòd
Gaelic games
Highland games
Insular Christianity
Gaelic Christian mission





Language



Primitive Irish
Old Irish
Middle Irish
Classical Gaelic
Irish
Manx
Scottish Gaelic





Major tribes or clans



Connachta (incl. Uí Néill, Clan Colla, Clan Donald, Uí Maine, etc)
Dál gCais (incl. Déisi)
Eóganachta
Érainn (incl. Dál Riata, Corcu Loígde, Clan Conla, Dál Fiatach, etc)
Laigin
Ulaid (incl. Dál nAraidi, Conmhaícne, Ciarraige, etc)





Prominent organisations



Údarás na Gaeltachta
Foras na Gaeilge
Bòrd na Gàidhlig
Culture Vannin
Conradh na Gaeilge
An Comunn Gàidhealach
Manx Gaelic Society
Seachtain na Gaeilge
Gael Linn
ULTACH Trust
Comunn na Gàidhlig
Columba Project
Clans of Ireland
An Coimisinéir Teanga
An Comunn Gàidhealach America





Related subjects



Haplogroup R-M269 (human genetics)
Celts
Norse–Gaels (incl. Uí Ímair and Clan MacLeod)
Kingdom of the Isles
Gaelicisation












v
t
e


 Languages of the Republic of Ireland



Official languages



Irish
English





Minority languages



Scots

Ulster Scots


Shelta





Sign languages



Irish Sign Language










Geographic locale




Lat. and Long. 53°20′39″N 6°16′3″W﻿ / ﻿53.34417°N 6.26750°W﻿ / 53.34417; -6.26750 (Dublin)






v
t
e


Sovereign states and dependencies of Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia2
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus2
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland1
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia2
Artsakh2
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus2
South Ossetia2
Transnistria






Dependencies





Denmark



Faroe Islands1

autonomous country of the Kingdom of Denmark







United Kingdom



Akrotiri and Dhekelia2

Sovereign Base Areas


Gibraltar

British Overseas Territory


Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey

Crown dependencies











Special areas of
internal sovereignty





Finland



Åland Islands

autonomous region subject to the Åland Convention of 1921







Norway



Svalbard

unincorporated area subject to the Svalbard Treaty







United Kingdom



Northern Ireland

country of the United Kingdom subject to the British-Irish Agreement














1 Oceanic islands within the vicinity of Europe are usually grouped with the continent even though they are not situated on its continental shelf.
2 Some countries completely outside the conventional geographical boundaries of Europe are commonly associated with the continent due to ethnological links.













v
t
e


British Isles






Terminology

Alba
Albion
Prydain
Britain
Éire
Hibernia


Naming dispute





Politics




Sovereign states



Ireland
United Kingdom (England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales)





Crown dependencies



Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Sark





Political cooperation



Ireland–United Kingdom relations
British–Irish Council
British–Irish Intergovernmental Conference
British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly
Common Travel Area








Geography




Island groups



Channel Islands
Islands of the Clyde
Great Britain
Hebrides

Inner
Outer


Ireland
Isle of Man
Northern Isles

Orkney
Shetland


Isles of Scilly





Lists of islands of



Bailiwick of Guernsey
Ireland
Bailiwick of Jersey
Isle of Man
United Kingdom

England
Scotland
Wales










History




Island groups



Ireland





Current states



Ireland
United Kingdom

England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales


Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man





Former states



Irish Free State
Kingdom of England

Principality of Wales


Kingdom of Great Britain
Kingdom of Ireland
Kingdom of Scotland
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland








Society




Modern languages




Germanic



English
Scots





Celtic



Cornish
Scottish Gaelic
Irish
Manx
Welsh





Romance



Auregnais
French
Guernésiais
Jèrriais
Sercquiais





Other



British Sign Language
Irish Sign Language
Northern Ireland Sign Language
Shelta








People



British
Cornish
English
English Gypsies
Irish
Irish Travellers
Kale
Manx
Northern Irish
Scottish
Ulster-Scots
Welsh















v
t
e


British–Irish Council




Good Friday Agreement



Member jurisdictions



 United Kingdom
 Ireland
 Guernsey
 Isle of Man
 Jersey
Northern Ireland
 Scotland
 Wales





Member bodies



Government of the United Kingdom
Government of Ireland
Policy Council of Guernsey
Isle of Man Government
Council of Ministers of Jersey
Northern Ireland Executive
Scottish Government
Welsh Government





Work areas



Demography
eHealth
Environment
Indigenous, minority and lesser-used languages
Knowledge economy
Misuse of drugs
Social inclusion
Tourism
Transport





Representatives of states



 May
 Varadkar
 St Pier
 Quayle
 Gorst
Vacant
 Sturgeon
 Jones















International membership











v
t
e


Member states of the European Union






Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom















v
t
e


 Council of Europe



Institutions



Secretary General
Committee of Ministers
Parliamentary Assembly
Congress
Court of Human Rights
Commissioner for Human Rights
Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
Commission against Racism and Intolerance








Members



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia1
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





Observers



Canada
Holy See
Israel
Japan
Mexico
United States
Sovereign Military Order of Malta





Former members



Czechoslovakia (1991–1992)
Saar (assoc. 1950–1956)






1 Provisionally referred to by the Council of Europe as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.










v
t
e


Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)



History



Convention on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OECD Anti-Bribery Convention





Guidelines



Multinational Enterprises
Testing of Chemicals












v
t
e


World Trade Organization



System



Accession and membership
Appellate Body
Dispute Settlement Body
International Trade Centre
Chronology of key events





Issues



Criticism
Doha Development Round
Singapore issues
Quota Elimination
Peace Clause





Agreements



General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
Agriculture
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Technical Barriers to Trade
Trade Related Investment Measures
Trade in Services
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Government Procurement
Information Technology
Marrakech Agreement
Doha Declaration
Bali Package





Ministerial
Conferences



1st (1996)
2nd (1998)
3rd (1999)
4th (2001)
5th (2003)
6th (2005)
7th (2009)
8th (2011)
9th (2013)
10th (2015)





People



Roberto Azevêdo (Director-General)
Pascal Lamy
Supachai Panitchpakdi
Alejandro Jara
Rufus Yerxa





Members



Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Benin
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Cuba
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Fiji
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Ghana
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong1
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Israel
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lesotho
Liberia
Liechtenstein
Macau1
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Rwanda
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Suriname
Swaziland
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Taiwan2
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe




European Union



Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom











Special administrative regions of the People's Republic of China, participates as "Hong Kong, China" and "Macao China".
Officially the Republic of China, participates as "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu", and "Chinese Taipei" in short.

















v
t
e


Pan-Celticism



Nations




Celtic League definition



Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales





Other claimants



Asturias
Galicia
Y Wladfa















Nationalisms



Breton nationalism (history)
Cornish nationalism
Welsh nationalism
Scottish nationalism
Irish nationalism (incl. Republicanism)
Manx nationalism





Pan-Celtic groups



Celtic Congress
Celtic League
Columba Project





Languages



Brythonic (Breton, Cornish & Welsh)
Goidelic (Irish, Manx & Scottish Gaelic)
Mixed (Shelta & Bungee)





Peoples



Britons (Bretons, Cornish & Welsh)
Gaels (Irish incl. Irish Travellers, Manx & Highland Scots incl. Scottish Travellers)





Culture



Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales
Celtic art





Music



Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales





Festivals



Festival Interceltique de Lorient
Pan Celtic Festival
Hebridean Celtic Festival
Celtic Connections
Celtic Media Festival





Sport



Bando
Cammag
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cornish wrestling
Curling
Gaelic football
Gaelic handball
Gouren
Rounders
Highland games
Hurling
Road bowls
Shinty








 Celts portal
 Media
 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Irish states since 1171






Ireland (1937 onward)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (1922† onward)





Medieval period



Gaelic Ireland (until 1607)
Lordship of Ireland (1171–1541)





Modern period



Kingdom of Ireland (1541–1801)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (1801–1922†)





Twentieth century



Irish Free State (1922–37)





Notable declared states



Republic of Connacht (1798)
Irish Republic (1919–22)





See also



Confederate Ireland (1642–53)
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland (1649–60)
Patriot Parliament (1689)








† This date marks the secession of the majority of Ireland from the United Kingdom rather than the creation of a new state. Official name was changed in 1927.












v
t
e


English-speaking world






Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region






































































Further links







Articles



English-speaking world
History of the English language
British Empire
English in the Commonwealth of Nations
Anglosphere





Lists



List of countries by English-speaking population
List of countries where English is an official language









 







Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority





Africa



Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha





Americas



Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Canada
Cayman Islands
Dominica
Falkland Islands
Grenada
Guyana
Jamaica
Montserrat
Saba
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States
United States Virgin Islands





Europe



Guernsey
Ireland
Isle of Man
Jersey
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand
Norfolk Island
Pitcairn Islands








 







Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language





Africa



Botswana
Cameroon
The Gambia
Ghana
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Malawi
Mauritius
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sierra Leone
Somaliland
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Puerto Rico





Asia



Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
India
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore





Europe



Gibraltar
Malta





Oceania



American Samoa
Cook Islands
Fiji
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
Niue
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tuvalu
Vanuatu












Dependencies shown in italics.















Coordinates: 53°N 8°W﻿ / ﻿53°N 8°W﻿ / 53; -8



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 8144648137969636653
LCCN: n79063445
ISNI: 0000 0001 2359 1198
GND: 4027667-3
SUDOC: 026389452
BNF: cb11864622v (data)
HDS: 3357
NDL: 00560111
NKC: ge130752











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Republic_of_Ireland&oldid=818416034"					Categories: Republic of IrelandEnglish-speaking countries and territoriesIsland countriesMember states of the Council of EuropeMember states of the European UnionNUTS 1 statistical regions of the European UnionRepublicsWestern European countriesCountries in EuropeLiberal democraciesStates and territories established in 19491949 establishments in IrelandHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from July 2017Use Irish English from August 2013All Wikipedia articles written in Irish EnglishArticles containing Irish-language textPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parametersPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parametersArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciations (English)Articles needing additional references from April 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from November 2015Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing explicitly cited English-language textArticles with DMOZ linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers