






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (December 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (December 2014)









This article is incomplete. Please help to improve it, or discuss the issue on the talk page. (August 2017)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A research center is a facility or building dedicated to research, commonly with the focus on a specific area. There are over 14,000 research centers in the United States.[1] Centers apply varied disciplines including basic research and applied research in addition to non traditional techniques. However, a research center should not be confused with a research institute. Additionally, today many universities are establishing research centers to conduct a specific research or education activity. Over a hundred of research centers can be established in one university. This number certainly differs from a university to a university, but most of the research centers there do bring something to the scientific table.
Notable research centers[edit]

Ames Research Center
Bell Labs
Center for Advanced Life Cycle Engineering
Marine Sciences Research Center
Palo Alto Research Center
Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Biological Research Centre
Pennington Biomedical Research Center

References[edit]



^ Evaluating Research Centers and Institutes for Success: A Manual and Guide with Case Studies William R. Tash WT & Associates, 2006. 229 pages



External links[edit]

University of Washington Research C,ضلييستيحؤوطجعهف

UCLA Research Centers and Institutes
Stanford University Research Centers
Brown University Research Centers and Institutes
AW Research Center





This organization-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e








This science article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Research_center&oldid=814323619"					Categories: Research organizationsOrganization stubsScience stubsHidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2014Articles needing additional references from December 2014All articles needing additional referencesArticles to be expanded from August 2017Articles with multiple maintenance issuesAll stub articles