For other uses, see Resin (disambiguation).




Cedar of Lebanon cone showing flecks of resin as used in the mummification of Egyptian Pharaohs.






Insect trapped in resin


In polymer chemistry and materials science, resin is a "solid or highly viscous substance" of plant or synthetic origin that is typically convertible into polymers.[1] They are often mixtures of organic compounds, principally terpenes. Many plants, particularly woody plants, produce resin in response to injury. The resin acts as a bandage protecting the plant from invading insects and pathogens.[2]



Contents


1 Examples of natural resins and related materials

1.1 Resins

1.1.1 Fossil resins


1.2 Rosin
1.3 Petroleum- and insect-derived resins


2 History and etymology

2.1 Non-resinous exudates


3 Uses

3.1 Plant resins
3.2 Synthetic resins


4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Examples of natural resins and related materials[edit]
Plants secrete resins and rosins for their protective benefits. They confound a wide range of herbivores, insects, and pathogens, while the volatile phenolic compounds may attract benefactors such as parasitoids or predators of the herbivores that attack the plant.[3]
Resins[edit]
The resin produced by most plants is composed mainly of terpenes and derivatives. The most common terpenes in resin are the bicyclic terpenes alpha-pinene, beta-pinene, delta-3 carene, and sabinene, the monocyclic terpenes limonene and terpinolene, and smaller amounts of the tricyclic sesquiterpenes, longifolene, caryophyllene and delta-cadinene. Some resins also contain a high proportion of resin acids. The individual components of resin can be separated by fractional distillation. Rosins on the other hand are less volatile and consist, inter alia, of diterpenes.[citation needed]
Notable examples of plant resins include amber, Balm of Gilead, balsam, Canada balsam, Boswellia, copal from trees of Protium copal and Hymenaea courbaril, dammar gum from trees of the family Dipterocarpaceae, Dragon's blood from the dragon trees (Dracaena species), elemi, frankincense from Boswellia sacra, galbanum from Ferula gummosa, gum guaiacum from the lignum vitae trees of the genus Guaiacum, kauri gum from trees of Agathis australis, hashish (Cannabis resin) from Cannabis indica, labdanum from mediterranean species of Cistus, mastic (plant resin) from the mastic tree Pistacia lentiscus, myrrh from shrubs of Commiphora, sandarac resin from Tetraclinis articulata, the national tree of Malta, styrax (a Benzoin resin from various Styrax species), Spinifex resin from Australian Spinifex grasses, and turpentine, distilled from pine resin.
Fossil resins[edit]
Amber is fossil resin (also called resinite) from coniferous and other tree species. Copal, kauri gum, dammar and other resins may also be found as subfossil deposits. Subfossil copal can be distinguished from genuine fossil amber because it becomes tacky when a drop of a solvent such as acetone or chloroform is placed on it.[4] African copal and the kauri gum of New Zealand are also procured in a semi-fossil condition.
Rosin[edit]
See also: Rosin




Extremely viscous resin extruding from the trunk of a mature Araucaria columnaris.


Solidified resin from which the volatile terpene components have been removed by distillation is known as rosin. Typical rosin is a transparent or translucent mass, with a vitreous fracture and a faintly yellow or brown colour, non-odorous or having only a slight turpentine odor and taste. Rosin is insoluble in water, mostly soluble in alcohol, essential oils, ether and hot fatty oils, and softens and melts under the influence of heat, and burns with a bright but smoky flame.
Rosin consists of a complex mixture of different substances including organic acids named the resin acids. These are closely related to the terpenes, and derive from them through partial oxidation. Resin acids can be dissolved in alkalis to form resin soaps, from which the purified resin acids are regenerated by treatment with acids. Examples of resin acids are abietic acid (sylvic acid), C20H30O2, plicatic acid contained in cedar, and pimaric acid, C20H30O2, a constituent of galipot resin. Abietic acid can also be extracted from rosin by means of hot alcohol; it crystallizes in leaflets, and on oxidation yields trimellitic acid, isophthalic acid and terebic acid. Pimaric acid closely resembles abietic acid into which it passes when distilled in a vacuum; it has been supposed to consist of three isomers.
Rosin is obtained from pines and some other plants, mostly conifers.[5] Plant resins are generally produced as stem secretions, but in some Central and South American species such as Euphorbia dalechampia and Clusia species they are produced as pollination rewards, and used by some stingless bee species to construct their nests.[6][7] Propolis, consisting largely of resins collected from plants such as poplars and conifers, is used by honey bees to seal gaps in their hives.[8]
Petroleum- and insect-derived resins[edit]
Shellac and lacquer are examples of insect-derived resins.
Asphaltite and Utah resin are petroleum bitumens, not a product secreted by plants, although it was ultimately derived from plants.
History and etymology[edit]




Resin dripping from an almond tree


Plant resins have a very long history that was documented in ancient Greece by Theophrastus, in ancient Rome by Pliny the Elder, and especially in the resins known as frankincense and myrrh, prized in ancient Egypt.[9] These were highly prized substances, and required as incense in some religious rites.
The word resin comes from French resine, from Latin resina "resin", which either derives from or is a cognate of the Greek ῥητίνη rhētinē "resin of the pine", of unknown earlier origin, though probably non-Indo-European.[10][11]
The word "resin" has been applied in the modern world to nearly any component of a liquid that will set into a hard lacquer or enamel-like finish. An example is nail polish. Certain "casting resins" and synthetic resins (such as epoxy resin) have also been given the name "resin."
Some resins when soft are known as 'oleoresins', and when containing benzoic acid or cinnamic acid they are called balsams. Oleoresins are naturally occurring mixtures of an oil and a resin; they can be extracted from various plants. Other resinous products in their natural condition are a mix with gum or mucilaginous substances and known as gum resins. Several natural resins are used as ingredients in perfumes, e.g., balsams of Peru and tolu, elemi, styrax, and certain turpentines.[5]
Non-resinous exudates[edit]
Other liquid compounds found inside plants or exuded by plants, such as sap, latex, or mucilage, are sometimes confused with resin, but are not the same. Saps, in particular, serve a nutritive function that resins do not.




Resin of a pine


Uses[edit]
Plant resins[edit]
Plant resins are valued for the production of varnishes, adhesives, and food glazing agents. They are also prized as raw materials for the synthesis of other organic compounds and provide constituents of incense and perfume. The oldest known use of plant resin comes from the late Middle Stone Age in Southern Africa where it was used as an adhesive for hafting stone tools[12].




Lumps of dried frankincense resin






Protium Sp. - MHNT


The hard transparent resins, such as the copals, dammars, mastic, and sandarac, are principally used for varnishes and adhesives, while the softer odoriferous oleo-resins (frankincense, elemi, turpentine, copaiba), and gum resins containing essential oils (ammoniacum, asafoetida, gamboge, myrrh, and scammony) are more used for therapeutic purposes, food and incense. The resin of the Aleppo Pine is used to flavour retsina, a Greek resinated wine.[13]
Synthetic resins[edit]
Main article: synthetic resin
Many materials are produced via the conversion of synthetic resins to solids. Important examples are bisphenol A diglycidyl ether, which is a resin converted to epoxy glue upon the addition of a hardener. Silicones are often prepared from silicone resins via room temperature vulcanization.
See also[edit]

Resin extraction – method of harvesting resin from trees
Balsam of Peru – a balsam used in food and drink for flavoring, in perfumes and toiletries for fragrance, and in medicine and pharmaceutical items.
Mastic (plant resin) – resin from the Pistacia lentiscus tree
Pitch (resin)
Kino (gum) – a plant gum similar to resin
Biodegradable – plant resins are naturally biodegradable in many circumstances.
Resin casting – casting with a resin, usually using a synthetic not a natural resin.
Polyresin – a hard, synthetic resin for casting in molds

References[edit]


^ http://goldbook.iupac.org/RT07166.html
^ http://www.fs.fed.us/wildflowers/ethnobotany/resins.shtml
^ "Plant Resins: Chemistry, evolution, ecology, and ethnobotany", by Jean Langenheim, Timber Press, Portland, OR. 2003
^ David Grimaldi, Amber: Window to the Past, 1996, p 16-20, American Museum of Natural History
^ a b Fiebach, Klemens; Grimm, Dieter (2000). "Resins, Natural". Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry. doi:10.1002/14356007.a23_073. ISBN 978-3-527-30673-2. 
^ Bittrich, V.; Amaral, Maria C. E. (1996). "Flower morphology and pollination biology of some Clusia species from the Gran Sabana (Venezuela)". Kew Bulletin. 51 (4): 681–694. doi:10.2307/4119722. 
^ Gonçalves-Alvim, Silmary de Jesus (2001). "Resin-collecting bees (Apidae) on Clusia palmicida (Clusiaceae) in a riparian forest in Brazil". Journal of Tropical Ecology. 17 (1): 149–153. doi:10.1017/s0266467401001092. 
^ Simone-Finstrom, M.; Spivak, M. (2010). "Propolis and bee health: The natural history and significance of resin use by honey bees". Apidologie. 41 (3): 295–311. doi:10.1051/apido/2010016. 
^ "Queen Hatshepsut's expedition to the Land of Punt: The first oceanographic cruise?". Dept. of Oceanography, Texas A&M University. Retrieved 2010-05-08. 
^ "resin, n. and adj". OED Online. Oxford University Press. September 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2014. 
^ "resin (n.)". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2 December 2014. 
^ Kozowyk, P. R. B.; Langejans, G. H. J.; Poulis, J. A. (2016-03-16). "Lap Shear and Impact Testing of Ochre and Beeswax in Experimental Middle Stone Age Compound Adhesives". PLOS ONE. 11 (3): e0150436. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0150436. ISSN 1932-6203. 
^ http://www.fao.org/docrep/x0453e/x0453e10.htm


External links[edit]

 The dictionary definition of resin at Wiktionary
 Media related to Resin at Wikimedia Commons







v
t
e


Non-timber forest products



Animal products



Furs
Honey
Pine honey
Wild game











Berries
Tree fruit






Blackberry
Blueberry
Bilberry
Breadfruit
Cocoa bean
Coconut
Durian
Gambooge
Huckleberry
Jackfruit
Juniper berry
Lingonberry
Raspberry
Tamarind
Woodland strawberry





Edible plants / roots



Betel
Fiddlehead ferns
Mahuwa flowers
Sago palm

queen


Sassafras

filé powder
root beer


Saw palmetto
Wild ginseng





Mushrooms



Bare-toothed russula
Bay bolete
Birch bolete
Cep
Chanterelle
Honey mushroom
Lingzhi
Matsutake
Meadow mushroom
Morel
Oyster mushroom
Parasol mushroom
Red cap
Saffron milk cap
Slippery jack
Truffle
Yellow knight








Nuts
Spices






Allspice
Areca nut
Bay leaf
Black pepper
Brazil nut
Cinnamon
Clove
Hazelnut
Malva nut
Nutmeg
Pine nut
Vanilla








Oil
Waxes






Carnauba
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus wightiana)
Cocoa butter
Eucalyptol
Eucalyptus
Japan wax
Kokum
Kusum
Mahuwa
Nagkesar
Palm (kernel)
Pongamia
Phulwara
Pilu
Sal-seed (Shorea robusta)
Sandalwood
Shea butter
Tea-seed
Tea-tree
Vateria indica





Resins



Benzoin
Birch tar
Camphor
Creosote
Frankincense
Gamboge
Kauri
Lacquer
Mastic
Myrrh
Pine tar
Pitch
Rosin
Turpentine
Varnish





Sap / Gum / etc.



Birch syrup
Chicle

chewing gum


Coconut sugar
Date sugar
Fruit syrup
Gum arabic
Gutta-percha
Kino
Latex
Maple sugar
Maple syrup
Palm sugar
Palm wine

akpeteshie
ogogoro


Rubber
Spruce gum





Other



Bamboo

edible
musical instruments
textiles


Birch bark
Birch beer
Cork
Ferns
Forage
Gambier
Moss
Natural dyes

henna


Peat
Quinine
Rattan
Shellac
Tanbark

tannin


Thatching
Tendu leaves
Willow bark





Related



Dehesa (Iberian agroforestry)
Forest farming / gardening
Honey hunting
Indian forest produce
Mushroom hunting
Naval stores
Permaforestry
Resin extraction
Rubber tapping
Wildcrafting








 Forestry portal
 Trees portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject Forestry












v
t
e


Paper






History
Manufacture/Papermaking





Types



Bible
Blotting
Bond
Cartridge
Construction
Cotton (rag)
Crêpe
Display
Dó
Asphalt
Glassine
India
Korean
Kraft
Laid
Manila
Newsprint
Oatmeal
Onionskin
Origami
Baking
Building
Rice
Rolling
Scritta
Security
Seed
Copy
Stone
Tar
Thermal
Tissue
Tracing
Transfer
Tree-free
Wallpaper
Washi
Waterproof
Wax
Wood-free
Wove
Writing
Xuan





Materials



Fiber crop
Paper chemicals
Papyrus
Wood pulp





Specifications



Grammage
Density
Size
Units of paper quantity
Surface chemistry of paper
Wet strength





Manufacture and process



Bleaching of wood pulp
Calender
Conical refiner
Deinking
Paper pollution
Environmental impact of paper
Handmade paper
Hollander beater
Kraft process
Organosolv
Paper machine
Paper recycling
Papermaking
Soda pulping
Sulfite process





Industry



Paper industry
In Europe
In Canada
In India
In Japan
In the United States
Paper mill
List of paper mills








  Category:Paper
  Commons









Authority control



NDL: 00575139











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Resin&oldid=818205504"					Categories: ResinsNon-timber forest productsPapermakingTree tappingHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2015Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text