"Nixon" and "Richard M. Nixon" redirect here. For other uses, see Nixon (disambiguation) and Richard Nixon (disambiguation).


Richard Nixon








37th President of the United States


In office
January 20, 1969 – August 9, 1974


Vice President



Spiro Agnew (1969–1973)
None (Oct–Dec. 1973)
Gerald Ford (1973–1974)





Preceded by
Lyndon B. Johnson


Succeeded by
Gerald Ford


36th Vice President of the United States


In office
January 20, 1953 – January 20, 1961


President
Dwight D. Eisenhower


Preceded by
Alben W. Barkley


Succeeded by
Lyndon B. Johnson


United States Senator
from California


In office
December 1, 1950 – January 1, 1953


Preceded by
Sheridan Downey


Succeeded by
Thomas Kuchel


Member of the U.S. House of Representatives
from California's 12th district


In office
January 3, 1947 – November 30, 1950


Preceded by
Jerry Voorhis


Succeeded by
Patrick J. Hillings





Personal details


Born
Richard Milhous Nixon
(1913-01-09)January 9, 1913
Yorba Linda, California, U.S.


Died
April 22, 1994(1994-04-22) (aged 81)
Manhattan, New York, U.S.


Cause of death
Stroke and cerebral edema


Resting place
Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum
Yorba Linda, California, U.S.


Political party
Republican


Spouse(s)
Pat Ryan (m. 1940;  d. 1993)


Children
Patricia "Tricia" and Julie


Parents
Frank Nixon
Hannah Milhous Nixon


Alma mater
Whittier College
Duke University


Profession
Lawyer


Nickname
Dick


Signature



Military service


Allegiance
 United States


Service/branch
 United States Navy Reserve


Years of service
1942–1946, active duty
1946–1966, inactive duty


Rank
 Commander


Battles/wars

World War II

South Pacific theater[1]




Awards
 Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal (2)








This article is part of
a series about
Richard Nixon







Birthplace
Early Life
1946 U.S. House election
1950 U.S. Senate election


"Checkers speech"



Vice President of the United States


Motorcade attack


Kitchen Debate
Operation 40


1960 presidential election



Post-Vice-Presidency


1962 gubernatorial bid
"Last press conference"


President of the United States

Presidency


First term

1968 presidential election

Campaign




1st Inauguration


Nixon Doctrine
War policy
Visit to China


Nixonomics

Nixon shock




Silent majority
EPA
Environmental policy
Clean Water
NOAA
War on Cancer
War on Drugs


Second term

1972 presidential election

Convention




2nd Inauguration


Détente
Paris Peace Accords
Endangered Species Act
Watergate scandal

Timeline
Tapes
U.S. v. Nixon




Watergate Committee
Impeachment process




Speech




Post-Presidency

Pardon
The Nixon Interviews
Nixon v. General Services Administration
State Funeral
Electoral history


Library
Foundation
Center


Six Crises
Bibliography








v
t
e





Richard Milhous Nixon (January 9, 1913 – April 22, 1994) was the 37th President of the United States, serving from 1969 until 1974, when he resigned from office, the only U.S. president to do so. He had previously served as the 36th Vice President of the United States from 1953 to 1961, and prior to that as a U.S. Representative and also Senator from California.
Nixon was born in Yorba Linda, California. After completing his undergraduate studies at Whittier College, he graduated from Duke University School of Law in 1937 and returned to California to practice law. He and his wife Pat moved to Washington in 1942 to work for the federal government. He subsequently served on active duty in the U.S. Navy Reserve during World War II. Nixon was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946 and to the Senate in 1950. His pursuit of the Hiss Case established his reputation as a leading anti-communist and elevated him to national prominence. He was the running mate of Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Republican Party presidential nominee in the 1952 election. Nixon served for eight years as vice president, becoming the second-youngest vice president in history at age 40. He waged an unsuccessful presidential campaign in 1960, narrowly losing to John F. Kennedy, and lost a race for Governor of California to Pat Brown in 1962. In 1968, he ran for the presidency again and was elected, defeating incumbent Vice President Hubert Humphrey.
Nixon ended American involvement in the war in Vietnam in 1973 and brought the American POWs home, and ended the military draft. Nixon's visit to China in 1972 eventually led to diplomatic relations between the two nations, and he initiated détente and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with the Soviet Union the same year. His administration generally transferred power from Washington D.C. to the states. He imposed wage and price controls for ninety days, enforced desegregation of Southern schools and established the Environmental Protection Agency. Nixon also presided over the Apollo 11 moon landing, which signaled the end of the moon race. He was reelected in one of the largest electoral landslides in U.S. history in 1972 when he defeated George McGovern.
In his second term, Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses in the Yom Kippur War, resulting in the restart of the Middle East peace process and an oil crisis at home. The Nixon administration supported a coup in Chile that ousted the government of Salvador Allende and propelled Augusto Pinochet to power. By late 1973, the Watergate scandal escalated, costing Nixon much of his political support. On August 9, 1974, he resigned in the face of almost certain impeachment and removal from office. After his resignation, he was issued a pardon by his successor, Gerald Ford. In 20 years of retirement, Nixon wrote nine books and undertook many foreign trips, helping to rehabilitate his image into that of elder statesman. He suffered a debilitating stroke on April 18, 1994 and died four days later at the age of 81.



Contents


1 Early life

1.1 Primary and secondary education
1.2 Collegiate and law school education


2 Early career and marriage
3 World War II
4 Rising politician

4.1 Congressional career (1947–1953)

4.1.1 House of Representatives
4.1.2 Senate


4.2 Vice Presidency (1953–1961)
4.3 1960 and 1962 elections; wilderness years


5 1968 presidential election
6 Presidency (1969–1974)

6.1 Foreign policy

6.1.1 China
6.1.2 Vietnam War
6.1.3 Latin American policy
6.1.4 Soviet Union
6.1.5 Middle Eastern policy


6.2 Domestic policy

6.2.1 Economy
6.2.2 Governmental initiatives and organization
6.2.3 Civil rights


6.3 Space policy
6.4 Reelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation

6.4.1 1972 presidential campaign
6.4.2 Watergate
6.4.3 Resignation




7 Later years and death

7.1 Pardon and illness
7.2 Return to public life
7.3 Author and elder statesman
7.4 Death and funeral


8 Legacy
9 Personality and public image
10 See also
11 Notes

11.1 Explanatory notes
11.2 Citations


12 References

12.1 Bibliography
12.2 Nixon Library
12.3 Other sources


13 Further reading
14 External links



Early life
Richard Milhous Nixon was born on January 9, 1913 in Yorba Linda, California, in a house that was built by his father.[2][3] His parents were Hannah (Milhous) Nixon and Francis A. Nixon. His mother was a Quaker, and his father converted from Methodism to the Quaker faith. Nixon was a descendant of the early American settler, Thomas Cornell, who was also an ancestor of Ezra Cornell, the founder of Cornell University, as well as of Jimmy Carter and Bill Gates.[4]
Nixon's upbringing was marked by evangelical Quaker observances of the time, such as refraining from alcohol, dancing, and swearing. Nixon had four brothers: Harold (1909–33), Donald (1914–87), Arthur (1918–25), and Edward (born 1930).[5] Four of the five Nixon boys were named after kings who had ruled in historical or legendary Britain; Richard, for example, was named after Richard the Lionheart.[6][7]




Nixon (second from right) makes his newspaper debut in 1916, contributing five cents to a fund for war orphans. Donald is to the left of his brother.


Nixon's early life was marked by hardship, and he later quoted a saying of Eisenhower to describe his boyhood: "We were poor, but the glory of it was we didn't know it".[8] The Nixon family ranch failed in 1922, and the family moved to Whittier, California. In an area with many Quakers, Frank Nixon opened a grocery store and gas station.[9] Richard's younger brother Arthur died in 1925 at the age of seven after a short illness.[10] At the age of twelve, a spot was found on Richard's lung, and, with a family history of tuberculosis, he was forbidden to play sports. Eventually, the spot was found to be scar tissue from an early bout of pneumonia.[11][12]
Primary and secondary education
Young Richard attended East Whittier Elementary School, where he was president of his eighth-grade class.[13] His parents believed that attending Whittier High School had caused Richard's older brother Harold to live a dissolute lifestyle before he fell ill of tuberculosis (he died of the disease in 1933), and so they sent Richard to the larger Fullerton Union High School.[14][15] He had to ride a school bus for an hour each way during his freshman year, and he received excellent grades. Later, he lived with an aunt in Fullerton during the week.[16] He played junior varsity football, and seldom missed a practice, even though he was rarely used in games.[17] He had greater success as a debater, winning a number of championships and taking his only formal tutelage in public speaking from Fullerton's Head of English, H. Lynn Sheller. Nixon later remembered Sheller's words, "Remember, speaking is conversation ... don't shout at people. Talk to them. Converse with them."[18] Nixon stated that he tried to use the conversational tone as much as possible.[18]




Nixon at Whittier High School, 1930


At the start of his junior year beginning in September 1928, Richard's parents permitted him to transfer to Whittier High School. At Whittier High, Nixon suffered his first electoral defeat, for student body president. He often rose at 4 a.m., to drive the family truck into Los Angeles and purchase vegetables at the market. He then drove to the store to wash and display them, before going to school. Harold had been diagnosed with tuberculosis the previous year; when their mother took him to Arizona in the hopes of improving his health, the demands on Richard increased, causing him to give up football. Nevertheless, Richard graduated from Whittier High third in his class of 207 students.[19]
Collegiate and law school education
Nixon was offered a tuition grant to attend Harvard University, but Harold's continued illness and the need for their mother to care for him meant Richard was needed at the store. He remained in his hometown and attended Whittier College, his expenses there covered by a bequest from his maternal grandfather.[20] Nixon played for the basketball team; he also tried out for football but lacked the size to play. He remained on the team as a substitute and was noted for his enthusiasm.[21] Instead of fraternities and sororities, Whittier had literary societies. Nixon was snubbed by the only one for men, the Franklins; many members of the Franklins were from prominent families, but Nixon was not. He responded by helping to found a new society, the Orthogonian Society.[22] In addition to the society, schoolwork, and work at the store, Nixon found time for a large number of extracurricular activities, becoming a champion debater and gaining a reputation as a hard worker.[23] In 1933, he became engaged to Ola Florence Welch, daughter of the Whittier police chief. The two broke up in 1935.[24]
After his graduation from Whittier in 1934, Nixon received a full scholarship to attend Duke University School of Law.[25] The school was new and sought to attract top students by offering scholarships.[26] It paid high salaries to its professors, many of whom had national or international reputations.[27] The number of scholarships was greatly reduced for second- and third-year students, forcing recipients into intense competition.[26] Nixon not only kept his scholarship but was elected president of the Duke Bar Association,[28] inducted into the Order of the Coif,[29] and graduated third in his class in June 1937.[25]
Early career and marriage
After graduating from Duke, Nixon initially hoped to join the Federal Bureau of Investigation. He received no response to his letter of application and learned years later that he had been hired, but his appointment had been canceled at the last minute due to budget cuts.[30] Instead, he returned to California and was admitted to the bar in 1937. He began practicing with the law firm Wingert and Bewley in Whittier,[25] working on commercial litigation for local petroleum companies and other corporate matters, as well as on wills.[31] In later years, Nixon proudly stated that he was the only modern president to have previously worked as a practicing attorney. Nixon was reluctant to work on divorce cases, disliking frank sexual talk from women.[32] In 1938, he opened up his own branch of Wingert and Bewley in La Habra, California,[33] and became a full partner in the firm the following year.[34]
In January 1938, Nixon was cast in the Whittier Community Players production of The Dark Tower. There he played opposite a high school teacher named Thelma "Pat" Ryan.[25] Nixon described it in his memoirs as "a case of love at first sight"[35]—for Nixon only, as Pat Ryan turned down the young lawyer several times before agreeing to date him.[36] Once they began their courtship, Ryan was reluctant to marry Nixon; they dated for two years before she assented to his proposal. They wed in a small ceremony on June 21, 1940. After a honeymoon in Mexico, the Nixons began their married life in Whittier.[37] They had two daughters, Tricia (born 1946) and Julie (born 1948).[38]
World War II
In January 1942, the couple moved to Washington, D.C., where Nixon took a job at the Office of Price Administration.[25] In his political campaigns, Nixon would suggest that this was his response to Pearl Harbor, but he had sought the position throughout the latter part of 1941. Both Nixon and his wife believed he was limiting his prospects by remaining in Whittier.[39] He was assigned to the tire rationing division, where he was tasked with replying to correspondence. He did not enjoy the role, and four months later, applied to join the United States Navy.[40] As a birthright Quaker, he could have claimed exemption from the draft; he might also have been deferred because he worked in government service. But instead of exploiting his circumstance, Nixon sought a commission in the navy. His application was successful, and he was appointed a lieutenant junior grade in the U.S Naval Reserve (U.S. Navy Reserve) on June 15, 1942.[41][42]
In October 1942, he was assigned as aide to the commander of the Naval Air Station Ottumwa in Iowa until May 1943.[41] On October 1, 1943, Nixon was promoted to lieutenant.[41] Seeking more excitement, he requested sea duty and was reassigned as the naval passenger control officer for the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command, supporting the logistics of operations in the South West Pacific theater;[43][44] he was the Officer in Charge of the Combat Air Transport Command at Guadalcanal in the Solomons and in March 1944 at Green Island (Nissan Island) just north of Bougainville.[41] His unit prepared manifests and flight plans for C-47 operations and supervised the loading and unloading of the cargo aircraft. For this service, he received a Navy Letter of Commendation (awarded a Navy Commendation Ribbon which was later updated to the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal) from his commanding officer for "meritorious and efficient performance of duty as Officer in Charge of the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command". Upon his return to the U.S., Nixon was appointed the administrative officer of the Alameda Naval Air Station in California. In January 1945, he was transferred to the Bureau of Aeronautics office in Philadelphia to help negotiate the termination of war contracts, and received his second letter of commendation, from the Secretary of the Navy [45] for "meritorious service, tireless effort, and devotion to duty". Later, Nixon was transferred to other offices to work on contracts and finally to Baltimore.[46] On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander.[41][45] On March 10, 1946, he was relieved of active duty.[41] He resigned his commission on New Year's Day 1946.[47] On June 1, 1953, he was promoted to commander.[41] He retired in the U.S. Naval Reserve on June 6, 1966.[41]
 


 
















Navy and Marine Corps
Commendation Medal
American Campaign Medal


Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal
with two stars
World War II Victory Medal
Armed Forces Reserve Medal
with silver hourglass device



Rising politician





Richard and Pat Nixon introduce General Dwight D. Eisenhower—Richard Nixon's running mate—to their daughters Tricia (standing) and Julie (carried by her father), Washington National Airport, September 10, 1952.



Congressional career (1947–1953)
For more information on Nixon's congressional election campaigns, see California's 12th congressional district election, 1946 and United States Senate election in California, 1950.
House of Representatives




Nixon's congressional campaign flyer


In 1945, Republicans in California's 12th congressional district, frustrated by their inability to defeat Democratic Congressman Jerry Voorhis, sought a consensus candidate who would run a strong campaign against him. They formed a "Committee of 100" to decide on a candidate, hoping to avoid internal dissensions which had led to Voorhis victories. After the committee failed to attract higher-profile candidates, Herman Perry, Whittier's Bank of America branch manager, suggested Nixon, a family friend with whom he had served on the Whittier College Board of Trustees before the war. Perry wrote to Nixon in Baltimore. After a night of excited talk between the Nixons, the naval officer responded to Perry with enthusiasm. Nixon flew to California and was selected by the committee. When he left the Navy at the start of 1946, Nixon and his wife returned to Whittier, where Nixon began a year of intensive campaigning.[48][49] He contended that Voorhis had been ineffective as a congressman and suggested that Voorhis's endorsement by a group linked to communists meant that Voorhis must have radical views.[50] Nixon won the election, receiving 65,586 votes to Voorhis' 49,994.[51]




Nixon campaigning for the Senate, 1950


In Congress, Nixon supported the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947, a federal law that monitors the activities and power of labor unions, and he served on the Education and Labor Committee. He was part of the Herter Committee, which went to Europe to report on the need for U.S. foreign aid. Nixon was the youngest member of the committee and the only Westerner.[52] Advocacy by Herter Committee members, including Nixon, led to congressional passage of the Marshall Plan.[53]
In his memoirs, Nixon recounts that he joined the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) "at the end of 1947." However, he was already a HUAC member in early February 1947, when he heard "Enemy Number One" Gerhard Eisler and his sister Ruth Fischer testify. On February 18, 1947, Nixon referred to Eisler's belligerence toward HUAC in his maiden speech to the House. Also by early February 1947, fellow U.S. Representative Charles J. Kersten had introduced him to Father John Francis Cronin in Baltimore, who shared with Nixon his 1945 privately circulated paper "The Problem of American Communism in 1945," [54] with much information from the FBI's William C. Sullivan (who by 1961 would head domestic intelligence under Hoover).[55]
By May 1948, Nixon had co-sponsored a "Mundt-Nixon Bill" to implement "a new approach to the complicated problem of internal communist subversion... It provided for registration of all Communist Party members and required a statement of the source of all printed and broadcast material issued by organizations that were found to be Communist fronts." He served as floor manager for the Republican Party; Vito Marcantonio served as floor manager for the Democratic Party. On May 19, 1948, the bill passed the House by 319 to 58 but failed to pass the Senate.[56] (The Nixon Library cites this bill's passage as Nixon's first significant victory in Congress.[57])
Nixon first gained national attention in August 1948 when as a HUAC member, his persistence helped break the Alger Hiss spy case. While many doubted Whittaker Chambers' allegations that Hiss, a former State Department official, had been a Soviet spy, Nixon believed them to be true and pressed for the committee to continue its investigation. Under suit for defamation filed by Hiss, Chambers produced documents corroborating his allegations. These included paper and microfilm copies that Chambers turned over to House investigators after having hidden them overnight in a field; they became known as the "Pumpkin Papers".[58] Hiss was convicted of perjury in 1950 for denying under oath he had passed documents to Chambers.[59] In 1948, Nixon successfully cross-filed as a candidate in his district, winning both major party primaries,[60] and was comfortably reelected.[61]
Senate




Nixon on his "station wagon tour" in Sausalito, California, 1950


In 1949, Nixon began to consider running for the United States Senate against the Democratic incumbent, Sheridan Downey,[62] and entered the race in November.[63] Downey, faced with a bitter primary battle with Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas, announced his retirement in March 1950.[64] Nixon and Douglas won the primary elections[65] and engaged in a contentious campaign in which the ongoing Korean War was a major issue.[66] Nixon tried to focus attention on Douglas' liberal voting record. As part of that effort, a "Pink Sheet" was distributed by the Nixon campaign suggesting that, as Douglas' voting record was similar to that of New York Congressman Vito Marcantonio (believed by some to be a communist), their political views must be nearly identical.[67] Nixon won the election by almost twenty percentage points.[68] During this campaign, Nixon was first called "Tricky Dick" by his opponents for his campaign tactics.[69]
In the Senate, Nixon took a prominent position in opposing global communism, traveling frequently and speaking out against it.[70] He maintained friendly relations with his fellow anti-communist, the controversial Wisconsin senator, Joseph McCarthy, but was careful to keep some distance between himself and McCarthy's allegations.[71] Nixon also criticized President Harry S. Truman's handling of the Korean War.[70] He supported statehood for Alaska and Hawaii, voted in favor of civil rights for minorities, and supported federal disaster relief for India and Yugoslavia.[72] He voted against price controls and other monetary restrictions, benefits for illegal immigrants, and public power.[72]
Vice Presidency (1953–1961)
General Dwight D. Eisenhower was nominated for president by the Republicans in 1952. He had no strong preference for a vice presidential candidate, and Republican officeholders and party officials met in a "smoke-filled room" and recommended Nixon to the general, who agreed to the senator's selection. Nixon's youth (he was then 39), stance against communism, and political base in California—one of the largest states—were all seen as vote-winners by the leaders. Among the candidates considered along with Nixon were Ohio Senator Robert A. Taft, New Jersey Governor Alfred Driscoll and Illinois Senator Everett Dirksen.[73][74] On the campaign trail, Eisenhower spoke to his plans for the country, leaving the negative campaigning to his running mate.[75]




Front cover of literature for the Eisenhower–Nixon campaign, 1952


In mid-September, the Republican ticket faced a major crisis.[76] The media reported that Nixon had a political fund, maintained by his backers, which reimbursed him for political expenses.[77] Such a fund was not illegal, but it exposed Nixon to allegations of possible conflict of interest. With pressure building for Eisenhower to demand Nixon's resignation from the ticket, the senator went on television to deliver an address to the nation on September 23, 1952.[78] The address, later termed the Checkers speech, was heard by about 60 million Americans—including the largest television audience up to that point.[79] Nixon emotionally defended himself, stating that the fund was not secret, nor had donors received special favors. He painted himself as a man of modest means (his wife had no mink coat; instead she wore a "respectable Republican cloth coat") and a patriot.[78] The speech would be remembered for the gift which Nixon had received, but which he would not give back: "a little cocker spaniel dog … sent all the way from Texas. And our little girl—Tricia, the 6-year-old—named it Checkers."[78] The speech prompted a huge public outpouring of support for Nixon.[80] Eisenhower decided to retain him on the ticket,[81] which proved victorious in the November election.[75]
Eisenhower gave Nixon responsibilities during his term as vice president—more than any previous vice president.[82] Nixon attended Cabinet and National Security Council meetings and chaired them when Eisenhower was absent. A 1953 tour of the Far East succeeded in increasing local goodwill toward the United States and prompted Nixon to appreciate the potential of the region as an industrial center. He visited Saigon and Hanoi in French Indochina.[83] On his return to the United States at the end of 1953, Nixon increased the amount of time he devoted to foreign relations.[84]
Biographer Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional years, said of his vice presidency:

Eisenhower radically altered the role of his running mate by presenting him with critical assignments in both foreign and domestic affairs once he assumed his office. The vice president welcomed the president's initiatives and worked energetically to accomplish White House objectives. Because of the collaboration between these two leaders, Nixon deserves the title, "the first modern vice president".[85]

Despite intense campaigning by Nixon, who reprised his strong attacks on the Democrats, the Republicans lost control of both houses of Congress in the 1954 elections. These losses caused Nixon to contemplate leaving politics once he had served out his term.[86] On September 24, 1955, President Eisenhower suffered a heart attack; his condition was initially believed to be life-threatening. Eisenhower was unable to perform his duties for six weeks. The 25th Amendment to the United States Constitution had not yet been proposed, and the Vice President had no formal power to act. Nonetheless, Nixon acted in Eisenhower's stead during this period, presiding over Cabinet meetings and ensuring that aides and Cabinet officers did not seek power.[87] According to Nixon biographer Stephen Ambrose, Nixon had "earned the high praise he received for his conduct during the crisis ... he made no attempt to seize power".[88]
His spirits buoyed, Nixon sought a second term, but some of Eisenhower's aides aimed to displace him. In a December 1955 meeting, Eisenhower proposed that Nixon not run for reelection in order to give him administrative experience before a 1960 presidential run and instead become a Cabinet officer in a second Eisenhower administration. Nixon believed such an action would destroy his political career. When Eisenhower announced his reelection bid in February 1956, he hedged on the choice of his running mate, stating that it was improper to address that question until he had been renominated. Although no Republican was opposing Eisenhower, Nixon received a substantial number of write-in votes against the President in the 1956 New Hampshire primary election. In late April, the President announced that Nixon would again be his running mate.[89] Eisenhower and Nixon were reelected by a comfortable margin in the November 1956 election.[90]




Vice President Nixon and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev speak as the press looks on in part of what came to be known as the Kitchen Debate, July 24, 1959.


In early 1957, Nixon undertook another major foreign trip, this time to Africa. On his return, he helped shepherd the Civil Rights Act of 1957 through Congress. The bill was weakened in the Senate, and civil rights leaders were divided over whether Eisenhower should sign it. Nixon advised the President to sign the bill, which he did.[91] Eisenhower suffered a mild stroke in November 1957, and Nixon gave a press conference, assuring the nation that the Cabinet was functioning well as a team during Eisenhower's brief illness.[92]
On April 27, 1958, Richard and Pat Nixon embarked on a goodwill tour of South America. In Montevideo, Uruguay, Nixon made an impromptu visit to a college campus, where he fielded questions from students on U.S. foreign policy. The trip was uneventful until the Nixon party reached Lima, Peru, where he was met with student demonstrations. Nixon went to the campus, got out of his car to confront the students, and stayed until forced back into the car by a volley of thrown objects. At his hotel, Nixon faced another mob, and one demonstrator spat on him.[93] In Caracas, Venezuela, Nixon and his wife were spat on by anti-American demonstrators and their limousine was attacked by a pipe-wielding mob.[94] According to Ambrose, Nixon's courageous conduct "caused even some of his bitterest enemies to give him some grudging respect".[95]
In July 1959, President Eisenhower sent Nixon to the Soviet Union for the opening of the American National Exhibition in Moscow. On July 24, while touring the exhibits with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, the two stopped at a model of an American kitchen and engaged in an impromptu exchange about the merits of capitalism versus communism that became known as the "Kitchen Debate".[96]

1960 and 1962 elections; wilderness years
Main article: United States presidential election, 1960




1960 electoral vote results


In 1960, Nixon launched his first campaign for President of the United States. He faced little opposition in the Republican primaries[97] and chose former Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. as his running mate.[98] His Democratic opponent was John F. Kennedy, and the race remained close for the duration.[99] Nixon campaigned on his experience, but Kennedy called for new blood and claimed the Eisenhower–Nixon administration had allowed the Soviet Union to overtake the U.S. in ballistic missiles (the "missile gap").[100] A new political medium was introduced in the campaign: televised presidential debates. In the first of four such debates, Nixon appeared pale, with a five o'clock shadow, in contrast to the photogenic Kennedy.[98] Nixon's performance in the debate was perceived to be mediocre in the visual medium of television, though many people listening on the radio thought that Nixon had won.[101] Nixon lost the election narrowly, with Kennedy ahead by only 112,827 votes (0.2 percent) in the popular vote.[98]




Outgoing Vice President Nixon and incoming Vice President Lyndon Johnson leave the White House on the morning of January 20, 1961, for the Kennedy–Johnson inauguration ceremonies


There were charges of vote fraud in Texas and Illinois, both states won by Kennedy; Nixon refused to consider contesting the election, feeling a lengthy controversy would diminish the United States in the eyes of the world, and the uncertainty would hurt U.S. interests.[102] At the end of his term of office as vice president in January 1961, Nixon and his family returned to California, where he practiced law and wrote a bestselling book, Six Crises, which included coverage of the Hiss case, Eisenhower's heart attack, and the Fund Crisis, which had been resolved by the Checkers speech.[98][103]
Local and national Republican leaders encouraged Nixon to challenge incumbent Pat Brown for Governor of California in the 1962 election.[98] Despite initial reluctance, Nixon entered the race.[98] The campaign was clouded by public suspicion that Nixon viewed the office as a stepping-stone for another presidential run, some opposition from the far-right of the party, and his own lack of interest in being California's governor.[98] Nixon hoped that a successful run would confirm him in his status as the nation's leading active Republican politician, and ensure he remained a major player in national politics.[104] Instead, he lost to Brown by more than five percentage points, and the defeat was widely believed to be the end of his political career.[98] In an impromptu concession speech the morning after the election, Nixon blamed the media for favoring his opponent, saying, "You won't have Nixon to kick around anymore because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference".[105] The California defeat was highlighted in the November 11, 1962, episode of ABC's Howard K. Smith: News and Comment entitled "The Political Obituary of Richard M. Nixon".[106] Alger Hiss appeared on the program, and many members of the public complained that it was unseemly to allow a convicted felon air time to attack a former vice president. The furor drove Smith and his program from the air,[107] and public sympathy for Nixon grew.[106]




Nixon shows his papers to an East German officer to cross between the sectors of the divided city of Berlin, 1963


The Nixon family traveled to Europe in 1963, where Nixon gave press conferences and met with leaders of the countries he visited.[108] The family moved to New York City, where Nixon became a senior partner in the leading law firm Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie & Alexander.[98] Nixon had pledged, when announcing his California campaign, not to run for president in 1964; even if he had not, he believed it would be difficult to defeat Kennedy, or after his assassination, Kennedy's successor, Lyndon Johnson.[109] In 1964, he supported Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater for the Republican nomination for president; when Goldwater was successful in gaining the nomination, Nixon was selected to introduce the candidate to the convention. Although he thought Goldwater unlikely to win, Nixon campaigned for him loyally. The election was a disaster for the Republicans; Goldwater's landslide loss to Johnson was matched by heavy losses for the party in Congress and among state governors.[110]
Nixon was one of the few leading Republicans not blamed for the disastrous results, and he sought to build on that in the 1966 congressional elections. He campaigned for many Republicans seeking to regain seats lost in the Johnson landslide and received credit for helping the Republicans make major gains in the midterm election.[111]

1968 presidential election
Main articles: Richard Nixon presidential campaign, 1968 and United States presidential election, 1968





Nixon and Johnson meet at the White House before Nixon's nomination, July 1968







Facsimile of a Nixon campaign poster


At the end of 1967, Nixon told his family he planned to run for president a second time. Although Pat Nixon did not always enjoy public life[112] (for example, she had been embarrassed by the need to reveal how little the family owned in the Checkers speech),[113] she was supportive of her husband's ambitions. Nixon believed that with the Democrats torn over the issue of the Vietnam War, a Republican had a good chance of winning, although he expected the election to be as close as in 1960.[112]




Text on automobile trash bag given away by the Nixon campaign in California, 1968






1968 electoral vote results


One of the most tumultuous primary election seasons ever began as the Tet Offensive was launched, followed by the withdrawal of President Johnson as a candidate after doing unexpectedly poorly in the New Hampshire primary; it concluded with the assassination of one of the Democratic candidates, Senator Robert F. Kennedy, just moments after his victory in the California primary. On the Republican side, Nixon's main opposition was Michigan Governor George Romney, though New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller and California Governor Ronald Reagan each hoped to be nominated in a brokered convention. Nixon secured the nomination on the first ballot.[114] He selected Maryland Governor Spiro Agnew as his running mate, a choice which Nixon believed would unite the party, appealing to both Northern moderates and Southerners disaffected with the Democrats.[115]
Nixon's Democratic opponent in the general election was Vice President Hubert Humphrey, who was nominated at a convention marked by violent protests.[116] Throughout the campaign, Nixon portrayed himself as a figure of stability during a period of national unrest and upheaval.[116] He appealed to what he later called the "silent majority" of socially conservative Americans who disliked the hippie counterculture and the anti-war demonstrators. Agnew became an increasingly vocal critic of these groups, solidifying Nixon's position with the right.[117]
Nixon waged a prominent television advertising campaign, meeting with supporters in front of cameras.[118] He stressed that the crime rate was too high, and attacked what he perceived as a surrender by the Democrats of the United States' nuclear superiority.[119] Nixon promised "peace with honor" in the Vietnam War and proclaimed that "new leadership will end the war and win the peace in the Pacific".[120] He did not release specifics of how he hoped to end the war, resulting in media intimations that he must have a "secret plan".[120] His slogan of "Nixon's the One" proved to be effective.[118]
Johnson's negotiators hoped to reach a truce, or at least a cessation of bombings, in Vietnam prior to the election. On October 22, 1968, candidate Nixon received information that Johnson was preparing a so-called "October surprise" to elect Humphrey in the last days of the campaign, and his administration had abandoned three non-negotiable conditions for a bombing halt.[121] Whether the Nixon campaign interfered with any ongoing negotiations between the Johnson administration and the South Vietnamese by engaging Anna Chennault, a prominent Chinese-American fundraiser for the Republican party, remains an ongoing controversy. While notes uncovered in 2016 may support such a contention, the context of said notes remains of debate[121] and it is not clear whether the government of South Vietnam needed much encouragement to opt out of a peace process they considered disadvantageous.[122]
In a three-way race between Nixon, Humphrey, and American Independent Party candidate former Alabama Governor George Wallace, Nixon defeated Humphrey by nearly 500,000 votes (seven-tenths of a percentage point), with 301 electoral votes to 191 for Humphrey and 46 for Wallace.[116][123] In his victory speech, Nixon pledged that his administration would try to bring the divided nation together.[124] Nixon said: "I have received a very gracious message from the Vice President, congratulating me for winning the election. I congratulated him for his gallant and courageous fight against great odds. I also told him that I know exactly how he felt. I know how it feels to lose a close one."[125]

Presidency (1969–1974)
Main article: Presidency of Richard Nixon




Nixon is sworn in as the 37th President by Chief Justice Earl Warren on January 20, 1969, with the new First Lady, Pat, holding the family Bibles.


Nixon was inaugurated as president on January 20, 1969, sworn in by his onetime political rival, Chief Justice Earl Warren. Pat Nixon held the family Bibles open at Isaiah 2:4, which reads, "They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks." In his inaugural address, which received almost uniformly positive reviews, Nixon remarked that "the greatest honor history can bestow is the title of peacemaker"[126]—a phrase that would later be placed on his gravestone.[127] He spoke about turning partisan politics into a new age of unity:

In these difficult years, America has suffered from a fever of words; from inflated rhetoric that promises more than it can deliver; from angry rhetoric that fans discontents into hatreds; from bombastic rhetoric that postures instead of persuading. We cannot learn from one another until we stop shouting at one another, until we speak quietly enough so that our words can be heard as well as our voices.[128]


Foreign policy





Nixon and Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai toast during Nixon's 1972 visit to China



China
Main article: 1972 Nixon visit to China




President Nixon shakes hands with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai upon arriving in Beijing, 1972


Nixon laid the groundwork for his overture to China before he became president, writing in Foreign Affairs a year before his election: "There is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation."[129] Assisting him in this venture was his National Security Advisor and future Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, with whom the President worked closely, bypassing Cabinet officials. With relations between the Soviet Union and China at a nadir—border clashes between the two took place during Nixon's first year in office—Nixon sent private word to the Chinese that he desired closer relations. A breakthrough came in early 1971, when Chairman Mao invited a team of American table tennis players to visit China and play against top Chinese players. Nixon followed up by sending Kissinger to China for clandestine meetings with Chinese officials.[129] On July 15, 1971, it was simultaneously announced by Beijing and by Nixon (on television and radio) that the President would visit China the following February. The announcements astounded the world.[130] The secrecy allowed both sets of leaders time to prepare the political climate in their countries for the contact.[131]
In February 1972, Nixon and his wife traveled to China. Kissinger briefed Nixon for over 40 hours in preparation.[132] Upon touching down, the President and First Lady emerged from Air Force One and greeted Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai. Nixon made a point of shaking Zhou's hand, something which then-Secretary of State John Foster Dulles had refused to do in 1954 when the two met in Geneva.[133] Over 100 television journalists accompanied the president. On Nixon's orders, television was strongly favored over printed publications, as Nixon felt that the medium would capture the visit much better than print. It also gave him the opportunity to snub the print journalists he despised.[133]
Nixon and Kissinger met for an hour with Mao and Zhou at Mao's official private residence, where they discussed a range of issues.[134] Mao later told his doctor that he had been impressed by Nixon, whom he considered forthright, unlike the leftists and the Soviets.[134] He said he was suspicious of Kissinger,[134] though the National Security Advisor referred to their meeting as his "encounter with history".[133] A formal banquet welcoming the presidential party was given that evening in the Great Hall of the People. The following day, Nixon met with Zhou; the joint communique following this meeting recognized Taiwan as a part of China, and looked forward to a peaceful solution to the problem of reunification.[135] When not in meetings, Nixon toured architectural wonders including the Forbidden City, Ming Tombs, and the Great Wall.[133] Americans received their first glimpse into Chinese life through the cameras which accompanied Pat Nixon, who toured the city of Beijing and visited communes, schools, factories, and hospitals.[133]
The visit ushered in a new era of Sino-American relations.[116] Fearing the possibility of a Sino-American alliance, the Soviet Union yielded to pressure for détente with the United States.[136]
Vietnam War
Main articles: Vietnam War, Vietnamization, and Role of the United States in the Vietnam War




Nixon delivers an address to the nation about the Cambodian incursion


When Nixon took office, about 300 American soldiers were dying each week in Vietnam,[137] and the war was broadly unpopular in the United States, with violent protests against the war ongoing. The Johnson administration had agreed to suspend bombing in exchange for negotiations without preconditions, but this agreement never fully took force. According to Walter Isaacson, soon after taking office, Nixon had concluded that the Vietnam War could not be won and he was determined to end the war quickly.[138] He sought some arrangement which would permit American forces to withdraw, while leaving South Vietnam secure against attack.[139]
Nixon approved a secret B-52 carpet bombing campaign of North Vietnamese (and, later, allied Khmer Rouge) positions in Cambodia in March 1969 (code-named Operation Menu), without the consent of Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk.[140][141][142] In mid-1969, Nixon began efforts to negotiate peace with the North Vietnamese, sending a personal letter to North Vietnamese leaders, and peace talks began in Paris. Initial talks, however, did not result in an agreement.[143] In May 1969 he publicly proposed to withdraw all American troops from South Vietnam provided North Vietnam also did so and for South Vietnam to hold internationally supervised elections with Viet Cong participation.[144]
In July 1969, Nixon visited South Vietnam, where he met with his U.S. military commanders and President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu. Amid protests at home demanding an immediate pullout, he implemented a strategy of replacing American troops with Vietnamese troops, known as "Vietnamization".[116] He soon instituted phased U.S. troop withdrawals[145] but authorized incursions into Laos, in part to interrupt the Ho Chi Minh trail, used to supply North Vietnamese forces, that passed through Laos and Cambodia. Nixon announced the ground invasion of Cambodia to the American public on April 30, 1970.[146] His responses to protesters included an impromptu, early morning meeting with them at the Lincoln Memorial on May 9, 1970.[147][148][149] Documents uncovered from the Soviet archives after 1991 reveal that the North Vietnamese attempt to overrun Cambodia in 1970 was launched at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge and negotiated by Pol Pot's then-second-in-command, Nuon Chea.[150] Nixon's campaign promise to curb the war, contrasted with the escalated bombing, led to claims that Nixon had a "credibility gap" on the issue.[145] It is estimated that between 50,000 and 150,000 people were killed during the bombing of Cambodia between 1970 and 1973.[141]
In 1971, excerpts from the "Pentagon Papers", which had been leaked by Daniel Ellsberg, were published by The New York Times and The Washington Post. When news of the leak first appeared, Nixon was inclined to do nothing; the Papers, a history of United States' involvement in Vietnam, mostly concerned the lies of prior administrations and contained few real revelations. He was persuaded by Kissinger that the papers were more harmful than they appeared, and the President tried to prevent publication. The Supreme Court eventually ruled for the newspapers.[151]
As U.S. troop withdrawals continued, conscription was reduced and in 1973 ended; the armed forces became all-volunteer.[152] After years of fighting, the Paris Peace Accords were signed at the beginning of 1973. The agreement implemented a cease fire and allowed for the withdrawal of remaining American troops without requiring the 160,000 North Vietnam Army regulars located in the South to withdraw.[153] Once American combat support ended, there was a brief truce, before fighting broke out again. North Vietnam conquered South Vietnam in 1975.[154]
Latin American policy
See also: U.S. intervention in Chile § 1973 coup




Nixon and Mexican president Gustavo Díaz Ordaz riding a presidential motorcade in San Diego, California, September 1970


Nixon had been a firm supporter of Kennedy in the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion and 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis; on taking office he stepped up covert operations against Cuba and its president, Fidel Castro. He maintained close relations with the Cuban-American exile community through his friend, Bebe Rebozo, who often suggested ways of irritating Castro. These activities concerned the Soviets and Cubans, who feared Nixon might attack Cuba and break the understanding between Kennedy and Khrushchev which had ended the missile crisis. In August 1970, the Soviets asked Nixon to reaffirm the understanding; despite his hard line against Castro, Nixon agreed. The process had not yet been completed when the Soviets began expanding their base at the Cuban port of Cienfuegos in October 1970. A minor confrontation ensued, which was concluded with an understanding that the Soviets would not use Cienfuegos for submarines bearing ballistic missiles. The final round of diplomatic notes, reaffirming the 1962 accord, were exchanged in November.[155]
The election of Marxist candidate Salvador Allende as President of Chile in September 1970 spurred Nixon and Kissinger to pursue a vigorous campaign of covert resistance to Allende,[156]:25 first designed to convince the Chilean congress to confirm Jorge Alessandri as the winner of the election and then messages to military officers in support of a coup.[156] Other support included strikes organized against Allende and funding for Allende opponents. It was even alleged that "Nixon personally authorized" $700,000 in covert funds to print anti-Allende messages in a prominent Chilean newspaper.[156]:93 Following an extended period of social, political, and economic unrest, General Augusto Pinochet assumed power in a violent coup d'état on September 11, 1973; among the dead was Allende.[157]
Soviet Union
Nixon used the improving international environment to address the topic of nuclear peace. Following the announcement of his visit to China, the Nixon administration concluded negotiations for him to visit the Soviet Union. The President and First Lady arrived in Moscow on May 22, 1972 and met with Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Communist Party; Alexei Kosygin, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers; and Nikolai Podgorny, the head of state, among other leading Soviet officials.[158]




Nixon meets with Brezhnev during the Soviet leader's trip to the U.S., 1973.


Nixon engaged in intense negotiations with Brezhnev.[158] Out of the summit came agreements for increased trade and two landmark arms control treaties: SALT I, the first comprehensive limitation pact signed by the two superpowers,[116] and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which banned the development of systems designed to intercept incoming missiles. Nixon and Brezhnev proclaimed a new era of "peaceful coexistence". A banquet was held that evening at the Kremlin.[158]
Seeking to foster better relations with the United States, both China and the Soviet Union cut back on their diplomatic support for North Vietnam and advised Hanoi to come to terms militarily.[159][160][161] Nixon later described his strategy:

I had long believed that an indispensable element of any successful peace initiative in Vietnam was to enlist, if possible, the help of the Soviets and the Chinese. Though rapprochement with China and détente with the Soviet Union were ends in themselves, I also considered them possible means to hasten the end of the war. At worst, Hanoi was bound to feel less confident if Washington was dealing with Moscow and Beijing. At best, if the two major Communist powers decided that they had bigger fish to fry, Hanoi would be pressured into negotiating a settlement we could accept.[162]

Having made considerable progress over the previous two years in U.S.-Soviet relations, Nixon embarked on a second trip to the Soviet Union in 1974.[163] He arrived in Moscow on June 27 to a welcome ceremony, cheering crowds, and a state dinner at the Grand Kremlin Palace that evening.[163] Nixon and Brezhnev met in Yalta, where they discussed a proposed mutual defense pact, détente, and MIRVs. While he considered proposing a comprehensive test-ban treaty, Nixon felt he would not have time as president to complete it.[163] There were no significant breakthroughs in these negotiations.[163]
Middle Eastern policy





Nixon meets with President Anwar Sadat of Egypt, June 1974


As part of the Nixon Doctrine that the U.S. would avoid direct combat assistance to allies where possible, instead giving them assistance to defend themselves, the U.S. greatly increased arms sales to the Middle East—particularly Israel, Iran and Saudi Arabia—during the Nixon administration.[164] The Nixon administration strongly supported Israel, an American ally in the Middle East, but the support was not unconditional. Nixon believed that Israel should make peace with its Arab neighbors and that the United States should encourage it. The president believed that—except during the Suez Crisis—the U.S. had failed to intervene with Israel, and should use the leverage of the large U.S. military aid to Israel to urge the parties to the negotiating table. The Arab-Israeli conflict was not a major focus of Nixon's attention during his first term—for one thing, he felt that no matter what he did, American Jews would oppose his reelection.[a]
On October 6, 1973, an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria, supported with arms and materiel by the Soviet Union, attacked Israel in the Yom Kippur War. Israel suffered heavy losses and Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses, cutting through inter-departmental squabbles and bureaucracy and taking personal responsibility for any response by Arab nations. More than a week later, by the time the U.S. and Soviet Union began negotiating a truce, Israel had penetrated deep into enemy territory. The truce negotiations rapidly escalated into a superpower crisis; when Israel gained the upper hand, Egyptian President Sadat requested a joint U.S.-USSR peacekeeping mission, which the U.S. refused. When Soviet Premier Brezhnev threatened to unilaterally enforce any peacekeeping mission militarily, Nixon ordered the U.S. military to DEFCON3,[165] placing all U.S. military personnel and bases on alert for nuclear war. This was the closest that the world had come to nuclear war since the Cuban Missile Crisis. Brezhnev backed down as a result of Nixon's actions.[166]
Because Israel's victory was largely due to U.S. support, the Arab OPEC nations retaliated by refusing to sell crude oil to the U.S., resulting in the 1973 oil crisis.[167] The embargo caused gasoline shortages and rationing in the United States in late 1973, and was eventually ended by the oil-producing nations as peace in the Middle East took hold.[168]
After the war, and under Nixon's presidency, the U.S. reestablished relations with Egypt for the first time since 1967. Nixon used the Middle East crisis to restart the stalled Middle East Peace Negotiations; he wrote in a confidential memo to Kissinger on October 20:

I believe that, beyond a doubt, we are now facing the best opportunity we have had in 15 years to build a lasting peace in the Middle East. I am convinced history will hold us responsible if we let this opportunity slip by ... I now consider a permanent Middle East settlement to be the most important final goal to which we must devote ourselves.[169]

Nixon made one of his final international visits as president to the Middle East in June 1974, and became the first President to visit Israel.[170]
Domestic policy





At the Washington Senators' 1969 Opening Day at RFK Stadium. To the right of Nixon is team owner Bob Short and then Baseball Commissioner Bowie Kuhn. Marine Corps Aide to the President Jack Brennan sits in uniform behind Nixon.



Economy
Further information: Nixon shock and 1970s energy crisis
At the time Nixon took office in 1969, inflation was at 4.7 percent—its highest rate since the Korean War. The Great Society had been enacted under Johnson, which, together with the Vietnam War costs, was causing large budget deficits. Unemployment was low, but interest rates were at their highest in a century.[171] Nixon's major economic goal was to reduce inflation; the most obvious means of doing so was to end the war.[171] This could not be accomplished overnight, and the U.S. economy continued to struggle through 1970, contributing to a lackluster Republican performance in the midterm congressional elections (Democrats controlled both Houses of Congress throughout Nixon's presidency).[172] According to political economist Nigel Bowles in his 2011 study of Nixon's economic record, the new president did little to alter Johnson's policies through the first year of his presidency.[173]
Nixon was far more interested in foreign affairs than domestic policies, but believed that voters tend to focus on their own financial condition, and that economic conditions were a threat to his reelection. As part of his "New Federalism" views, he proposed grants to the states, but these proposals were for the most part lost in the congressional budget process. However, Nixon gained political credit for advocating them.[172] In 1970, Congress had granted the President the power to impose wage and price freezes, though the Democratic majorities, knowing Nixon had opposed such controls through his career, did not expect Nixon to actually use the authority.[173] With inflation unresolved by August 1971, and an election year looming, Nixon convened a summit of his economic advisers at Camp David. He then announced temporary wage and price controls, allowed the dollar to float against other currencies, and ended the convertibility of the dollar into gold.[174] Bowles points out,

by identifying himself with a policy whose purpose was inflation's defeat, Nixon made it difficult for Democratic opponents ... to criticize him. His opponents could offer no alternative policy that was either plausible or believable since the one they favored was one they had designed but which the president had appropriated for himself.[173]

Nixon's policies dampened inflation through 1972, although their aftereffects contributed to inflation during his second term and into the Ford administration.[174]
After Nixon won re-election, inflation was returning.[175] He reimposed price controls in June 1973. The price controls became unpopular with the public and businesspeople, who saw powerful labor unions as preferable to the price board bureaucracy.[175] The controls produced food shortages, as meat disappeared from grocery stores and farmers drowned chickens rather than sell them at a loss.[175] Despite the failure to control inflation, controls were slowly ended, and on April 30, 1974, their statutory authorization lapsed.[175]
Governmental initiatives and organization
Nixon advocated a "New Federalism", which would devolve power to state and local elected officials, though Congress was hostile to these ideas and enacted few of them.[176] He eliminated the Cabinet-level United States Post Office Department, which in 1971 became the government-run United States Postal Service.[177]
Nixon was a late convert to the conservation movement. Environmental policy had not been a significant issue in the 1968 election; the candidates were rarely asked for their views on the subject. He saw that the first Earth Day in April 1970 presaged a wave of voter interest on the subject, and sought to use that to his benefit; in June he announced the formation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Nixon broke new ground by discussing environment policy in his State of the Union speech; other initiatives supported by Nixon included the Clean Air Act of 1970 and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA); the National Environmental Policy Act required environmental impact statements for many Federal projects.[178] Nixon vetoed the Clean Water Act of 1972—objecting not to the policy goals of the legislation but to the amount of money to be spent on them, which he deemed excessive. After Congress overrode his veto, Nixon impounded the funds he deemed unjustifiable.[179]
In 1971, Nixon proposed health insurance reform—a private health insurance employer mandate,[b] federalization of Medicaid for poor families with dependent minor children,[180] and support for health maintenance organizations (HMOs).[181] A limited HMO bill was enacted in 1973.[181] In 1974, Nixon proposed more comprehensive health insurance reform—a private health insurance employer mandate[b] and replacement of Medicaid by state-run health insurance plans available to all, with income-based premiums and cost sharing.[182]
Concerned about the prevalence of drug use both domestically and among American soldiers in Vietnam, Nixon called for a War on Drugs, pledging to cut off sources of supply abroad, and to increase funds for education and for rehabilitation facilities.[183]
As one policy initiative, Nixon called for more money for sickle-cell research, treatment, and education in February 1971[184] and signed the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act on May 16, 1972.[185][186][c] While Nixon called for increased spending on such high-profile items as sickle-cell disease and for a War on Cancer, at the same time he sought to reduce overall spending at the National Institutes of Health.[187]
Civil rights
The Nixon presidency witnessed the first large-scale integration of public schools in the South.[188] Nixon sought a middle way between the segregationist Wallace and liberal Democrats, whose support of integration was alienating some Southern whites.[189] Hopeful of doing well in the South in 1972, he sought to dispose of desegregation as a political issue before then. Soon after his inauguration, he appointed Vice President Agnew to lead a task force, which worked with local leaders—both white and black—to determine how to integrate local schools. Agnew had little interest in the work, and most of it was done by Labor Secretary George Shultz. Federal aid was available, and a meeting with President Nixon was a possible reward for compliant committees. By September 1970, less than ten percent of black children were attending segregated schools. By 1971, however, tensions over desegregation surfaced in Northern cities, with angry protests over the busing of children to schools outside their neighborhood to achieve racial balance. Nixon opposed busing personally but enforced court orders requiring its use.[190]
In addition to desegregating public schools, Nixon implemented the Philadelphia Plan in 1970—the first significant federal affirmative action program.[191] He also endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment after it passed both houses of Congress in 1972 and went to the states for ratification.[192] Nixon had campaigned as an ERA supporter in 1968, though feminists criticized him for doing little to help the ERA or their cause after his election. Nevertheless, he appointed more women to administration positions than Lyndon Johnson had.[193]
Space policy




Nixon visits the Apollo 11 astronauts in quarantine aboard USS Hornet.


Further information: Space policy of the United States
After a nearly decade-long national effort, the United States won the race to land astronauts on the Moon on July 20, 1969, with the flight of Apollo 11. Nixon spoke with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin during their moonwalk. He called the conversation "the most historic phone call ever made from the White House".[194]
Nixon was unwilling to keep funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) at the high level seen during the 1960s as NASA prepared to send men to the Moon. NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine drew up ambitious plans for the establishment of a permanent base on the Moon by the end of the 1970s and the launch of a manned expedition to Mars as early as 1981. Nixon rejected both proposals due to the expense.[195] Nixon also canceled the Air Force Manned Orbital Laboratory program in 1969, because unmanned spy satellites were a more cost-effective way to achieve the same reconnaissance objective.[196]
On March 7, 1970, Nixon announced the end of the Kennedy-Johnson era's massive efforts in the space race, stating "We must think of [space activities] as part of a continuing process [...] and not as a series of separate leaps, each requiring a massive concentration of energy. [...] We must also realize that space expenditures must take their proper place within a rigorous system of national priorities. What we do in space from here on in must become a normal and regular part of our national life and must therefore be planned in conjunction with all of the other undertakings which are also important to us."[197] He then cancelled the last three planned Apollo lunar missions to place Skylab in orbit more efficiently and free money up for the design and construction of the Space Shuttle.[198]
On May 24, 1972, Nixon approved a five-year cooperative program between NASA and the Soviet space program, culminating in the 1975 joint mission of an American Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft linking in space.[199]

Reelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation





Nixon announces the release of edited transcripts of the Watergate tapes, April 29, 1974.



1972 presidential campaign
Main article: United States presidential election, 1972




1972 electoral vote results


Nixon believed his rise to power had peaked at a moment of political realignment. The Democratic "Solid South" had long been a source of frustration to Republican ambitions. Goldwater had won several Southern states by opposing the Civil Rights Act of 1964 but had alienated more moderate Southerners. Nixon's efforts to gain Southern support in 1968 were diluted by Wallace's candidacy. Through his first term, he pursued a Southern Strategy with policies, such as his desegregation plans, that would be broadly acceptable among Southern whites, encouraging them to realign with the Republicans in the aftermath of the Civil Rights Movement. He nominated two Southern conservatives, Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell to the Supreme Court, but neither was confirmed by the Senate.[200]




Nixon meets the public during the 1972 presidential campaign.


Nixon entered his name on the New Hampshire primary ballot on January 5, 1972, effectively announcing his candidacy for reelection.[201] Virtually assured the Republican nomination,[202] the President had initially expected his Democratic opponent to be Massachusetts Senator Ted Kennedy (brother of the late president), but he was largely removed from contention after the 1969 Chappaquiddick incident.[203] Instead, Maine Senator Edmund Muskie became the front runner, with South Dakota Senator George McGovern in a close second place.[201]
On June 10, McGovern won the California primary and secured the Democratic nomination.[204] The following month, Nixon was renominated at the 1972 Republican National Convention. He dismissed the Democratic platform as cowardly and divisive.[205] McGovern intended to sharply reduce defense spending[206] and supported amnesty for draft evaders as well as abortion rights. With some of his supporters believed to be in favor of drug legalization, McGovern was perceived as standing for "amnesty, abortion and acid". McGovern was also damaged by his vacillating support for his original running mate, Missouri Senator Thomas Eagleton, dumped from the ticket following revelations that he had received treatment for depression.[207][208] Nixon was ahead in most polls for the entire election cycle, and was reelected on November 7, 1972 in one of the largest landslide election victories in American history. He defeated McGovern with over 60 percent of the popular vote, losing only in Massachusetts and the District of Columbia.[209]
Watergate
Main articles: Watergate scandal and Impeachment process of Richard Nixon




Nixon fields questions at a press conference, October 26, 1973.


The term Watergate has come to encompass an array of clandestine and often illegal activities undertaken by members of the Nixon administration. Those activities included "dirty tricks," or bugging the offices of political opponents and the harassment of activist groups and political figures. The activities were brought to light after five men were caught breaking into Democratic party headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington, D.C. on June 17, 1972. The Washington Post picked up on the story; reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward relied on an informant known as "Deep Throat"—later revealed to be Mark Felt, associate director at the FBI—to link the men to the Nixon administration. Nixon downplayed the scandal as mere politics, calling news articles biased and misleading. A series of revelations made it clear that the Committee to Re-elect President Nixon, and later the White House, was involved in attempts to sabotage the Democrats. Senior aides such as White House Counsel John Dean faced prosecution; in total 48 officials were convicted of wrongdoing.[116][210][211]
In July 1973, White House aide Alexander Butterfield testified under oath to Congress that Nixon had a secret taping system that recorded his conversations and phone calls in the Oval Office. These tapes were subpoenaed by Watergate Special Counsel Archibald Cox; Nixon provided transcripts of the conversations but not the actual tapes, citing executive privilege. With the White House and Cox at loggerheads, Nixon had Cox fired in October in the "Saturday Night Massacre"; he was replaced by Leon Jaworski. In November, Nixon's lawyers revealed that an audio tape of conversations held in the White House on June 20, 1972 featured an 18½ minute gap.[211] Rose Mary Woods, the President's personal secretary, claimed responsibility for the gap, alleging that she had accidentally wiped the section while transcribing the tape, though her tale was widely mocked. The gap, while not conclusive proof of wrongdoing by the President, cast doubt on Nixon's statement that he had been unaware of the cover-up.[212]




A demonstrator demands Nixon's impeachment, October 1973.


Though Nixon lost much popular support, even from his own party, he rejected accusations of wrongdoing and vowed to stay in office.[211] He insisted that he had made mistakes, but had no prior knowledge of the burglary, did not break any laws, and did not learn of the cover-up until early 1973.[213] On October 10, 1973, Vice President Agnew resigned —unrelated to Watergate— and was convicted on charges of bribery, tax evasion and money laundering during his tenure as Governor of Maryland. Nixon chose Gerald Ford, Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, to replace Agnew.[214] One researcher suggested Nixon effectively disengaged from his own administration after the swearing in of Gerald Ford as Vice President on December 6, 1973.[215]
On November 17, 1973, during a televised question and answer session with the press,[216] Nixon said, "People have got to know whether or not their President is a crook. Well, I'm not a crook. I've earned everything I've got."[217]
The legal battle over the tapes continued through early 1974, and in April 1974 Nixon announced the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between him and his aides. The House Judiciary Committee opened impeachment hearings against the President on May 9, 1974, which were televised on the major TV networks. These hearings culminated in votes for impeachment.[213] On July 24, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the full tapes, not just selected transcripts, must be released.[218]
The scandal grew to involve a slew of additional allegations against the President, ranging from the improper use of government agencies to accepting gifts in office and his personal finances and taxes; Nixon repeatedly stated his willingness to pay any outstanding taxes due, and paid $465,000 in back taxes in 1974.[219]








Nixon Oval Office meeting with H.R. Haldeman "Smoking Gun" Conversation June 23, 1972 Full Transcript


Even with support diminished by the continuing series of revelations, Nixon hoped to fight the charges. However, one of the new tapes, recorded soon after the break-in, demonstrated that Nixon had been told of the White House connection to the Watergate burglaries soon after they took place, and had approved plans to thwart the investigation. In a statement accompanying the release of what became known as the "Smoking Gun Tape" on August 5, 1974, Nixon accepted blame for misleading the country about when he had been told of White House involvement, stating that he had a lapse of memory.[220] Senate Minority Leader Hugh Scott, Senator Barry Goldwater, and House Minority Leader John Jacob Rhodes met with Nixon soon after. Rhodes told Nixon that he faced certain impeachment in the House. Scott and Goldwater told the president that he had, at most, only 15 votes in his favor in the Senate— far fewer than the 34 he needed to avoid removal from office.[221]
Resignation










Richard Nixon resigns







Resignation speech of President Richard Nixon, delivered August 8, 1974.






Problems playing this file? See media help.


In light of his loss of political support and the near-certainty that he would be impeached and removed, Nixon resigned the presidency on August 9, 1974, after addressing the nation on television the previous evening.[213] Nixon chose to resign after realizing public opinion was not in his favor to remain in office.[222] The resignation speech was delivered from the Oval Office and was carried live on radio and television. Nixon stated that he was resigning for the good of the country and asked the nation to support the new president, Gerald Ford. Nixon went on to review the accomplishments of his presidency, especially in foreign policy.[223] He defended his record as president, quoting from Theodore Roosevelt's 1910 speech Citizenship in a Republic:

Sometimes I have succeeded and sometimes I have failed, but always I have taken heart from what Theodore Roosevelt once said about the man in the arena, "whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs and comes up short again and again because there is not effort without error and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do the deed, who knows the great enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievements and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly".[224]

Nixon's speech received generally favorable initial responses from network commentators, with only Roger Mudd of CBS stating that Nixon had not admitted wrongdoing.[225] It was termed "a masterpiece" by Conrad Black, one of his biographers. Black opined that "What was intended to be an unprecedented humiliation for any American president, Nixon converted into a virtual parliamentary acknowledgement of almost blameless insufficiency of legislative support to continue. He left while devoting half his address to a recitation of his accomplishments in office."[226]

Later years and death




President Ronald Reagan meets with his three predecessors, Ford, Carter and Nixon at the White House, October 1981; the three former presidents represented the United States at the funeral of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat.


Pardon and illness
Further information: Pardon of Richard Nixon




President Ford announces his decision to pardon Nixon, September 8, 1974, in the Oval Office.


Following his resignation, the Nixons flew to their home La Casa Pacifica in San Clemente, California.[227] According to his biographer, Aitken, after his resignation, "Nixon was a soul in torment".[228] Congress had funded Nixon's transition costs, including some salary expenses, though reducing the appropriation from $850,000 to $200,000. With some of his staff still with him, Nixon was at his desk by 7 a.m.—with little to do.[228] His former press secretary, Ron Ziegler, sat with him alone for hours each day.[229]
Nixon's resignation had not put an end to the desire among many to see him punished. The Ford White House considered a pardon of Nixon, though it would be unpopular in the country. Nixon, contacted by Ford emissaries, was initially reluctant to accept the pardon, but then agreed to do so. Ford insisted on a statement of contrition, but Nixon felt he had not committed any crimes and should not have to issue such a document. Ford eventually agreed, and on September 8, 1974, he granted Nixon a "full, free, and absolute pardon", which ended any possibility of an indictment. Nixon then released a statement:

I was wrong in not acting more decisively and more forthrightly in dealing with Watergate, particularly when it reached the stage of judicial proceedings and grew from a political scandal into a national tragedy. No words can describe the depth of my regret and pain at the anguish my mistakes over Watergate have caused the nation and the presidency, a nation I so deeply love, and an institution I so greatly respect.[230][231]

In October 1974, Nixon fell ill with phlebitis, the inflammation of the walls of a vein. Told by his doctors that he could either be operated on or die, a reluctant Nixon chose surgery, and President Ford visited him in the hospital. Nixon was under subpoena for the trial of three of his former aides—Dean, Haldeman, and John Ehrlichman—and The Washington Post, disbelieving his illness, printed a cartoon showing Nixon with a cast on the "wrong foot". Judge John Sirica excused Nixon's presence despite the defendants' objections.[232] Congress instructed Ford to retain Nixon's presidential papers—beginning a three-decade legal battle over the documents that was eventually won by the former president and his estate.[233] Nixon was in the hospital when the 1974 midterm elections were held, and Watergate and the pardon were contributing factors to the Republican loss of 43 seats in the House and three in the Senate.[234]
Return to public life
In December 1974, Nixon began planning his comeback despite the considerable ill-will against him in the country. He wrote in his diary, referring to himself and Pat,

So be it. We will see it through. We've had tough times before and we can take the tougher ones that we will have to go through now. That is perhaps what we were made for—to be able to take punishment beyond what anyone in this office has had before particularly after leaving office. This is a test of character and we must not fail the test.[235]





Nixon (right) joins Gerald Ford (center) and President Jimmy Carter (left) at the White House for the funeral of former Vice President Hubert Humphrey, 1978.


By early 1975, Nixon's health was improving. He maintained an office in a Coast Guard station 300 yards from his home, at first taking a golf cart and later walking the route each day; he mainly worked on his memoirs.[236] He had hoped to wait before writing his memoirs; the fact that his assets were being eaten away by expenses and lawyer fees compelled him to begin work quickly.[237] He was handicapped in this work by the end of his transition allowance in February, which compelled him to part with many of his staff, including Ziegler.[238] In August of that year, he met with British talk-show host and producer David Frost, who paid him $600,000 (equivalent to $2,730,000 in 2017) for a series of sit-down interviews, filmed and aired in 1977.[239] They began on the topic of foreign policy, recounting the leaders he had known, but the most remembered section of the interviews was that on Watergate. Nixon admitted that he had "let down the country" and that "I brought myself down. I gave them a sword and they stuck it in. And they twisted it with relish. And, I guess, if I'd been in their position, I'd have done the same thing."[240] The interviews garnered 45–50 million viewers—becoming the most-watched program of their kind in television history.[241]
The interviews helped improve Nixon's financial position—at one point in early 1975 he had only $500 in the bank—as did the sale of his Key Biscayne property to a trust set up by wealthy Nixon friends such as Bebe Rebozo.[242] In February 1976, Nixon visited China at the personal invitation of Mao. Nixon had wanted to return to China, but chose to wait until after Ford's own visit in 1975.[243] Nixon remained neutral in the close 1976 primary battle between Ford and Reagan. Ford won, but was defeated by Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter in the general election. The Carter administration had little use for Nixon and blocked his planned trip to Australia, causing the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser to withhold its official invitation.[244]
In 1976, Nixon was disbarred by the New York State Bar Association for obstruction of justice in the Watergate affair. Nixon chose not to present any defense.[245] In early 1978, Nixon went to the United Kingdom. He was shunned by American diplomats and by most ministers of the James Callaghan government. He was welcomed, however, by the Leader of the Opposition, Margaret Thatcher, as well as by former prime ministers Lord Home and Sir Harold Wilson. Two other former prime ministers, Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath declined to meet him. Nixon addressed the Oxford Union regarding Watergate:

Some people say I didn't handle it properly and they're right. I screwed it up. Mea culpa. But let's get on to my achievements. You'll be here in the year 2000 and we'll see how I'm regarded then.[246]

Author and elder statesman




Nixon speaks with Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping and U.S. President Jimmy Carter at the White House, 1979.


In 1978, Nixon published his memoirs, RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon, the first of ten books he was to author in his retirement.[227] The book was a bestseller and attracted a generally positive critical response.[247] Nixon visited the White House in 1979, invited by Carter for the state dinner for Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. Carter had not wanted to invite Nixon, but Deng had stated he would visit Nixon in California if the former president was not invited. Nixon had a private meeting with Deng and visited Beijing again in mid-1979.[248]
On August 10, 1979, the Nixons purchased a New York City townhouse at 817 Fifth Avenue[249] after being rejected by two Manhattan co-ops.[250] When the former Shah of Iran died in Egypt in July 1980, Nixon defied the State Department, which intended to send no U.S. representative, by attending the funeral. Though Nixon had no official credentials, as a former president he was seen as the American presence at its former ally's funeral.[251] Nixon supported Ronald Reagan for president in 1980, making television appearances portraying himself as, in biographer Stephen Ambrose's words, "the senior statesman above the fray".[252] He wrote guest articles for many publications both during the campaign and after Reagan's victory.[253] After eighteen months in the New York City townhouse, Nixon and his wife moved in 1981 to Saddle River, New Jersey.[227]




Nixon in 1992


Throughout the 1980s, Nixon maintained an ambitious schedule of speaking engagements and writing,[227] traveled, and met with many foreign leaders, especially those of Third World countries. He joined former Presidents Ford and Carter as representatives of the United States at the funeral of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat.[227] On a trip to the Middle East, Nixon made his views known regarding Saudi Arabia and Libya, which attracted significant U.S. media attention; The Washington Post ran stories on Nixon's "rehabilitation".[254] Nixon visited the Soviet Union in 1986 and on his return sent President Reagan a lengthy memorandum containing foreign policy suggestions and his personal impressions of Mikhail Gorbachev.[227] Following this trip, Nixon was ranked in a Gallup poll as one of the ten most admired men in the world.[255]




Nixon visits President Bill Clinton in the White House family quarters, March 1993.


In 1986, Nixon addressed a convention of newspaper publishers, impressing his audience with his tour d'horizon of the world.[256] At the time, political pundit Elizabeth Drew wrote, "Even when he was wrong, Nixon still showed that he knew a great deal and had a capacious memory, as well as the capacity to speak with apparent authority, enough to impress people who had little regard for him in earlier times."[256] Newsweek ran a story on "Nixon's comeback" with the headline "He's back".[257]
On July 19, 1990, the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, California opened as a private institution with the Nixons in attendance. They were joined by a large crowd of people, including Presidents Ford, Reagan, and George H. W. Bush, as well as their wives, Betty, Nancy, and Barbara.[258] In January 1991, the former president founded the Nixon Center (today the Center for the National Interest), a Washington policy think tank and conference center.[259]
Pat Nixon died on June 22, 1993, of emphysema and lung cancer. Her funeral services were held on the grounds of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace. Former President Nixon was distraught throughout the interment and delivered a tribute to her inside the library building.[260]

Death and funeral
Main article: Death and funeral of Richard Nixon
Nixon suffered a severe stroke on April 18, 1994, while preparing to eat dinner in his Park Ridge, New Jersey home.[261] A blood clot resulting from the atrial fibrillation he had suffered for many years had formed in his upper heart, broken off, and traveled to his brain.[262] He was taken to New York Hospital–Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, initially alert but unable to speak or to move his right arm or leg.[261] Damage to the brain caused swelling (cerebral edema), and Nixon slipped into a deep coma. He died at 9:08 p.m. on April 22, 1994, with his daughters at his bedside. He was 81 years old.[261]




Five U.S. presidents (including then-incumbent president Bill Clinton) and their wives attend the funeral of Richard Nixon, April 27, 1994.


Nixon's funeral took place on April 27, 1994, in Yorba Linda, California. Eulogists at the Nixon Library ceremony included President Bill Clinton, former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, California Governor Pete Wilson, and the Reverend Billy Graham. Also in attendance were former Presidents Ford, Carter, Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and their wives.[263]
Richard Nixon was buried beside his wife Pat on the grounds of the Nixon Library. He was survived by his two daughters, Tricia and Julie, and four grandchildren.[261] In keeping with his wishes, his funeral was not a full state funeral, though his body did lie in repose in the Nixon Library lobby from April 26 to the morning of the funeral service.[264] Mourners waited in line for up to eight hours in chilly, wet weather to pay their respects.[265] At its peak, the line to pass by Nixon's casket was three miles long with an estimated 42,000 people waiting.[266]
John F. Stacks of Time magazine said of Nixon shortly after his death,

An outsize energy and determination drove him on to recover and rebuild after every self-created disaster that he faced. To reclaim a respected place in American public life after his resignation, he kept traveling and thinking and talking to the world's leaders ... and by the time Bill Clinton came to the White House [in 1993], Nixon had virtually cemented his role as an elder statesman. Clinton, whose wife served on the staff of the committee that voted to impeach Nixon, met openly with him and regularly sought his advice.[267]

Tom Wicker of The New York Times noted that Nixon had been equalled only by Franklin Roosevelt in being five times nominated on a major party ticket and, quoting Nixon's 1962 farewell speech, wrote,

Richard Nixon's jowly, beard-shadowed face, the ski-jump nose and the widow's peak, the arms upstretched in the V-sign, had been so often pictured and caricatured, his presence had become such a familiar one in the land, he had been so often in the heat of controversy, that it was hard to realize the nation really would not 'have Nixon to kick around anymore'.[268]

Ambrose said of the reaction to Nixon's death, "To everyone's amazement, except his, he's our beloved elder statesman."[269]
Upon Nixon's death, almost all of the news coverage mentioned Watergate, but for the most part, the coverage was favorable to the former president. The Dallas Morning News stated, "History ultimately should show that despite his flaws, he was one of our most farsighted chief executives."[270] This offended some; columnist Russell Baker complained of "a group conspiracy to grant him absolution".[271] Cartoonist Jeff Koterba of the Omaha World-Herald depicted History before a blank canvas, his subject Nixon, as America looks on eagerly. The artist urges his audience to sit down; the work will take some time to complete, as "this portrait is a little more complicated than most".[272]
Hunter S. Thompson wrote a scathing piece denouncing Nixon for Rolling Stone, entitled "He Was a Crook" (which also appeared a month later in The Atlantic).[273] In his article, Thompson described Nixon as "a political monster straight out of Grendel and a very dangerous enemy."[273]
Legacy
Historian and political scientist James MacGregor Burns observed of Nixon, "How can one evaluate such an idiosyncratic president, so brilliant and so morally lacking?"[274] Nixon's biographers disagree on how he will be perceived by history. According to Ambrose, "Nixon wanted to be judged by what he accomplished. What he will be remembered for is the nightmare he put the country through in his second term and for his resignation."[275] Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional career, suggests that "he was remarkable among his congressional peers, a success story in a troubled era, one who steered a sensible anti-Communist course against the excess of McCarthy".[276] Aitken feels that "Nixon, both as a man and as a statesman, has been excessively maligned for his faults and inadequately recognised for his virtues. Yet even in a spirit of historical revisionism, no simple verdict is possible."[277]




The graves of President Richard Nixon (right) and First Lady Pat Nixon


Nixon's Southern Strategy is credited by some historians as causing the South to become a Republican stronghold, though others deem economic factors more important to the change.[200] Throughout his career, he was instrumental in moving his party away from the control of isolationists, and as a congressman was a persuasive advocate of containing Soviet communism.[278] According to his biographer, Herbert Parmet, "Nixon's role was to steer the Republican party along a middle course, somewhere between the competitive impulses of the Rockefellers, the Goldwaters, and the Reagans."[279]
Nixon is given credit for his stance on domestic affairs, which resulted in the passage and enforcement of environmental and regulatory legislation. Historian Paul Charles Milazzo in his 2011 paper on Nixon and the environment, points to Nixon's creation of the EPA and his enforcement of legislation such as the 1973 Endangered Species Act, stating that "though unsought and unacknowledged, Richard Nixon's environmental legacy is secure".[280]
Nixon saw his policies regarding Vietnam, China, and the Soviets as key to his place in history.[164] George McGovern, Nixon's onetime opponent, commented in 1983, "President Nixon probably had a more practical approach to the two superpowers, China and the Soviet Union, than any other president since World War II ... With the exception of his inexcusable continuation of the war in Vietnam, Nixon really will get high marks in history."[281] Political scientist Jussi Hanhimäki disagrees, saying Nixon's diplomacy was merely a continuation of the Cold War policy of containment, using diplomatic rather than military means.[164] Historian Christopher Andrew concludes that "Nixon was a great statesman on the world stage as well as a shabby practitioner of electoral politics in the domestic arena. While the criminal farce of Watergate was in the making, Nixon's inspirational statesmanship was establishing new working relationships with both Communist China and the Soviet Union."[282]
Historian Keith W. Olson has written that Nixon left a negative legacy: fundamental mistrust of government with its roots in Vietnam and Watergate.[283] During the impeachment of Bill Clinton in 1998, both sides tried to use Nixon and Watergate to their advantage: Republicans suggested that Clinton's misconduct had been comparable to Nixon's, while Democrats contended that Nixon's actions had been far more serious than those of the incumbent.[284] Another legacy, for a time, was a decrease in the power of the presidency as Congress passed restrictive legislation in the wake of Watergate. Olson suggests that grants of power to George W. Bush in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks restored the president's power.[283]
Personality and public image




Nixon and Elvis Presley in December 1970: "The President & The King"


Nixon's career was frequently dogged by his persona and the public's perception of it. Editorial cartoonists and comedians often exaggerated his appearance and mannerisms, to the point where the line between the human and the caricature became increasingly blurred. He was often portrayed with unshaven jowls, slumped shoulders, and a furrowed, sweaty brow.[285]
Nixon had a complex personality, both very secretive and awkward, yet strikingly reflective about himself. He was inclined to distance himself from people and was formal in all aspects, wearing a coat and tie even when home alone.[286] Nixon biographer Conrad Black described him as being "driven" though also "uneasy with himself in some ways".[287] According to Black, Nixon

thought that he was doomed to be traduced, double-crossed, unjustly harassed, misunderstood, underappreciated, and subjected to the trials of Job, but that by the application of his mighty will, tenacity, and diligence, he would ultimately prevail.[288]

Biographer Elizabeth Drew summarized Nixon as a "smart, talented man, but most peculiar and haunted of presidents".[289] In his account of the Nixon presidency, author Richard Reeves described Nixon as "a strange man of uncomfortable shyness, who functioned best alone with his thoughts".[290] Nixon's presidency was doomed by his personality, Reeves argues:

He assumed the worst in people and he brought out the worst in them ... He clung to the idea of being 'tough'. He thought that was what had brought him to the edge of greatness. But that was what betrayed him. He could not open himself to other men and he could not open himself to greatness.[291]





Nixon with Bebe Rebozo (left) and FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover. The three men relax before dinner, Key Biscayne, Florida, December 1971.


Nixon believed that putting distance between himself and other people was necessary for him as he advanced in his political career and became president. Even Bebe Rebozo, by some accounts his closest friend, did not call him by his first name. Nixon stated of this,

Even with close friends, I don't believe in letting your hair down, confiding this and that and the other thing—saying, 'Gee, I couldn't sleep' ... I believe you should keep your troubles to yourself. That's just the way I am. Some people are different. Some people think it's good therapy to sit with a close friend and, you know, just spill your guts ... [and] reveal their inner psyche—whether they were breast-fed or bottle-fed. Not me. No way.[292]

When told that most Americans, even at the end of his career, did not feel they knew him, Nixon replied, "Yeah, it's true. And it's not necessary for them to know."[292]

See also

Murray Chotiner, Nixon's campaign manager and aide

Notes
Explanatory notes



^ Black, pp. 583–585. In 1972, Nixon did more than double his percentage of the Jewish vote, from 17 percent to 35 percent. Merkley, p. 68.
^ a b voluntary for employees
^ see especially page 2 (after introductory material) in which a bar graph displays NHLBI funding for sickle cell research from FY 1972 through FY 2001, totaling $923 million for these thirty years, starting at $10 million for 1972, then about $15 million a year through 1976, about $20 million for 1977, etc



Citations


^ Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum http://nixon.archives.gov/thelife/nixonbio.pdf
^ NPS, Nixon Birthplace.
^ Ferris, p. 209.
^ Reitwiesner, William Addams The Ancestors of Senator John Forbes Kerry (b. 1943) http://www.wargs.com/political/kerry.html Accessed August 31, 2016
^ Nixon Library, Childhood.
^ Aitken, p. 11.
^ "Nixon Genealogy – President Richard Nixon Family History". archives.com. 
^ Aitken, p. 12.
^ Aitken, p. 21.
^ Ambrose 1987, p. 41.
^ Aitken, p. 27.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 56–57.
^ Black, p. 16.
^ Morris, p. 89.
^ Black, pp. 17–19.
^ Morris, p. 91.
^ Morris, p. 92.
^ a b Aitken, p. 28.
^ Black, pp. 20–23.
^ Black, pp. 23–24.
^ Gellman, p. 15.
^ Black, pp. 24–25.
^ Ambrose 1987, p. 61.
^ Aitken, pp. 58–63.
^ a b c d e Nixon Library, Student & Sailor.
^ a b Ambrose 1987, pp. 33–34.
^ Aitken, p. 67.
^ Parmet, p. 81.
^ Nixon Library, Family Collection Guide.
^ Aitken, p. 76.
^ Aitken, pp. 79–82.
^ Morris, p. 193.
^ Black, p. 44.
^ Black, p. 43.
^ Nixon 1978, p. 23.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 93, 99.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 100–101.
^ Nixon Library, Nixon Family.
^ Morris, pp. 124–126.
^ Kornitzer, pp. 143–144.
^ a b c d e f g h "Naval Profiles: Richard Milhous Nixon". Naval History and Heritage Command. U.S. Navy. February 18, 2015. Retrieved March 6, 2017. From August through December of 1944, Nixon was assigned to Fleet Air Wing EIGHT. From December through March 1945, he served at the Bureau of Aeronautics, Navy Department, Washington, D.C. In March, his next assignment was as the Bureau of Aeronautics Contracting Officer for Terminations in the Office of the Bureau of Aeronautics General Representative, Eastern District, headquartered in New York City. In that capacity he had temporary additional duty at various places, including Washington D.C., Philadelphia, Buffalo, New York City, and East Hartford, Connecticut. When he was released from active duty on 10 March 1946. He was promoted to Commander in the Naval Reserve on 1 June 1953. While on active duty besides the Letter of Commendation, Nixon earned the American Campaign Medal, the Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal, and the World War II Victory Medal. He is entitled to two engagement stars on the Asiatic- Pacific Campaign Medal for supporting air action in the Treasury- Bougainville operations from 27 October to 15 December 1943 and for consolidation of the northern Solomons from 15 December 1943 to 22 July 1944. Nixon transferred to the Retired Reserve of the Naval Reserve on 1 June 1966. 
^ Aitken, pp. 96–97.
^ Naval Historical Center, Commander Nixon.
^ Black, pp. 58–60.
^ a b Black, p. 62.
^ Aitken, p. 112.
^ Black, pp. 62–63.
^ Parmet, pp. 91–96.
^ Gellman, pp. 27–28.
^ Parmet, pp. 111–113.
^ Gellman, p. 82.
^ Gellman, pp. 105–107, 125–126.
^ Morris, p. 365.
^ Cronin, John Francis (October 29, 1945). "The Problem of American Communism in 1945: Facts and Recommendations" (PDF). "A Confidential Study for Private Circulation". Retrieved July 26, 2017. 
^ Ambrose, Stephen E. (March 18, 2014). Nixon Volume I: The Education of a Politician 1913-1962. Simon and Schuster. pp. 144–147. Retrieved July 26, 2017. 
^ Nixon, Richard (1978). RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon. New York: Grosset & Dunlap. ISBN 978-0-448-14374-3. 
^ "Timeline". Nixon Library. Retrieved April 2, 2017. 
^ Black, pp. 129–135.
^ Gellman, pp. 239–241.
^ Morris, p. 381.
^ Nixon Library, Congressman.
^ Gellman, p. 282.
^ Morris, p. 535.
^ Gellman, pp. 296–297.
^ Gellman, p. 304.
^ Gellman, p. 310.
^ Morris, p. 581.
^ Gellman, p. 335.
^ Gellman, p. 303.
^ a b Nixon Library, Senator.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 211, 311–312.
^ a b Black, p. 178.
^ Gellman, pp. 440–441.
^ Aitken, pp. 205–206.
^ a b Aitken, pp. 222–223.
^ John W. Malsberger, "Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and the Fund Crisis of 1952," Historian, 73 (Fall 2011), pp 526–47.
^ Kornitzer, pp. 191.
^ a b c Aitken, pp. 210–217.
^ Thompson, p. 291.
^ Aitken, p. 218.
^ Morris, p. 846.
^ John W. Malsberger, The General and the Politician: Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and American Politics (2014)
^ Aitken, pp. 225–227.
^ Ambrose 1987, p. 342.
^ Gellman, Irwin. "The Richard Nixon vice presidency: Research without the Nixon manuscripts" in Small, pp. 102–120.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 357–358.
^ Aitken, pp. 256–258.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 375–376.
^ Aitken, pp. 237–241.
^ Parmet, p. 294.
^ Black, pp. 349–352.
^ Black, p. 355.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 465–469.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 469–479.
^ Ambrose 1987, p. 463.
^ Ambrose 1987, pp. 521–525.
^ UPI 1960 in Review.
^ a b c d e f g h i Nixon Library, Vice President.
^ Museum of Broadcast Communications, "Kennedy-Nixon Debates".
^ Steel & 2003-05-25.
^ Foner, p. 843.
^ Carlson & 2000-11-17.
^ Black, p. 431.
^ Black, pp. 432–433.
^ Aitken, pp. 304–305.
^ a b Ambrose 1987, p. 673.
^ Museum of Broadcast Communications, "Smith, Howard K.".
^ Black, p. 446.
^ Aitken, pp. 297, 321.
^ Aitken, pp. 321–322.
^ Aitken, pp. 323–326.
^ a b Parmet, p. 502.
^ Morris, pp. 410–411.
^ Parmet, pp. 503–508.
^ Parmet, p. 509.
^ a b c d e f g Nixon Library, President.
^ Morrow & 1996-09-30.
^ a b Black, pp. 513–514.
^ Black, p. 550.
^ a b Schulzinger, p. 413.
^ a b "Misunderstanding a Monkey Wrench". Richard Nixon Foundation. Retrieved November 12, 2017. 
^ Nixon Tried to Spoil Johnson’s Vietnam Peace Talks in ’68, Notes Show, New York Times, Politics Section, Peter Baker, January 2, 2017. See also H.R. Haldeman's Notes from Oct. 22, 1968, NY Times, December 31, 2016, which reprints four pages of Haldeman's notes.
^ Black, p. 558.
^ Evans & Novak, pp. 33–34.
^ UPI 1968 in Review.
^ Black, pp. 567–68.
^ Frick, p. 189.
^ UPI 1969 in Review.
^ a b Miller Center.
^ Ambrose 1989, p. 453.
^ Goh, Evelyn. "The China card" in Small, pp. 425–443.
^ Black, p. 778.
^ a b c d e PBS, The Nixon Visit.
^ a b c Black, pp. 780–782.
^ Ambrose 1989, p. 516.
^ Dallek, p. 300.
^ "Vietnam War Deaths and Casualties By Month". The American War Library. Retrieved June 22, 2012. 
^ Drew, p. 65.
^ Black, p. 569.
^ Black, p. 591.
^ a b Owen, Taylor; Kiernan, Ben (October 2006). "Bombs Over Cambodia" (PDF). The Walrus: 32–36.  Kiernan and Owen later revised their estimate of 2.7 million tons of U.S. bombs dropped on Cambodia down to the previously accepted figure of roughly 500,000 tons: See Kiernan, Ben; Owen, Taylor (April 26, 2015). "Making More Enemies than We Kill? Calculating U.S. Bomb Tonnages Dropped on Laos and Cambodia, and Weighing Their Implications". The Asia-Pacific Journal. Retrieved November 15, 2016. 
^ Clymer, Kenton (2013). The United States and Cambodia, 1969-2000: A Troubled Relationship. Routledge. pp. 14–16. ISBN 9781134341566. 
^ Ambrose 1989, pp. 281–283.
^ Address to the Nation on Vietnam May 14, 1969
^ a b Time & 1971-04-05.
^ AP/St. Peterburg Independent.
^ Safire, pp. 205–209
^ UPI/Beaver County Times & 1970-05-09.
^ Black, pp. 675–676.
^ Mosyakov, Dmitry (2004). "The Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese Communists: A History of Their Relations as Told in the Soviet Archives". In Cook, Susan E. Genocide in Cambodia and Rwanda. Yale Genocide Studies Program Monograph Series. p. 54ff. Archived from the original on March 9, 2013. In April–May 1970, many North Vietnamese forces entered Cambodia in response to the call for help addressed to Vietnam not by Pol Pot, but by his deputy Nuon Chea. Nguyen Co Thach recalls: 'Nuon Chea has asked for help and we have liberated five provinces of Cambodia in ten days.' 
^ Ambrose 1989, pp. 446–448.
^ Evans.
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 53–55.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 473.
^ Ambrose 1989, pp. 379–383.
^ a b c Kornbluh, Peter (2003). The Pinochet File: A Declassified Dossier on Atrocity and Accountability. New York: The New Press. ISBN 1-56584-936-1. 
^ Black, p. 921.
^ a b c BBC & 1972-05-22.
^ Gaddis, pp. 294, 299.
^ Guan, pp. 61, 69, 77–79.
^ Zhai, p. 136.
^ Nixon 1985, pp. 105–106.
^ a b c d Black, p. 963.
^ a b c Hanhimäki, Jussi M. "Foreign Policy Overview" in Small, pp. 345–361.
^ "DEFCON DEFense CONdition". fas.org. 
^ Nixon 1978, p. 938-940.
^ Black, pp. 923–928.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 311.
^ Tyler, Patrick (2010), p. 161
^ Black, pp. 951–52, 959.
^ a b Ambrose 1989, pp. 225–226.
^ a b Ambrose 1989, pp. 431–432.
^ a b c Bowles, Nigel. "Economic Policy" in Small, pp. 235–251.
^ a b Aitken, pp. 399–400.
^ a b c d Hetzel, p. 92.
^ Aitken, p. 395.
^ USPS, Periodicals postage.
^ Aitken, pp. 397–398.
^ Aitken, p. 396.
^ NHI: CQ Almanac 1971.
^ a b HMO: CQ Almanac 1973.
^ NHI: CQ Almanac 1974.
^ Ambrose 1989, p. 418.
^ Office of the Federal Register, pp. 179–182.
^ The American Presidency Project.
^ National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, p. 2.
^ Wailoo, pp. 165, 170.
^ Boger, p. 6.
^ Sabia.
^ Parmet, pp. 595–597, 603.
^ Delaney & 1970-07-20.
^ Frum, p. 246.
^ PBS, Nixon, Domestic Politics.
^ Parmet, p. 563.
^ Handlin.
^ Hepplewhite, pp. 204–205, ch. 5.
^ "appen-j.htm". history.nasa.gov. 
^ "MIT lecture notes in "Aircraft Systems Engineering," fall 2005, on early Space Shuttle policy" (PDF). Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Fall 2005. p. 7. Retrieved August 22, 2014. 
^ Ezell, p. 192, ch. 6–11.
^ a b Mason, Robert "Political realignment" in Small, pp. 252–269.
^ a b Black, p. 766.
^ Black, p. 795.
^ Black, p. 617.
^ Black, p. 816.
^ Black, p. 834.
^ White, p. 123.
^ Time & 1972-08-14.
^ Time & 1970-11-20.
^ Parmet, p. 629.
^ The Washington Post, The Post Investigates.
^ a b c The Washington Post, The Government Acts.
^ Aitken, pp. 511–512.
^ a b c The Washington Post, Nixon Resigns.
^ Ambrose 1989, pp. 231–232, 239.
^ Beckmann, Matthew N. (April 1, 2017). "Did Nixon quit before he resigned?". Research & Politics. 4 (2): 2053168017704800. doi:10.1177/2053168017704800. ISSN 2053-1680. 
^ Frum, p. 26.
^ Kilpatrick & 1973-11-18.
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 394–395.
^ Samson.
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 414–416.
^ Black, p. 978.
^ Schmidt, Steffen W. (2013), American Government and Politics Today, 2013-2014 Edition, Wadsworth Publishing, p. 181, ISBN 978-1133602132, In 1974, President Richard Nixon resigned in the wake of a scandal when it was obvious that public opinion no longer supported him. 
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 435–436.
^ PBS, Resignation Speech.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 437.
^ Black, p. 983.
^ a b c d e f Nixon Library, Post Presidency.
^ a b Aitken, p. 529.
^ Aitken, pp. 529–530.
^ Aitken, p. 532.
^ Black, p. 990.
^ Aitken, pp. 533–534.
^ Black, pp. 994, 999.
^ Black, p. 998.
^ Aitken, p. 535.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 481.
^ Aitken, pp. 537, 539.
^ Black, p. 1000.
^ Black, p. 1004.
^ Drew, p. 138.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 512.
^ Aitken, pp. 539–540.
^ Black, p. 1005.
^ Aitken, p. 543.
^ "Nixon disbarred in New York in 1st ruling of Watergate guilt", Toledo Blade, July 9, 1976 p.1
^ Aitken, pp. 546–547.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 525.
^ Ambrose 1991, pp. 524–525.
^ "Nixons Buy Fifth Avenue Condo in N.Y". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. August 11, 1979. 
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 528.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 533.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 534.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 540.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 545.
^ Drew, p. 142.
^ a b Drew, p. 144.
^ Aitken, pp. 561–562.
^ Aitken, pp. 565–568.
^ Black, pp. 1045–1046.
^ Black, pp. 1049–1050.
^ a b c d Weil & Randolph & 1994-04-23.
^ Lawrence K. Altman (April 24, 1994). "THE 37TH PRESIDENT: THE LAST DAYS; Disabled, Yet Retaining Control Over His Care". The New York Times. Retrieved February 12, 2016. 
^ Black, pp. 1051–1053.
^ BBC & 2004-06-11.
^ The Deseret News & 1994-04-27.
^ Frick, p. 206.
^ Stacks & 1994-05-02.
^ Wicker & 1994-04-24.
^ Sawhill & 2011-02.
^ Frick, pp. 205–206.
^ Frick, pp. 204–205.
^ Frick, p. 210.
^ a b Thompson, Hunter S. (July 1994). "He Was a Crook". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 4, 2017. 
^ Skidmore, p. 495.
^ Ambrose 1991, p. 592.
^ Gellman, p. 460.
^ Aitken, p. 577.
^ Black, p. 1053.
^ Parmet, p. viii.
^ Milazzo, Paul Charles. "Nixon and the Environment" in Small, pp. 270–291.
^ Greider & 1983-10-10.
^ Andrew 1995, p. 384.
^ a b Olson, Keith W. "Watergate" in Small, pp. 481–496.
^ Frick, pp. 211–214.
^ Reeves, pp. 281–283.
^ Drew, p. 150.
^ Black, p. 574.
^ Black, p. 700.
^ Drew, p. 151.
^ Reeves, p. 12.
^ Reeves, p. 13.
^ a b Greene.


References
Bibliography


Aitken, Jonathan (1996). Nixon: A Life. Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing. ISBN 978-0-89526-720-7. 
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1987). Nixon: The Education of a Politician 1913–1962. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-52836-2. 
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1989). Nixon: The Triumph of a Politician 1962–1972. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-72506-8. 
Ambrose, Stephen E. (1991). Nixon: Ruin and Recovery 1973–1990. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-69188-2. 
Andrew, Christopher (1995). For the President's Eyes Only: Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-06-092178-1. 
Black, Conrad (2007). Richard M. Nixon: A Life in Full. New York: PublicAffairs Books. ISBN 978-1-58648-519-1. 
Blythe, Will (2006). To Hate Like This is to be Happy Forever. New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-074023-8. 
Boger, John Charles (2005). School Resegregation: Must the South Turn Back?. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-5613-0. 
Dallek, Robert (2007). Nixon and Kissinger: Partners in Power. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-072230-2. 
Drew, Elizabeth (2007). Richard M. Nixon. The American Presidents Series. New York: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-6963-1. 
Evans, Rowland; Novak, Robert (1971). Nixon in the White House: The Frustration of Power. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-394-46273-8. 
Ezell, Edward Clinton; Ezell, Linda Neuman (1978). The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Washington D.C.: NASA History Office. 
Ferris, Gary W. (1999). Presidential Places: A Guide to the Historic Sites of the U.S. Presidents. Winston-Salem, N.C.: John F. Blair. ISBN 978-0-89587-176-3. 
Foner, Eric (2006). Give Me Liberty!: An American History. 2. New York: W. W. Norton & Co. ISBN 978-0-393-92784-9. 
Frick, Daniel (2008). Reinventing Richard Nixon. Lawrence, Kans.: University of Kansas Press. ISBN 978-0-7006-1599-5. 
Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04195-4. 
Gaddis, John Lewis (1982). Strategies of Containment: A Critical Appraisal of Postwar American National Security Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-503097-6. 
Gellman, Irwin (1999). The Contender. New York: The Free Press. ISBN 978-1-4165-7255-8. 
Guan, Ang Cheng (2003). Ending the Vietnam War: The Vietnamese Communists' Perspective. Florence, Ky.: RoutledgeCurzon. ISBN 978-0-415-40619-2. 
Hepplewhite, T.A. (1999). The Space Shuttle Decision: NASA's Search for a Reusable Space Vehicle. Washington D.C.: NASA History Office. 
Hetzel, Robert L. (2008). The Monetary Policy of the Federal Reserve. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88132-6. 
Ingle, H. Larry (2015). Nixon's First Cover-up: The Religious Life of a Quaker President. Columbia, Missouri: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 978-0-8262-2042-4. 
Kornitzer, Bela (1960). The Real Nixon: An Intimate Biography. New York: Rand McNally & Company. 
Langguth, A.J. (2000). Our Vietnam: The War 1954–1975. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-1244-1. 
Malsberger, John W. The General and the Politician: Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, and American Politics (2014)
Merkley, Paul Charles (2004). American Presidents, Religion, and Israel: the Heirs of Cyrus. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-98340-6. 
Morris, Roger (1990). Richard Milhous Nixon: The Rise of an American Politician. New York: Henry Holt & Co. ISBN 978-0-8050-1834-9. 
Nixon, Richard (1978). RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon. New York: Grosset & Dunlap. ISBN 978-0-448-14374-3. 
Nixon, Richard (1985). No More Vietnams. Westminster, Md.: Arbor House Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-87795-668-6. 
Parmet, Herbert S. (1990). Richard Nixon and His America. Boston: Little, Brown & Co. ISBN 978-0-316-69232-8. 
Perlstein, Richard (2008). Nixonland: The Rise of a President and the Fracturing of America. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-7432-4302-5. 
Reeves, Richard (2001). President Nixon: Alone in the White House. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-80231-2. 
Safire, William (2005) [1975]. Before The Fall: An Insider View of the Pre-Watergate White House, with a 2005 Preface by the Author. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4128-0466-0.  Originally published: Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1975 (new material 2005)
Small, Melvin, ed. (2011). A Companion to Richard M. Nixon. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4443-3017-5. ; Emphasis on historiography
Schulzinger, Robert D. (2003). A Companion to American Foreign Relations. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-4986-0. 
Thompson, John B. (2000). Political Scandal: Power and Visibility in the Media Age. Cambridge: Polity Press. ISBN 978-0-7456-2550-8. 
Tyler, Patrick (2010). A World of Trouble: The White House and the Middle East – from the Cold War to the War on Terror. New York: Macmillan. 
White, Theodore H. (1973). The Making of the President 1972. New York: Antheneum. ISBN 978-0-689-10553-1. 
Zhai, Qiang (2000). China and the Vietnam Wars, 1950–1975. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-4842-5. 

Nixon Library

"Childhood". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
"A Student & Sailor". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
"The Nixon Family". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
"The Congressman". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"The Senator". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"The Vice President". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"The President". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"Post Presidency". The Life. Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved March 5, 2012. 
Lee, Meghan. "Guide to the Nixon Family Collection (1909–1967)". Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. 

Other sources

"1972: President Nixon arrives in Moscow". BBC. June 11, 2004. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"Reagan funeral: Schedule of events". BBC. June 11, 2004. Retrieved May 11, 2012. 
Delaney, Paul (July 20, 1970). "Nixon Plan for Negro Construction Jobs Is Lagging". The New York Times. p. 1. 
"Mourners pay last respects to Nixon". The Deseret News. April 27, 1994. p. 1. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
Steel, Ronald (May 25, 2003). "The World: New Chapter, Old Debate; Would Kennedy Have Quit Vietnam?". The New York Times. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
Wicker, Tom (April 24, 1994). "From afar: An indomitable man, an incurable loneliness". The New York Times. Retrieved August 7, 2011. 
Kilpatrick, Carroll (November 18, 1973). "Nixon tells editors, 'I'm not a crook'". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"The Post Investigates". The Washington Post. The Watergate Story. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"The Government Acts". The Washington Post. The Watergate Story. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
"Nixon Resigns". The Washington Post. The Watergate Story. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
Weil, Martin; Randolph, Eleanor (April 23, 1994). "Richard M. Nixon, 37th President, dies". The Washington Post. p. A01. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
Lardner, George Jr.; Dobbs, Michael (October 6, 1999). "New tapes reveal depth of Nixon's anti-Semitism". The Washington Post. p. A31. Retrieved April 4, 2011. 
Carlson, Peter (November 17, 2000). "Another Race to the Finish". The Washington Post. p. A01. 
"8,000 Move Into Cambodia". St. Peterburg Independent (now The Evening Independent). AP (Saigon). May 1, 1970. p. 20–A. 
"Nixon Up Early, See Protesters". Beaver County Times. Pennsylvania. UPI. May 9, 1970. p. one [presumably late edition]. 
Greene, Bob (April 8, 2002). "What Nixon's best friend couldn't buy". Jewish World Review. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
Greider, William (November 10, 1983). "The McGovern factor". Rolling Stone: 13. 
Kiernan, Ben; Owen, Taylor (October 2006). "Bombs over Cambodia" (PDF). The Walrus. Retrieved January 29, 2012. 
Noah, Timothy (October 7, 1999). "Nixon: I Am Not an Anti-Semite". Slate. Retrieved May 11, 2012. 
Sawhill, Ray (February 2011). "The Fall and Rise of an American President". Opera News. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
"Again, the Credibility Gap?". Time. April 5, 1971. Retrieved July 29, 2011. 
"Behavior: Evaluating Eagleton". Time. August 14, 1972. Retrieved July 23, 2011. 
"Democrats: The long journey to disaster". Time. November 20, 1972. Retrieved July 23, 2011. 
Skidmore, Max J. (2001). "Ranking and Evaluating Presidents: The Case of Theodore Roosevelt". White House Studies. 1 (4). 
Stacks, John F. (May 2, 1994). "Richard Nixon: Victory in Defeat". Time. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
Morrow, Lance (September 30, 1996). "Naysayer to the nattering nabobs". Time. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
Allen, Erika Tyler. "The Kennedy-Nixon Presidential Debates, 1960". The Museum of Broadcast Communications. Retrieved May 11, 2012. 
Auster, Albert. "Smith, Howard K". The Museum of Broadcast Communications. Retrieved May 11, 2012. 
Evans, Thomas W. (1993). "The All-Volunteer Army After Twenty Years: Recruiting in the Modern Era". Sam Houston State University. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
Handlin, Daniel (November 28, 2005). "Just another Apollo? Part two". The Space Review. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
"American President: Richard Milhous Nixon (1913–1994), Foreign Affairs". Miller Center for Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"Richard M. Nixon Birthplace". National Park Service. Retrieved May 11, 2012. 
"Commander Richard M. Nixon, USNR". Naval Historical Center. United States Navy. August 7, 2006. Archived from the original on August 16, 2011. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
Nixon, Richard (August 8, 1974). "President Nixon's Resignation Speech". Character Above All. Public Broadcasting Service. Retrieved July 15, 2011. 
"The Nixon Visit – (February 21–28, 1972)". American Experience. Public Broadcasting Service. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"Richard M. Nixon, Domestic Politics". American Experience. Public Broadcasting Service. Retrieved May 11, 2012. 
Sabia, Joseph J. (May 31, 2004). "Why Richard Nixon Deserves to Be Remembered Along with Brown". History News Network. Retrieved May 11, 2012. 
"Kennedy Wins 1960 Presidential Election". 1960 Year In Review. United Press International. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
"1968 Presidential Election". 1968 Year in Review. United Press International. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
"Nixon Becomes President". 1969 Year in Review. United Press International. Retrieved July 16, 2011. 
"Postage rates for periodicals: A narrative history" (PDF). United States Postal Service. Retrieved August 6, 2011. 
Office of the Federal Register (1999). "New Actions To Prevent Illnesses And Accidents". Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Richard Nixon, 1971. National Archives and Records Service. General Services Administration. ISBN 978-0-16-058863-1. 
"Statement on Signing the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act". The American Presidency Project. University of California, Santa Barbara. May 16, 1972. 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (September 2002). "Sickle Cell Research for Treatment and Cure" (PDF). National Institutes of Health. 02-5214. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 31, 2012. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
Wailoo, Keith (2001). Dying in the City of the Blues: Sickle Cell Anemia and the Politics of Race and Health. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-4896-8. 
"Health insurance: hearings on new proposals". Congressional Quarterly Almanac. 92nd Congress 1st Session....1971. 27. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly. 1972. pp. 541–544. ISSN 0095-6007. OCLC 1564784. 
"Limited experimental health bill enacted". Congressional Quarterly Almanac. 93rd Congress 1st Session....1973. 29. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly. 1974. pp. 499–508. ISSN 0095-6007. OCLC 1564784. 
"National health insurance: no action in 1974". Congressional Quarterly Almanac. 93rd Congress 2nd Session....1974. 30. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly. 1975. pp. 386–394. ISSN 0095-6007. OCLC 1564784. 
Samson, William (2005). "President Nixon's Troublesome Tax Returns". TaxAnalysts. Retrieved December 20, 2013. 
Grier, Peter (2011). "Tax Day 2011: Why do presidents release tax returns?". Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved December 20, 2013. 


Further reading

Farrell, John A (2017) Richard Nixon: The Life New York: Doubleday
Thomas, Evan (2015). Being Nixon: A Man Divided. New York: Random House. ISBN 9780812995367. OCLC 904756092. 

External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Richard Nixon.



Find more aboutRichard Nixonat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity


Official websites

White House biography
Nixon Presidential Library and Museum
Richard Nixon Foundation

Media coverage

"Richard Nixon collected news and commentary". The New York Times. 
Appearances on C-SPAN

"Life Portrait of Richard M. Nixon", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, November 19, 1999



Other


United States Congress. "Richard Nixon (id: N000116)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. 
Essays on Richard Nixon, each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
Richard Nixon: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress
"The Presidents: Nixon", an American Experience documentary
Works by or about Richard Nixon at Internet Archive
Works by Richard Nixon at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Richard Nixon Personal Manuscripts
Richard Nixon on IMDb 







v
t
e


Richard Nixon






37th President of the United States (1969–1974)
36th Vice President of the United States (1953–1961)
U.S. Senator from California (1950–1953)
U.S. Representative for CA-12 (1947–1950)





Presidency



First inauguration
Second inauguration
Nixon Doctrine
"Bring Us Together"
Economic policies

Nixon shock


Tar Baby Option
Environmental Protection Agency

creation


National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Space exploration
1971 National Cancer Act
Vietnam War

Cambodian bombing
Paris Peace Accords
"Peace with Honor"


Silent majority
Cold War period

Linkage policy


1972 Visit to China

Shanghai Communiqué


Détente

1972 Moscow Summit
Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty
SALT I Treaty
Prevention of Nuclear War Agreement
Threshold Test Ban Treaty


Endangered Species Act
Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse
War on Drugs

Drug Enforcement Administration


Enemies List

list of opponents


Operation CHAOS
Watergate

timeline
White House tapes
United States v. Nixon
Senate Watergate Committee
impeachment process


Resignation

speech


Pardon
State of the Union Address (1970
1973
1974)
Wilson desk
Judicial appointments

Supreme Court
controversies







Life and
politics



Presidential Library and Museum

Richard Nixon Foundation


Birthplace and boyhood home
Checkers speech
Kitchen Debate
Operation 40
"Last press conference"
Florida White House
"La Casa Pacifica"
Nixon Center
Nixon v. General Services Administration
Death and funeral





Books



Six Crises (1962)
Bibliography





Elections



United States House of Representatives elections, 1946
1948
U.S. Senate election, 1950
California gubernatorial election, 1962
Republican Party presidential primaries, 1960
1964
1968
1972
Republican National Conventions, 1952
1956
1960
1968
1972
Nixon Presidential campaign, 1968
United States presidential elections, 1952
1956
1960

debates


1968
1972





Popular
culture



Nixon goes to China (phrase)
Millhouse (1971 film)
Four More Years (1972 film)
All the President's Men (1976 film)
White House Madness (1975 film)
Nixon in China (1987 opera)
Nixon (1995 film)
Elvis Meets Nixon (1997 film)
Dick (1999 film)
The Frost-Nixon Interviews (2006 play, 2008 film)
Our Nixon (2013 film)
U.S. Postage stamp





Related



Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act
Presidential Townhouse





Staff



Colonel Jack Brennan (aide de camp)
Manolo Sanchez (valet)
Rose Mary Woods (secretary)





Family



Thelma "Pat" Ryan Nixon (wife)
Tricia Nixon Cox (daughter)
Julie Nixon Eisenhower (daughter)
Frank Nixon (father)
Hannah Nixon (mother)
Donald Nixon (brother)
Edward Nixon (brother)
Donald A. Nixon (nephew)
Christopher Nixon Cox (grandson)
Jennie Eisenhower (granddaughter)








← Lyndon B. Johnson
Gerald Ford →


 Category










Offices and distinctions







U.S. House of Representatives


Preceded by
Jerry Voorhis
Member of the House of Representatives from California's 12th congressional district
1947–1950
Succeeded by
Patrick J. Hillings


U.S. Senate


Preceded by
Sheridan Downey
United States Senator (Class 3) from California
1950–1953
Served alongside: William Knowland
Succeeded by
Thomas Kuchel


Party political offices


Preceded by
Frederick F. Houser
Republican nominee for
U.S. Senator from California (Class 3)
1950
Succeeded by
Thomas Kuchel


Preceded by
Earl Warren
Republican nominee for
Vice President of the United States
1952, 1956
Succeeded by
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.


Preceded by
Dwight D. Eisenhower
Republican nominee for
President of the United States
1960
Succeeded by
Barry Goldwater


Preceded by
William F. Knowland
Republican nominee for
Governor of California
1962
Succeeded by
Ronald Reagan


Preceded by
Barry Goldwater
Republican nominee for
President of the United States
1968, 1972
Succeeded by
Gerald Ford


Political offices


Preceded by
Alben W. Barkley
Vice President of the United States
1953–1961
Succeeded by
Lyndon B. Johnson


Preceded by
Lyndon B. Johnson
President of the United States
1969–1974
Succeeded by
Gerald Ford


Honorary titles


Preceded by
Lyndon B. Johnson
Oldest living President of the United States
1973–1981
Succeeded by
Ronald Reagan











Articles related to Richard Nixon











v
t
e


Presidents of the United States (list)







George Washington (1789–1797)
John Adams (1797–1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809)
James Madison (1809–1817)
James Monroe (1817–1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825–1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829–1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837–1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841–1845)
James K. Polk (1845–1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849–1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850–1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853–1857)
James Buchanan (1857–1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865–1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869–1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877–1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881–1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885–1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889–1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893–1897)
William McKinley (1897–1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909)
William H. Taft (1909–1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913–1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921–1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929–1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945–1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961–1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–1969)
Richard Nixon (1969–1974)
Gerald Ford (1974–1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977–1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981–1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989–1993)
Bill Clinton (1993–2001)
George W. Bush (2001–2009)
Barack Obama (2009–2017)
Donald Trump (2017–present)









Presidency timelines




Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt

first 100 days


Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama

first 100 days


Trump

first 100 days











 Book
 Category












v
t
e


Vice Presidents of the United States (list)







John Adams (1789–1797)
Thomas Jefferson (1797–1801)
Aaron Burr (1801–1805)
George Clinton (1805–1812)
Elbridge Gerry (1813–1814)
Daniel D. Tompkins (1817–1825)
John C. Calhoun (1825–1832)
Martin Van Buren (1833–1837)
Richard M. Johnson (1837–1841)
John Tyler (1841)
George M. Dallas (1845–1849)
Millard Fillmore (1849–1850)
William R. King (1853)
John C. Breckinridge (1857–1861)
Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865)
Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873)
Henry Wilson (1873–1875)
William A. Wheeler (1877–1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881)
Thomas A. Hendricks (1885)
Levi P. Morton (1889–1893)
Adlai Stevenson (1893–1897)
Garret Hobart (1897–1899)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901)
Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909)
James S. Sherman (1909–1912)
Thomas R. Marshall (1913–1921)
Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923)
Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929)
Charles Curtis (1929–1933)
John N. Garner (1933–1941)
Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953)
Richard Nixon (1953–1961)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963)
Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969)
Spiro Agnew (1969–1973)
Gerald Ford (1973–1974)
Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977)
Walter Mondale (1977–1981)
George H. W. Bush (1981–1989)
Dan Quayle (1989–1993)
Al Gore (1993–2001)
Dick Cheney (2001–2009)
Joe Biden (2009–2017)
Mike Pence (2017–present)












 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Cabinet of President Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–61)



Vice President



Richard M. Nixon (1953–61)








Secretary of State



John Foster Dulles (1953–59)
Christian A. Herter (1959–61)





Secretary of the Treasury



George Magoffin Humphrey (1953–57)
Robert B. Anderson (1957–61)





Secretary of Defense



Charles E. Wilson (1953–57)
Neil H. McElroy (1957–59)
Thomas S. Gates Jr. (1959–61)





Attorney General



Herbert Brownell Jr. (1953–57)
William P. Rogers (1957–61)





Postmaster General



Arthur E. Summerfield (1953–61)





Secretary of the Interior



Douglas McKay (1953–56)
Fred A. Seaton (1956–61)





Secretary of Agriculture



Ezra Taft Benson (1953–61)





Secretary of Commerce



Sinclair Weeks (1953–58)
Lewis L. Strauss (1958–59)
Frederick H. Mueller (1959–61)





Secretary of Labor



Martin P. Durkin (1953)
James P. Mitchell (1953–61)





Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare



Oveta Culp Hobby (1953–55)
Marion B. Folsom (1955–58)
Arthur S. Flemming (1958–61)












v
t
e


United States Republican Party



Chairpersons
of the RNC



Morgan
Raymond
Ward
Claflin
Morgan
Chandler
Cameron
Jewell
Sabin
Jones
Quay
Clarkson
Carter
Hanna
Payne
Cortelyou
New
Hitchcock
Hill
Rosewater
Hilles
Wilcox
Hays
Adams
Butler
Work
Huston
Fess
Sanders
Fletcher
Hamilton
Martin
Walsh
Spangler
Brownell
Reece
Scott
Gabrielson
Summerfield
Roberts
Hall
Alcorn
T. B. Morton
Miller
Burch
Bliss
R. Morton
Dole
Bush
Smith
Brock
Richards
Laxalt/Fahrenkopf
Reagan/Fahrenkopf
Atwater
Yeutter
Bond
Barbour
Nicholson
Gilmore
Racicot
Gillespie
Mehlman
Martínez
Duncan
Steele
Priebus
Romney McDaniel





Presidential tickets



Frémont/Dayton
Lincoln/Hamlin
Lincoln/Johnson
Grant/Colfax
Grant/Wilson
Hayes/Wheeler
Garfield/Arthur
Blaine/Logan
Harrison/Morton
Harrison/Reid
McKinley/Hobart
McKinley/Roosevelt
Roosevelt/Fairbanks
Taft/Sherman
Taft/Sherman/Butler
Hughes/Fairbanks
Harding/Coolidge
Coolidge/Dawes
Hoover/Curtis (twice)
Landon/Knox
Willkie/McNary
Dewey/Bricker
Dewey/Warren
Eisenhower/Nixon (twice)
Nixon/Lodge
Goldwater/Miller
Nixon/Agnew (twice)
Ford/Dole
Reagan/G. H. W. Bush (twice)
G. H. W. Bush/Quayle (twice)
Dole/Kemp
G. W. Bush/Cheney (twice)
McCain/Palin
Romney/Ryan
Trump/Pence





Parties by state
and territory




State



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming





Territory



American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands








Conventions
(list)



1856 (Philadelphia)
1860 (Chicago)
1864 (Baltimore)
1868 (Chicago)
1872 (Philadelphia)
1876 (Cincinnati)
1880 (Chicago)
1884 (Chicago)
1888 (Chicago)
1892 (Minneapolis)
1896 (Saint Louis)
1900 (Philadelphia)
1904 (Chicago)
1908 (Chicago)
1912 (Chicago)
1916 (Chicago)
1920 (Chicago)
1924 (Cleveland)
1928 (Kansas City)
1932 (Chicago)
1936 (Cleveland)
1940 (Philadelphia)
1944 (Chicago)
1948 (Philadelphia)
1952 (Chicago)
1956 (San Francisco)
1960 (Chicago)
1964 (San Francisco)
1968 (Miami Beach)
1972 (Miami Beach)
1976 (Kansas City)
1980 (Detroit)
1984 (Dallas)
1988 (New Orleans)
1992 (Houston)
1996 (San Diego)
2000 (Philadelphia)
2004 (New York)
2008 (St. Paul)
2012 (Tampa)
2016 (Cleveland)





Affiliated
organizations




Fundraising groups



National Republican Congressional Committee
National Republican Senatorial Committee
Republican Conference of the United States House of Representatives
Republican Conference of the United States Senate
Republican Governors Association





Sectional groups



College Republicans

Chairmen


Congressional Hispanic Conference
International Democrat Union
Log Cabin Republicans
Republican Jewish Coalition
Republican National Hispanic Assembly
Republicans Abroad
Teen Age Republicans
Young Republicans





Factional groups



Republican Main Street Partnership
Republican Majority for Choice
Republican Liberty Caucus
Republican National Coalition for Life
Republican Study Committee
ConservAmerica
Liberty Caucus
Freedom Caucus
Ripon Society
The Wish List








Related articles



History
Primaries
Debates
2009 chairmanship election
2011 chairmanship election
2013 chairmanship election
2015 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election
Bibliography
Timeline of modern American conservatism






 Republican Party portal










v
t
e


United States Senators from California



Class 1



Frémont
Weller
Broderick
Haun
Latham
Conness
Casserly
Hager
Booth
Miller
Hearst
Williams
Hearst
Felton
White
Bard
Flint
Works
Johnson
Knowland
Engle
Salinger
Murphy
Tunney
Hayakawa
Wilson
Seymour
Feinstein








Class 3



Gwin
McDougall
Cole
Sargent
Farley
Stanford
Perkins
Phelan
Shortridge
McAdoo
Storke
Downey
Nixon
Kuchel
Cranston
Boxer
Harris












v
t
e


(1948 ←) United States presidential election, 1952 (→ 1956)



Republican Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Dwight D. Eisenhower





VP nominee



Richard Nixon





Candidates



Riley A. Bender
George Theodore Mickelson
Harold Stassen
Robert Taft
Earl Warren








Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Adlai Stevenson





VP nominee



John Sparkman





Candidates



Alben W. Barkley
Paul A. Dever
W. Averell Harriman
Hubert Humphrey
Estes Kefauver
Robert S. Kerr
Richard Russell Jr.













Third party and independent candidates



Prohibition Party




Nominee



Stuart Hamblen





VP nominee



Enoch A. Holtwick








Progressive Party




Nominee



Vincent Hallinan





VP nominee



Charlotta Bass








Socialist Labor Party




Nominee



Eric Hass








Socialist Party




Nominee



Darlington Hoopes





VP nominee



Samuel H. Friedman








Socialist Workers Party




Nominee



Farrell Dobbs





VP nominee



Myra Tanner Weiss








Independents and other candidates



Edward Longstreet Bodin
Henry B. Krajewski











Other 1952 elections: House
Senate












v
t
e


(1952 ←) United States presidential election, 1956 (→ 1960)



Republican Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Dwight D. Eisenhower





VP nominee



Richard Nixon








Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Adlai Stevenson





VP nominee



Estes Kefauver





Candidates



John S. Battle
Happy Chandler
James C. Davis
W. Averell Harriman
Lyndon B. Johnson
Frank Lausche
George Bell Timmerman Jr.













Third party and independent candidates



American Vegetarian Party




Nominee



Herbert M. Shelton





VP nominee



Symon Gould








Prohibition Party




Nominee



Enoch A. Holtwick





VP nominee



Herbert C. Holdridge








Socialist Labor Party




Nominee



Eric Hass





VP nominee



Georgia Cozzini








Socialist Party




Nominee



Darlington Hoopes





VP nominee



Samuel H. Friedman








Socialist Workers Party




Nominee



Farrell Dobbs





VP nominee



Myra Tanner Weiss








Independents and other candidates



T. Coleman Andrews
Gerald L. K. Smith











Other 1956 elections: House
Senate












v
t
e


(1956 ←) United States presidential election, 1960 (→ 1964)



Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries





Nominee
John F. Kennedy (campaign)


VP nominee
Lyndon B. Johnson


Candidates
Ross Barnett
Pat Brown
Michael DiSalle
Paul C. Fisher
Hubert Humphrey
Lyndon B. Johnson
George H. McLain
Robert B. Meyner
Wayne Morse
Albert S. Porter
Adlai Stevenson
George Smathers
Stuart Symington





Republican Party

Convention
Primaries





Nominee
Richard Nixon


VP nominee
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.


Candidates
Barry Goldwater
Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
James M. Lloyd
Nelson Rockefeller










Third party and independent candidates



American Vegetarian Party



Nominee
Symon Gould





National States' Rights Party



Nominee
Orval Faubus


VP nominee
J. B. Stoner





Prohibition Party



Nominee
Rutherford Decker


VP nominee
E. Harold Munn





Socialist Labor Party



Nominee
Eric Hass


VP nominee
Georgia Cozzini





Socialist Workers Party



Nominee
Farrell Dobbs


VP nominee
Myra Tanner Weiss





Independents and other candidates



Harry F. Byrd
Merritt B. Curtis
Lar Daly
George Lincoln Rockwell
Charles L. Sullivan











Other 1960 elections: House
Senate












v
t
e


(1964 ←)    United States presidential election, 1968    (→ 1972)






United States elections, 1968





Republican Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Richard Nixon

campaign







VP nominee



Spiro Agnew





Candidates



Frank Carlson
Clifford P. Case
Hiram Fong
John Lindsay
Ronald Reagan
Jim Rhodes
Nelson Rockefeller
Winthrop Rockefeller
George W. Romney

campaign


Harold Stassen
John Volpe








Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries


Protests






Nominee



Hubert Humphrey

campaign







VP nominee



Edmund Muskie





Candidates



Roger D. Branigin
John G. Crommelin
Paul C. Fisher
Lyndon B. Johnson
Robert F. Kennedy (campaign)
Thomas C. Lynch
Eugene McCarthy (campaign)
George McGovern
Dan K. Moore
Channing E. Phillips
George Smathers
Stephen M. Young








American Independent Party




Nominee



George Wallace

campaign







VP nominee



Curtis LeMay













Other third party and independent candidates



Communist Party




Nominee



Charlene Mitchell





VP nominee



Michael Zagarell








Peace and Freedom Party




Nominee



Eldridge Cleaver





VP nominee



Douglas Fitzgerald Dowd








Prohibition Party




Nominee



E. Harold Munn








Socialist Labor Party




Nominee



Henning A. Blomen








Socialist Workers Party




Nominee



Fred Halstead





VP nominee



Paul Boutelle








Independents and other candidates



Dick Gregory
Pat Paulsen
Pigasus











Other 1968 elections: House
Senate
Gubernatorial












v
t
e


(1968 ←) United States presidential election, 1972 (→ 1976)



Republican Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



Richard Nixon





VP nominee



Spiro Agnew





Candidates



John M. Ashbrook
Pete McCloskey








Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries






Nominee



George McGovern





VP nominee



Sargent Shriver





Candidates



Shirley Chisholm
Walter E. Fauntroy
Fred R. Harris
Vance Hartke
Wayne Hays
Hubert Humphrey
Henry M. Jackson
John Lindsay
Eugene McCarthy
Wilbur Mills
Patsy Mink
Edmund Muskie
Terry Sanford
George Wallace
Sam Yorty













Third party and independent candidates



American Independent Party




Nominee



John G. Schmitz





VP nominee



Thomas J. Anderson








Communist Party




Nominee



Gus Hall





VP nominee



Jarvis Tyner








Libertarian Party




Nominee



John Hospers





VP nominee



Tonie Nathan








People's Party




Nominee



Benjamin Spock





VP nominee



Julius Hobson








Prohibition Party




Nominee



E. Harold Munn








Socialist Labor Party




Nominee



Louis Fisher








Socialist Workers Party




Nominee



Linda Jenness
Alternate nominee: Evelyn Reed





VP nominee



Andrew Pulley








Independent



Gabriel Green











Other 1972 elections: House
Senate
Gubernatorial












v
t
e


Time Persons of the Year



1927–1950



Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)





1951–1975



Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975)





1976–2000



Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wałęsa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeffrey P. Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)





2001–present



Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly / Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)






 Book










v
t
e


National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners






1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower
1959: Douglas MacArthur
1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg
1961: John F. Kennedy
1962: Byron "Whizzer" White
1963: Roger Q. Blough
1964: Donold B. Lourie
1965: Juan T. Trippe
1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik
1967: Frederick L. Hovde
1968: Chester J. LaRoche
1969: Richard Nixon
1970: Thomas J. Hamilton
1971: Ronald Reagan
1972: Gerald Ford
1973: John Wayne
1974: Gerald B. Zornow
1975: David Packard
1976: Edgar B. Speer
1977: Louis H. Wilson
1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy
1979: William P. Lawrence
1980: Walter J. Zable
1981: Justin W. Dart
1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown, Willie Davis, Jack Kemp, Ron Kramer, Jim Swink
1983: Jack Kemp
1984: John F. McGillicuddy
1985: William I. Spencer
1986: William H. Morton
1987: Charles R. Meyer
1988: Clinton E. Frank
1989: Paul Brown
1990: Thomas H. Moorer
1991: George H. W. Bush
1992: Donald R. Keough
1993: Norman Schwarzkopf
1994: Thomas S. Murphy
1995: Harold Alfond
1996: Gene Corrigan
1997: Jackie Robinson
1998: John H. McConnell
1999: Keith Jackson
2000: Fred M. Kirby II
2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs
2002: George Steinbrenner
2003: Tommy Franks
2004: William V. Campbell
2005: Jon F. Hanson
2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden
2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach
2008: John Glenn
2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman
2010: Bill Cosby
2011: Robert Gates
2012: Roscoe Brown
2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell
2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss
2015: Condoleezza Rice
2016: Archie Manning












v
t
e


Cabinet of President Richard Nixon (1969–74)



Vice President



Spiro T. Agnew (1969–73)
None (1973)
Gerald R. Ford (1973–74)








Secretary of State



William P. Rogers (1969–73)
Henry A. Kissinger (1973–74)





Secretary of the Treasury



David M. Kennedy (1969–71)
John B. Connally (1971–72)
George P. Shultz (1972–74)
William E. Simon (1974)





Secretary of Defense



Melvin R. Laird (1969–73)
Elliot L. Richardson (1973)
James R. Schlesinger (1973–74)





Attorney General



John N. Mitchell (1969–72)
Richard G. Kleindienst (1972–73)
Elliot L. Richardson (1973)
William B. Saxbe (1974)





Postmaster General



Winton M. Blount (1969–71)





Secretary of the Interior



Walter J. Hickel (1969–70)
Rogers C. B. Morton (1970–74)





Secretary of Agriculture



Clifford M. Hardin (1969–71)
Earl L. Butz (1971–74)





Secretary of Commerce



Maurice H. Stans (1969–72)
Peter G. Peterson (1972–73)
Frederick B. Dent (1973–74)





Secretary of Labor



George P. Shultz (1969–70)
James D. Hodgson (1970–73)
Peter J. Brennan (1973–74)





Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare



Robert H. Finch (1969–70)
Elliot L. Richardson (1970–73)
Caspar W. Weinberger (1973–74)





Secretary of Housing and Urban Development



George W. Romney (1969–73)
James T. Lynn (1973–74)





Secretary of Transportation



John Volpe (1969–73)
Claude S. Brinegar (1973–74)














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 44303100
LCCN: n79018757
ISNI: 0000 0001 2279 0777
GND: 11858832X
SELIBR: 235970
SUDOC: 027048632
BNF: cb119177538 (data)
BIBSYS: 90075985
MusicBrainz: 056203cf-376f-412a-86f7-3ffa80157ef4
NLA: 35388842
NDL: 00451392
NARA: 1297744
US Congress: N000116
BNE: XX831641
IATH: w6w66hsr











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Nixon&oldid=818477650"					Categories: Richard Nixon1913 births1994 deaths20th-century American politicians20th-century American writers20th-century QuakersAmerican anti-communistsAmerican lawyersAmerican memoiristsAmerican military personnel of World War IIAmerican military personnel who served in the Pacific theatre of World War IIAmerican people of the Vietnam WarAmerican QuakersBurials in Orange County, CaliforniaCalifornia lawyersMilitary personnel from CaliforniaCalifornia RepublicansDuke University School of Law alumniEisenhower administration cabinet membersHistory of the United States (1964–80)Members of the United States House of Representatives from CaliforniaPeople from Saddle River, New JerseyPeople from San Clemente, CaliforniaPeople from Whittier, CaliforniaPeople from Yorba Linda, CaliforniaPeople of the Laotian Civil WarPresidents of the United StatesRecipients of American presidential pardonsRepublican Party members of the United States House of RepresentativesRepublican Party Presidents of the United StatesRepublican Party (United States) presidential nomineesRepublican Party United States SenatorsRepublican Party (United States) vice presidential nomineesRepublican Party Vice Presidents of the United StatesUnited States Navy officersUnited States presidential candidates, 1960United States presidential candidates, 1968United States presidential candidates, 1972United States Senators from CaliforniaUnited States vice-presidential candidates, 1952United States vice-presidential candidates, 1956Vice Presidents of the United StatesWhittier Poets football playersLawyers disbarred in the Watergate scandalNixon administration personnel involved in the Watergate scandalAmerican people of German descentAmerican people of English descentAmerican people of Irish descentAmerican people of Scottish descentAmerican people of Dutch descentHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from December 2017Articles with hAudio microformatsCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksAC with 15 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiersFeatured articles