



The Shadow robot hand system


Robotics is an interdisciplinary branch of engineering and science that includes mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, computer science, and others. Robotics deals with the design, construction, operation, and use of robots, as well as computer systems for their control, sensory feedback, and information processing.
These technologies are used to develop machines that can substitute for humans. Robots can be used in any situation and for any purpose, but today many are used in dangerous environments (including bomb detection and de-activation), manufacturing processes, or where humans cannot survive. Robots can take on any form but some are made to resemble humans in appearance. This is said to help in the acceptance of a robot in certain replicative behaviors usually performed by people. Such robots attempt to replicate walking, lifting, speech, cognition, and basically anything a human can do. Many of today's robots are inspired by nature, contributing to the field of bio-inspired robotics.
The concept of creating machines that can operate autonomously dates back to classical times, but research into the functionality and potential uses of robots did not grow substantially until the 20th century.[1] Throughout history, it has been frequently assumed that robots will one day be able to mimic human behavior and manage tasks in a human-like fashion. Today, robotics is a rapidly growing field, as technological advances continue; researching, designing, and building new robots serve various practical purposes, whether domestically, commercially, or militarily. Many robots are built to do jobs that are hazardous to people such as defusing bombs, finding survivors in unstable ruins, and exploring mines and shipwrecks. Robotics is also used in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) as a teaching aid.
Robotics is a branch of engineering that involves the conception, design, manufacture, and operation of robots. This field overlaps with electronics, computer science, artificial intelligence, mechatronics, nanotechnology and bioengineering.
Science-fiction author Isaac Asimov is often given credit for being the first person to use the term robotics in a short story composed in the 1940s. In the story, Asimov suggested three principles to guide the behavior of robots and smart machines. Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics, as they are called, have survived to the present: 1. Robots must never harm human beings. 2. Robots must follow instructions from humans without violating rule 1. 3. Robots must protect themselves without violating the other rules.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History
3 Robotic aspects
4 Applications
5 Components

5.1 Power source
5.2 Actuation

5.2.1 Electric motors
5.2.2 Linear actuators
5.2.3 Series elastic actuators
5.2.4 Air muscles
5.2.5 Muscle wire
5.2.6 Electroactive polymers
5.2.7 Piezo motors
5.2.8 Elastic nanotubes


5.3 Sensing

5.3.1 Touch
5.3.2 Vision
5.3.3 Other


5.4 Manipulation

5.4.1 Mechanical grippers
5.4.2 Vacuum grippers
5.4.3 General purpose effectors


5.5 Locomotion

5.5.1 Rolling robots

5.5.1.1 Two-wheeled balancing robots
5.5.1.2 One-wheeled balancing robots
5.5.1.3 Spherical orb robots
5.5.1.4 Six-wheeled robots
5.5.1.5 Tracked robots


5.5.2 Walking applied to robots

5.5.2.1 ZMP technique
5.5.2.2 Hopping
5.5.2.3 Dynamic balancing (controlled falling)
5.5.2.4 Passive dynamics


5.5.3 Other methods of locomotion

5.5.3.1 Flying
5.5.3.2 Snaking
5.5.3.3 Skating
5.5.3.4 Climbing
5.5.3.5 Swimming (Piscine)
5.5.3.6 Sailing




5.6 Environmental interaction and navigation
5.7 Human-robot interaction

5.7.1 Speech recognition
5.7.2 Robotic voice
5.7.3 Gestures
5.7.4 Facial expression
5.7.5 Artificial emotions
5.7.6 Personality
5.7.7 Social Intelligence




6 Control

6.1 Autonomy levels


7 Research

7.1 Dynamics and kinematics
7.2 Bionics and biomimetics


8 Education and training

8.1 Career training
8.2 Certification
8.3 Summer robotics camp
8.4 Robotics competitions
8.5 Robotics afterschool programs


9 Employment
10 Occupational safety and health implications
11 See also
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word robotics was derived from the word robot, which was introduced to the public by Czech writer Karel Čapek in his play R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots), which was published in 1920.[2] The word robot comes from the Slavic word robota, which means labour. The play begins in a factory that makes artificial people called robots, creatures who can be mistaken for humans – very similar to the modern ideas of androids. Karel Čapek himself did not coin the word. He wrote a short letter in reference to an etymology in the Oxford English Dictionary in which he named his brother Josef Čapek as its actual originator.[2]
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the word robotics was first used in print by Isaac Asimov, in his science fiction short story "Liar!", published in May 1941 in Astounding Science Fiction. Asimov was unaware that he was coining the term; since the science and technology of electrical devices is electronics, he assumed robotics already referred to the science and technology of robots. In some of Asimov's other works, he states that the first use of the word robotics was in his short story Runaround (Astounding Science Fiction, March 1942).[3][4] However, the original publication of "Liar!" predates that of "Runaround" by ten months, so the former is generally cited as the word's origin.
History[edit]
See also: History of robots
In 1942, the science fiction writer Isaac Asimov created his Three Laws of Robotics.
In 1948, Norbert Wiener formulated the principles of cybernetics, the basis of practical robotics.
Fully autonomous only appeared in the second half of the 20th century. The first digitally operated and programmable robot, the Unimate, was installed in 1961 to lift hot pieces of metal from a die casting machine and stack them. Commercial and industrial robots are widespread today and used to perform jobs more cheaply, more accurately and more reliably, than humans. They are also employed in some jobs which are too dirty, dangerous, or dull to be suitable for humans. Robots are widely used in manufacturing, assembly, packing and packaging, mining, transport, earth and space exploration, surgery, weaponry, laboratory research, safety, and the mass production of consumer and industrial goods.[5]


Date
Significance
Robot Name
Inventor


Third century B.C. and earlier
One of the earliest descriptions of automata appears in the Lie Zi text, on a much earlier encounter between King Mu of Zhou (1023–957 BC) and a mechanical engineer known as Yan Shi, an 'artificer'. The latter allegedly presented the king with a life-size, human-shaped figure of his mechanical handiwork.[6]

Yan Shi (Chinese: 偃师)


First century A.D. and earlier
Descriptions of more than 100 machines and automata, including a fire engine, a wind organ, a coin-operated machine, and a steam-powered engine, in Pneumatica and Automata by Heron of Alexandria

Ctesibius, Philo of Byzantium, Heron of Alexandria, and others


c. 420 B.C.E
A wooden, steam propelled bird, which was able to fly
Flying pigeon
Archytas of Tarentum


1206
Created early humanoid automata, programmable automaton band[7]
Robot band, hand-washing automaton,[8] automated moving peacocks[9]
Al-Jazari


1495
Designs for a humanoid robot
Mechanical Knight
Leonardo da Vinci


1738
Mechanical duck that was able to eat, flap its wings, and excrete
Digesting Duck
Jacques de Vaucanson


1898
Nikola Tesla demonstrates first radio-controlled vessel.
Teleautomaton
Nikola Tesla


1921
First fictional automatons called "robots" appear in the play R.U.R.
Rossum's Universal Robots
Karel Čapek


1930s
Humanoid robot exhibited at the 1939 and 1940 World's Fairs
Elektro
Westinghouse Electric Corporation


1946
First general-purpose digital computer
Whirlwind
Multiple people


1948
Simple robots exhibiting biological behaviors[10]
Elsie and Elmer
William Grey Walter


1956
First commercial robot, from the Unimation company founded by George Devol and Joseph Engelberger, based on Devol's patents[11]
Unimate
George Devol


1961
First installed industrial robot.
Unimate
George Devol


1967 to 1972
First full-scale humanoid intelligent robot,[12][13] and first android. Its limb control system allowed it to walk with the lower limbs, and to grip and transport objects with hands, using tactile sensors. Its vision system allowed it to measure distances and directions to objects using external receptors, artificial eyes and ears. And its conversation system allowed it to communicate with a person in Japanese, with an artificial mouth. This made it the [14][15][16]
WABOT-1
Waseda University


1973
First industrial robot with six electromechanically driven axes[17][18]
Famulus
KUKA Robot Group


1974
The world's first microcomputer controlled electric industrial robot, IRB 6 from ASEA, was delivered to a small mechanical engineering company in southern Sweden. The design of this robot had been patented already 1972.
IRB 6
ABB Robot Group


1975
Programmable universal manipulation arm, a Unimation product
PUMA
Victor Scheinman


1978
First object-level robot programming language, allowing robots to handle variations in object position, shape, and sensor noise.
Freddy I and II, RAPT robot programming language
Patricia Ambler and Robin Popplestone


Robotic aspects[edit]




Mechanical construction






Electrical aspect






A level of programming


There are many types of robots; they are used in many different environments and for many different uses, although being very diverse in application and form they all share three basic similarities when it comes to their construction:

Robots all have some kind of mechanical construction, a frame, form or shape designed to achieve a particular task. For example, a robot designed to travel across heavy dirt or mud, might use caterpillar tracks. The mechanical aspect is mostly the creator's solution to completing the assigned task and dealing with the physics of the environment around it. Form follows function.
Robots have electrical components which power and control the machinery. For example, the robot with caterpillar tracks would need some kind of power to move the tracker treads. That power comes in the form of electricity, which will have to travel through a wire and originate from a battery, a basic electrical circuit. Even petrol powered machines that get their power mainly from petrol still require an electric current to start the combustion process which is why most petrol powered machines like cars, have batteries. The electrical aspect of robots is used for movement (through motors), sensing (where electrical signals are used to measure things like heat, sound, position, and energy status) and operation (robots need some level of electrical energy supplied to their motors and sensors in order to activate and perform basic operations)
All robots contain some level of computer programming code. A program is how a robot decides when or how to do something. In the caterpillar track example, a robot that needs to move across a muddy road may have the correct mechanical construction and receive the correct amount of power from its battery, but would not go anywhere without a program telling it to move. Programs are the core essence of a robot, it could have excellent mechanical and electrical construction, but if its program is poorly constructed its performance will be very poor (or it may not perform at all). There are three different types of robotic programs: remote control, artificial intelligence and hybrid. A robot with remote control programing has a preexisting set of commands that it will only perform if and when it receives a signal from a control source, typically a human being with a remote control. It is perhaps more appropriate to view devices controlled primarily by human commands as falling in the discipline of automation rather than robotics. Robots that use artificial intelligence interact with their environment on their own without a control source, and can determine reactions to objects and problems they encounter using their preexisting programming. Hybrid is a form of programming that incorporates both AI and RC functions.

Applications[edit]
As more and more robots are designed for specific tasks this method of classification becomes more relevant. For example, many robots are designed for assembly work, which may not be readily adaptable for other applications. They are termed as "assembly robots". For seam welding, some suppliers provide complete welding systems with the robot i.e. the welding equipment along with other material handling facilities like turntables etc. as an integrated unit. Such an integrated robotic system is called a "welding robot" even though its discrete manipulator unit could be adapted to a variety of tasks. Some robots are specifically designed for heavy load manipulation, and are labelled as "heavy duty robots".
Current and potential applications include:

Military robots
Caterpillar plans to develop remote controlled machines and expects to develop fully autonomous heavy robots by 2021.[19] Some cranes already are remote controlled.
It was demonstrated that a robot can perform a herding[20] task.
Robots are increasingly used in manufacturing (since the 1960s). In the auto industry, they can amount for more than half of the "labor". There are even "lights off" factories such as an IBM keyboard manufacturing factory in Texas that is 100% automated.[21]
Robots such as HOSPI[22] are used as couriers in hospitals (hospital robot). Other hospital tasks performed by robots are receptionists, guides and porters helpers.[23]
Robots can serve as waiters[24][25] and cooks,[26] also at home. Boris is a robot that can load a dishwasher.[27] Rotimatic is a robotics kitchen appliance that cooks flatbreads automatically.[28]
Robot combat for sport – hobby or sport event where two or more robots fight in an arena to disable each other. This has developed from a hobby in the 1990s to several TV series worldwide.
Cleanup of contaminated areas, such as toxic waste or nuclear facilities.[29]
Agricultural robots (AgRobots[30][31]).
Domestic robots, cleaning and caring for the elderly
Medical robots performing low-invasive surgery
Household robots with full use.
Nanorobots
Swarm robotics

Components[edit]
Power source[edit]
Further information: Power supply and Energy storage
At present, mostly (lead–acid) batteries are used as a power source. Many different types of batteries can be used as a power source for robots. They range from lead–acid batteries, which are safe and have relatively long shelf lives but are rather heavy compared to silver–cadmium batteries that are much smaller in volume and are currently much more expensive. Designing a battery-powered robot needs to take into account factors such as safety, cycle lifetime and weight. Generators, often some type of internal combustion engine, can also be used. However, such designs are often mechanically complex and need a fuel, require heat dissipation and are relatively heavy. A tether connecting the robot to a power supply would remove the power supply from the robot entirely. This has the advantage of saving weight and space by moving all power generation and storage components elsewhere. However, this design does come with the drawback of constantly having a cable connected to the robot, which can be difficult to manage.[32] Potential power sources could be:

pneumatic (compressed gases)
Solar power (using the sun's energy and converting it into electrical power)
hydraulics (liquids)
flywheel energy storage
organic garbage (through anaerobic digestion)
nuclear

Actuation[edit]
Main article: Actuator




A robotic leg powered by air muscles


Actuators are the "muscles" of a robot, the parts which convert stored energy into movement. By far the most popular actuators are electric motors that rotate a wheel or gear, and linear actuators that control industrial robots in factories. There are some recent advances in alternative types of actuators, powered by electricity, chemicals, or compressed air.
Electric motors[edit]
Main article: Electric motor
The vast majority of robots use electric motors, often brushed and brushless DC motors in portable robots or AC motors in industrial robots and CNC machines. These motors are often preferred in systems with lighter loads, and where the predominant form of motion is rotational.
Linear actuators[edit]
Main article: Linear actuator
Various types of linear actuators move in and out instead of by spinning, and often have quicker direction changes, particularly when very large forces are needed such as with industrial robotics. They are typically powered by compressed and oxidized air (pneumatic actuator) or an oil (hydraulic actuator).
Series elastic actuators[edit]
A flexure is designed as part of the motor actuator, to improve safety and provide robust force control, energy efficiency, shock absorption (mechanical filtering) while reducing excessive wear on the transmission and other mechanical components. The resultant lower reflected inertia can improve safety when a robot is interacting with humans or during collisions. It has been used in various robots, particularly advanced manufacturing robots and[33] walking humanoid robots.[34]
Air muscles[edit]
Main article: Pneumatic artificial muscles
Pneumatic artificial muscles, also known as air muscles, are special tubes that expand(typically up to 40%) when air is forced inside them. They are used in some robot applications.[35][36][37]
Muscle wire[edit]
Main article: Shape memory alloy
Muscle wire, also known as shape memory alloy, Nitinol® or Flexinol® wire, is a material which contracts (under 5%) when electricity is applied. They have been used for some small robot applications.[38][39]
Electroactive polymers[edit]
Main article: Electroactive polymers
EAPs or EPAMs are a new[when?] plastic material that can contract substantially (up to 380% activation strain) from electricity, and have been used in facial muscles and arms of humanoid robots,[40] and to enable new robots to float,[41] fly, swim or walk.[42]
Piezo motors[edit]
Main article: Piezoelectric motor
Recent alternatives to DC motors are piezo motors or ultrasonic motors. These work on a fundamentally different principle, whereby tiny piezoceramic elements, vibrating many thousands of times per second, cause linear or rotary motion. There are different mechanisms of operation; one type uses the vibration of the piezo elements to step the motor in a circle or a straight line.[43] Another type uses the piezo elements to cause a nut to vibrate or to drive a screw. The advantages of these motors are nanometer resolution, speed, and available force for their size.[44] These motors are already available commercially, and being used on some robots.[45][46]
Elastic nanotubes[edit]
Further information: Nanotube
Elastic nanotubes are a promising artificial muscle technology in early-stage experimental development. The absence of defects in carbon nanotubes enables these filaments to deform elastically by several percent, with energy storage levels of perhaps 10 J/cm3 for metal nanotubes. Human biceps could be replaced with an 8 mm diameter wire of this material. Such compact "muscle" might allow future robots to outrun and outjump humans.[47]
Sensing[edit]
Main article: Robotic sensing
Sensors allow robots to receive information about a certain measurement of the environment, or internal components. This is essential for robots to perform their tasks, and act upon any changes in the environment to calculate the appropriate response. They are used for various forms of measurements, to give the robots warnings about safety or malfunctions, and to provide real-time information of the task it is performing.
Touch[edit]
Main article: Tactile sensor
Current robotic and prosthetic hands receive far less tactile information than the human hand. Recent research has developed a tactile sensor array that mimics the mechanical properties and touch receptors of human fingertips.[48][49] The sensor array is constructed as a rigid core surrounded by conductive fluid contained by an elastomeric skin. Electrodes are mounted on the surface of the rigid core and are connected to an impedance-measuring device within the core. When the artificial skin touches an object the fluid path around the electrodes is deformed, producing impedance changes that map the forces received from the object. The researchers expect that an important function of such artificial fingertips will be adjusting robotic grip on held objects.
Scientists from several European countries and Israel developed a prosthetic hand in 2009, called SmartHand, which functions like a real one—allowing patients to write with it, type on a keyboard, play piano and perform other fine movements. The prosthesis has sensors which enable the patient to sense real feeling in its fingertips.[50]
Vision[edit]
Main article: Computer vision
See also: Vision processing unit
Computer vision is the science and technology of machines that see. As a scientific discipline, computer vision is concerned with the theory behind artificial systems that extract information from images. The image data can take many forms, such as video sequences and views from cameras.
In most practical computer vision applications, the computers are pre-programmed to solve a particular task, but methods based on learning are now becoming increasingly common.
Computer vision systems rely on image sensors which detect electromagnetic radiation which is typically in the form of either visible light or infra-red light. The sensors are designed using solid-state physics. The process by which light propagates and reflects off surfaces is explained using optics. Sophisticated image sensors even require quantum mechanics to provide a complete understanding of the image formation process. Robots can also be equipped with multiple vision sensors to be better able to compute the sense of depth in the environment. Like human eyes, robots' "eyes" must also be able to focus on a particular area of interest, and also adjust to variations in light intensities.
There is a subfield within computer vision where artificial systems are designed to mimic the processing and behavior of biological system, at different levels of complexity. Also, some of the learning-based methods developed within computer vision have their background in biology.
Other[edit]
Other common forms of sensing in robotics use lidar, radar, and sonar.[citation needed]
Manipulation[edit]




KUKA industrial robot operating in a foundry






Puma, one of the first industrial robots






Baxter, a modern and versatile industrial robot developed by Rodney Brooks


Further information: Mobile manipulator
Robots need to manipulate objects; pick up, modify, destroy, or otherwise have an effect. Thus the "hands" of a robot are often referred to as end effectors,[51] while the "arm" is referred to as a manipulator.[52] Most robot arms have replaceable effectors, each allowing them to perform some small range of tasks. Some have a fixed manipulator which cannot be replaced, while a few have one very general purpose manipulator, for example, a humanoid hand.[53] Learning how to manipulate a robot often requires a close feedback between human to the robot, although there are several methods for remote manipulation of robots.[54]
Mechanical grippers[edit]
One of the most common effectors is the gripper. In its simplest manifestation, it consists of just two fingers which can open and close to pick up and let go of a range of small objects. Fingers can for example, be made of a chain with a metal wire run through it.[55] Hands that resemble and work more like a human hand include the Shadow Hand and the Robonaut hand.[56] Hands that are of a mid-level complexity include the Delft hand.[57][58] Mechanical grippers can come in various types, including friction and encompassing jaws. Friction jaws use all the force of the gripper to hold the object in place using friction. Encompassing jaws cradle the object in place, using less friction.
Vacuum grippers[edit]
Vacuum grippers are very simple astrictive[59] devices that can hold very large loads provided the prehension surface is smooth enough to ensure suction.
Pick and place robots for electronic components and for large objects like car windscreens, often use very simple vacuum grippers.
General purpose effectors[edit]
Some advanced robots are beginning to use fully humanoid hands, like the Shadow Hand, MANUS,[60] and the Schunk hand.[61] These are highly dexterous manipulators, with as many as 20 degrees of freedom and hundreds of tactile sensors.[62]
Locomotion[edit]
Main articles: Robot locomotion and Mobile robot
Rolling robots[edit]




Segway in the Robot museum in Nagoya


For simplicity, most mobile robots have four wheels or a number of continuous tracks. Some researchers have tried to create more complex wheeled robots with only one or two wheels. These can have certain advantages such as greater efficiency and reduced parts, as well as allowing a robot to navigate in confined places that a four-wheeled robot would not be able to.
Two-wheeled balancing robots[edit]
Balancing robots generally use a gyroscope to detect how much a robot is falling and then drive the wheels proportionally in the same direction, to counterbalance the fall at hundreds of times per second, based on the dynamics of an inverted pendulum.[63] Many different balancing robots have been designed.[64] While the Segway is not commonly thought of as a robot, it can be thought of as a component of a robot, when used as such Segway refer to them as RMP (Robotic Mobility Platform). An example of this use has been as NASA's Robonaut that has been mounted on a Segway.[65]
One-wheeled balancing robots[edit]
Main article: Self-balancing unicycle
A one-wheeled balancing robot is an extension of a two-wheeled balancing robot so that it can move in any 2D direction using a round ball as its only wheel. Several one-wheeled balancing robots have been designed recently, such as Carnegie Mellon University's "Ballbot" that is the approximate height and width of a person, and Tohoku Gakuin University's "BallIP".[66] Because of the long, thin shape and ability to maneuver in tight spaces, they have the potential to function better than other robots in environments with people.[67]
Spherical orb robots[edit]
Main article: Spherical robot
Several attempts have been made in robots that are completely inside a spherical ball, either by spinning a weight inside the ball,[68][69] or by rotating the outer shells of the sphere.[70][71] These have also been referred to as an orb bot[72] or a ball bot.[73][74]
Six-wheeled robots[edit]
Using six wheels instead of four wheels can give better traction or grip in outdoor terrain such as on rocky dirt or grass.
Tracked robots[edit]




TALON military robots used by the United States Army


Tank tracks provide even more traction than a six-wheeled robot. Tracked wheels behave as if they were made of hundreds of wheels, therefore are very common for outdoor and military robots, where the robot must drive on very rough terrain. However, they are difficult to use indoors such as on carpets and smooth floors. Examples include NASA's Urban Robot "Urbie".[75]
Walking applied to robots[edit]
Walking is a difficult and dynamic problem to solve. Several robots have been made which can walk reliably on two legs, however, none have yet been made which are as robust as a human. There has been much study on human inspired walking, such as AMBER lab which was established in 2008 by the Mechanical Engineering Department at Texas A&M University.[76] Many other robots have been built that walk on more than two legs, due to these robots being significantly easier to construct.[77][78] Walking robots can be used for uneven terrains, which would provide better mobility and energy efficiency than other locomotion methods. Hybrids too have been proposed in movies such as I, Robot, where they walk on two legs and switch to four (arms+legs) when going to a sprint. Typically, robots on two legs can walk well on flat floors and can occasionally walk up stairs. None can walk over rocky, uneven terrain. Some of the methods which have been tried are:
ZMP technique[edit]
Main article: Zero moment point
The zero moment point (ZMP) is the algorithm used by robots such as Honda's ASIMO. The robot's onboard computer tries to keep the total inertial forces (the combination of Earth's gravity and the acceleration and deceleration of walking), exactly opposed by the floor reaction force (the force of the floor pushing back on the robot's foot). In this way, the two forces cancel out, leaving no moment (force causing the robot to rotate and fall over).[79] However, this is not exactly how a human walks, and the difference is obvious to human observers, some of whom have pointed out that ASIMO walks as if it needs the lavatory.[80][81][82] ASIMO's walking algorithm is not static, and some dynamic balancing is used (see below). However, it still requires a smooth surface to walk on.
Hopping[edit]
Several robots, built in the 1980s by Marc Raibert at the MIT Leg Laboratory, successfully demonstrated very dynamic walking. Initially, a robot with only one leg, and a very small foot could stay upright simply by hopping. The movement is the same as that of a person on a pogo stick. As the robot falls to one side, it would jump slightly in that direction, in order to catch itself.[83] Soon, the algorithm was generalised to two and four legs. A bipedal robot was demonstrated running and even performing somersaults.[84] A quadruped was also demonstrated which could trot, run, pace, and bound.[85] For a full list of these robots, see the MIT Leg Lab Robots page.[86]
Dynamic balancing (controlled falling)[edit]
A more advanced way for a robot to walk is by using a dynamic balancing algorithm, which is potentially more robust than the Zero Moment Point technique, as it constantly monitors the robot's motion, and places the feet in order to maintain stability.[87] This technique was recently demonstrated by Anybots' Dexter Robot,[88] which is so stable, it can even jump.[89] Another example is the TU Delft Flame.
Passive dynamics[edit]
Main article: Passive dynamics
Perhaps the most promising approach utilizes passive dynamics where the momentum of swinging limbs is used for greater efficiency. It has been shown that totally unpowered humanoid mechanisms can walk down a gentle slope, using only gravity to propel themselves. Using this technique, a robot need only supply a small amount of motor power to walk along a flat surface or a little more to walk up a hill. This technique promises to make walking robots at least ten times more efficient than ZMP walkers, like ASIMO.[90][91]

Other methods of locomotion[edit]
Flying[edit]




Two robot snakes. Left one has 64 motors (with 2 degrees of freedom per segment), the right one 10.


A modern passenger airliner is essentially a flying robot, with two humans to manage it. The autopilot can control the plane for each stage of the journey, including takeoff, normal flight, and even landing.[92] Other flying robots are uninhabited and are known as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). They can be smaller and lighter without a human pilot on board, and fly into dangerous territory for military surveillance missions. Some can even fire on targets under command. UAVs are also being developed which can fire on targets automatically, without the need for a command from a human. Other flying robots include cruise missiles, the Entomopter, and the Epson micro helicopter robot. Robots such as the Air Penguin, Air Ray, and Air Jelly have lighter-than-air bodies, propelled by paddles, and guided by sonar.
Snaking[edit]
Several snake robots have been successfully developed. Mimicking the way real snakes move, these robots can navigate very confined spaces, meaning they may one day be used to search for people trapped in collapsed buildings.[93] The Japanese ACM-R5 snake robot[94] can even navigate both on land and in water.[95]
Skating[edit]
A small number of skating robots have been developed, one of which is a multi-mode walking and skating device. It has four legs, with unpowered wheels, which can either step or roll.[96] Another robot, Plen, can use a miniature skateboard or roller-skates, and skate across a desktop.[97]




Capuchin, a climbing robot


Climbing[edit]
Several different approaches have been used to develop robots that have the ability to climb vertical surfaces. One approach mimics the movements of a human climber on a wall with protrusions; adjusting the center of mass and moving each limb in turn to gain leverage. An example of this is Capuchin,[98] built by Dr. Ruixiang Zhang at Stanford University, California. Another approach uses the specialized toe pad method of wall-climbing geckoes, which can run on smooth surfaces such as vertical glass. Examples of this approach include Wallbot[99] and Stickybot.[100] China's Technology Daily reported on November 15, 2008, that Dr. Li Hiu Yeung and his research group of New Concept Aircraft (Zhuhai) Co., Ltd. had successfully developed a bionic gecko robot named "Speedy Freelander". According to Dr. Li, the gecko robot could rapidly climb up and down a variety of building walls, navigate through ground and wall fissures, and walk upside-down on the ceiling. It was also able to adapt to the surfaces of smooth glass, rough, sticky or dusty walls as well as various types of metallic materials. It could also identify and circumvent obstacles automatically. Its flexibility and speed were comparable to a natural gecko. A third approach is to mimic the motion of a snake climbing a pole.[citation needed].
Swimming (Piscine)[edit]
It is calculated that when swimming some fish can achieve a propulsive efficiency greater than 90%.[101] Furthermore, they can accelerate and maneuver far better than any man-made boat or submarine, and produce less noise and water disturbance. Therefore, many researchers studying underwater robots would like to copy this type of locomotion.[102] Notable examples are the Essex University Computer Science Robotic Fish G9,[103] and the Robot Tuna built by the Institute of Field Robotics, to analyze and mathematically model thunniform motion.[104] The Aqua Penguin,[105] designed and built by Festo of Germany, copies the streamlined shape and propulsion by front "flippers" of penguins. Festo have also built the Aqua Ray and Aqua Jelly, which emulate the locomotion of manta ray, and jellyfish, respectively.





Robotic Fish: iSplash-II


In 2014 iSplash-II was developed by PhD student Richard James Clapham and Prof. Huosheng Hu at Essex University. It was the first robotic fish capable of outperforming real carangiform fish in terms of average maximum velocity (measured in body lengths/ second) and endurance, the duration that top speed is maintained.[106] This build attained swimming speeds of 11.6BL/s (i.e. 3.7 m/s).[107] The first build, iSplash-I (2014) was the first robotic platform to apply a full-body length carangiform swimming motion which was found to increase swimming speed by 27% over the traditional approach of a posterior confined waveform.[108]
Sailing[edit]




The autonomous sailboat robot Vaimos


Sailboat robots have also been developed in order to make measurements at the surface of the ocean. A typical sailboat robot is Vaimos[109] built by IFREMER and ENSTA-Bretagne. Since the propulsion of sailboat robots uses the wind, the energy of the batteries is only used for the computer, for the communication and for the actuators (to tune the rudder and the sail). If the robot is equipped with solar panels, the robot could theoretically navigate forever. The two main competitions of sailboat robots are WRSC, which takes place every year in Europe, and Sailbot.
Environmental interaction and navigation[edit]
Main article: Robotic mapping




Radar, GPS, and lidar, are all combined to provide proper navigation and obstacle avoidance (vehicle developed for 2007 DARPA Urban Challenge)








This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Though a significant percentage of robots in commission today are either human controlled or operate in a static environment, there is an increasing interest in robots that can operate autonomously in a dynamic environment. These robots require some combination of navigation hardware and software in order to traverse their environment. In particular, unforeseen events (e.g. people and other obstacles that are not stationary) can cause problems or collisions. Some highly advanced robots such as ASIMO and Meinü robot have particularly good robot navigation hardware and software. Also, self-controlled cars, Ernst Dickmanns' driverless car, and the entries in the DARPA Grand Challenge, are capable of sensing the environment well and subsequently making navigational decisions based on this information. Most of these robots employ a GPS navigation device with waypoints, along with radar, sometimes combined with other sensory data such as lidar, video cameras, and inertial guidance systems for better navigation between waypoints.
Human-robot interaction[edit]
Main article: Human-robot interaction




Kismet can produce a range of facial expressions.


The state of the art in sensory intelligence for robots will have to progress through several orders of magnitude if we want the robots working in our homes to go beyond vacuum-cleaning the floors. If robots are to work effectively in homes and other non-industrial environments, the way they are instructed to perform their jobs, and especially how they will be told to stop will be of critical importance. The people who interact with them may have little or no training in robotics, and so any interface will need to be extremely intuitive. Science fiction authors also typically assume that robots will eventually be capable of communicating with humans through speech, gestures, and facial expressions, rather than a command-line interface. Although speech would be the most natural way for the human to communicate, it is unnatural for the robot. It will probably be a long time before robots interact as naturally as the fictional C-3PO, or Data of Star Trek, Next Generation.
Speech recognition[edit]
Main article: Speech recognition
Interpreting the continuous flow of sounds coming from a human, in real time, is a difficult task for a computer, mostly because of the great variability of speech.[110] The same word, spoken by the same person may sound different depending on local acoustics, volume, the previous word, whether or not the speaker has a cold, etc.. It becomes even harder when the speaker has a different accent.[111] Nevertheless, great strides have been made in the field since Davis, Biddulph, and Balashek designed the first "voice input system" which recognized "ten digits spoken by a single user with 100% accuracy" in 1952.[112] Currently, the best systems can recognize continuous, natural speech, up to 160 words per minute, with an accuracy of 95%.[113]
Robotic voice[edit]
Other hurdles exist when allowing the robot to use voice for interacting with humans. For social reasons, synthetic voice proves suboptimal as a communication medium,[114] making it necessary to develop the emotional component of robotic voice through various techniques.[115][116]
Gestures[edit]
Further information: Gesture recognition
One can imagine, in the future, explaining to a robot chef how to make a pastry, or asking directions from a robot police officer. In both of these cases, making hand gestures would aid the verbal descriptions. In the first case, the robot would be recognizing gestures made by the human, and perhaps repeating them for confirmation. In the second case, the robot police officer would gesture to indicate "down the road, then turn right". It is likely that gestures will make up a part of the interaction between humans and robots.[117] A great many systems have been developed to recognize human hand gestures.[118]
Facial expression[edit]
Further information: Facial expression
Facial expressions can provide rapid feedback on the progress of a dialog between two humans, and soon may be able to do the same for humans and robots. Robotic faces have been constructed by Hanson Robotics using their elastic polymer called Frubber, allowing a large number of facial expressions due to the elasticity of the rubber facial coating and embedded subsurface motors (servos).[119] The coating and servos are built on a metal skull. A robot should know how to approach a human, judging by their facial expression and body language. Whether the person is happy, frightened, or crazy-looking affects the type of interaction expected of the robot. Likewise, robots like Kismet and the more recent addition, Nexi[120] can produce a range of facial expressions, allowing it to have meaningful social exchanges with humans.[121]
Artificial emotions[edit]
Artificial emotions can also be generated, composed of a sequence of facial expressions and/or gestures. As can be seen from the movie Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within, the programming of these artificial emotions is complex and requires a large amount of human observation. To simplify this programming in the movie, presets were created together with a special software program. This decreased the amount of time needed to make the film. These presets could possibly be transferred for use in real-life robots.
Personality[edit]
Many of the robots of science fiction have a personality, something which may or may not be desirable in the commercial robots of the future.[122] Nevertheless, researchers are trying to create robots which appear to have a personality:[123][124] i.e. they use sounds, facial expressions, and body language to try to convey an internal state, which may be joy, sadness, or fear. One commercial example is Pleo, a toy robot dinosaur, which can exhibit several apparent emotions.[125]
Social Intelligence[edit]
The Socially Intelligent Machines Lab of the Georgia Institute of Technology researches new concepts of guided teaching interaction with robots. The aim of the projects is a social robot that learns task and goals from human demonstrations without prior knowledge of high-level concepts. These new concepts are grounded from low-level continuous sensor data through unsupervised learning, and task goals are subsequently learned using a Bayesian approach. These concepts can be used to transfer knowledge to future tasks, resulting in faster learning of those tasks. The results are demonstrated by the robot Curi who can scoop some pasta from a pot onto a plate and serve the sauce on top.[126]
Control[edit]




Puppet Magnus, a robot-manipulated marionette with complex control systems






RuBot II can resolve manually Rubik cubes


Further information: Control system






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The mechanical structure of a robot must be controlled to perform tasks. The control of a robot involves three distinct phases – perception, processing, and action (robotic paradigms). Sensors give information about the environment or the robot itself (e.g. the position of its joints or its end effector). This information is then processed to be stored or transmitted and to calculate the appropriate signals to the actuators (motors) which move the mechanical.
The processing phase can range in complexity. At a reactive level, it may translate raw sensor information directly into actuator commands. Sensor fusion may first be used to estimate parameters of interest (e.g. the position of the robot's gripper) from noisy sensor data. An immediate task (such as moving the gripper in a certain direction) is inferred from these estimates. Techniques from control theory convert the task into commands that drive the actuators.
At longer time scales or with more sophisticated tasks, the robot may need to build and reason with a "cognitive" model. Cognitive models try to represent the robot, the world, and how they interact. Pattern recognition and computer vision can be used to track objects. Mapping techniques can be used to build maps of the world. Finally, motion planning and other artificial intelligence techniques may be used to figure out how to act. For example, a planner may figure out how to achieve a task without hitting obstacles, falling over, etc.
Autonomy levels[edit]




TOPIO, a humanoid robot, played ping pong at Tokyo IREX 2009.[127]


Control systems may also have varying levels of autonomy.

Direct interaction is used for haptic or teleoperated devices, and the human has nearly complete control over the robot's motion.
Operator-assist modes have the operator commanding medium-to-high-level tasks, with the robot automatically figuring out how to achieve them.
An autonomous robot may go without human interaction for extended periods of time . Higher levels of autonomy do not necessarily require more complex cognitive capabilities. For example, robots in assembly plants are completely autonomous but operate in a fixed pattern.

Another classification takes into account the interaction between human control and the machine motions.

Teleoperation. A human controls each movement, each machine actuator change is specified by the operator.
Supervisory. A human specifies general moves or position changes and the machine decides specific movements of its actuators.
Task-level autonomy. The operator specifies only the task and the robot manages itself to complete it.
Full autonomy. The machine will create and complete all its tasks without human interaction.

Research[edit]
Further information: Open-source robotics, Evolutionary robotics, Areas of robotics, and Robotics simulator
Much of the research in robotics focuses not on specific industrial tasks, but on investigations into new types of robots, alternative ways to think about or design robots, and new ways to manufacture them. Other investigations, such as MIT's cyberflora project, are almost wholly academic.
A first particular new innovation in robot design is the open sourcing of robot-projects. To describe the level of advancement of a robot, the term "Generation Robots" can be used. This term is coined by Professor Hans Moravec, Principal Research Scientist at the Carnegie Mellon University Robotics Institute in describing the near future evolution of robot technology. First generation robots, Moravec predicted in 1997, should have an intellectual capacity comparable to perhaps a lizard and should become available by 2010. Because the first generation robot would be incapable of learning, however, Moravec predicts that the second generation robot would be an improvement over the first and become available by 2020, with the intelligence maybe comparable to that of a mouse. The third generation robot should have the intelligence comparable to that of a monkey. Though fourth generation robots, robots with human intelligence, professor Moravec predicts, would become possible, he does not predict this happening before around 2040 or 2050.[128]
The second is evolutionary robots. This is a methodology that uses evolutionary computation to help design robots, especially the body form, or motion and behavior controllers. In a similar way to natural evolution, a large population of robots is allowed to compete in some way, or their ability to perform a task is measured using a fitness function. Those that perform worst are removed from the population and replaced by a new set, which have new behaviors based on those of the winners. Over time the population improves, and eventually a satisfactory robot may appear. This happens without any direct programming of the robots by the researchers. Researchers use this method both to create better robots,[129] and to explore the nature of evolution.[130] Because the process often requires many generations of robots to be simulated,[131] this technique may be run entirely or mostly in simulation, then tested on real robots once the evolved algorithms are good enough.[132] Currently, there are about 10 million industrial robots toiling around the world, and Japan is the top country having high density of utilizing robots in its manufacturing industry.[citation needed]
Dynamics and kinematics[edit]
Further information: Kinematics and Dynamics (mechanics)

External video

 How the BB-8 Sphero Toy Works


The study of motion can be divided into kinematics and dynamics.[133] Direct kinematics refers to the calculation of end effector position, orientation, velocity, and acceleration when the corresponding joint values are known. Inverse kinematics refers to the opposite case in which required joint values are calculated for given end effector values, as done in path planning. Some special aspects of kinematics include handling of redundancy (different possibilities of performing the same movement), collision avoidance, and singularity avoidance. Once all relevant positions, velocities, and accelerations have been calculated using kinematics, methods from the field of dynamics are used to study the effect of forces upon these movements. Direct dynamics refers to the calculation of accelerations in the robot once the applied forces are known. Direct dynamics is used in computer simulations of the robot. Inverse dynamics refers to the calculation of the actuator forces necessary to create a prescribed end-effector acceleration. This information can be used to improve the control algorithms of a robot.
In each area mentioned above, researchers strive to develop new concepts and strategies, improve existing ones, and improve the interaction between these areas. To do this, criteria for "optimal" performance and ways to optimize design, structure, and control of robots must be developed and implemented.
Bionics and biomimetics[edit]
Bionics and biomimetics apply the physiology and methods of locomotion of animals to the design of robots. For example, the design of BionicKangaroo was based on the way kangaroos jump.
Education and training[edit]
Main article: Educational robotics




The SCORBOT-ER 4u educational robot


Robotics engineers design robots, maintain them, develop new applications for them, and conduct research to expand the potential of robotics.[134] Robots have become a popular educational tool in some middle and high schools, particularly in parts of the USA,[135] as well as in numerous youth summer camps, raising interest in programming, artificial intelligence, and robotics among students. First-year computer science courses at some universities now include programming of a robot in addition to traditional software engineering-based coursework.[54]
Career training[edit]
Universities offer bachelors, masters, and doctoral degrees in the field of robotics.[136] Vocational schools offer robotics training aimed at careers in robotics.
Certification[edit]
The Robotics Certification Standards Alliance (RCSA) is an international robotics certification authority that confers various industry- and educational-related robotics certifications.
Summer robotics camp[edit]
Several national summer camp programs include robotics as part of their core curriculum. In addition, youth summer robotics programs are frequently offered by celebrated museums and institutions.
Robotics competitions[edit]
Main article: Robot competition
There are lots of competitions all around the globe. One of the most important competitions is the FLL or FIRST Lego League. The idea of this specific competition is that kids start developing knowledge and getting into robotics while playing with Legos since they are 9 years old. This competition is associated with Ni or National Instruments.
Robotics afterschool programs[edit]
Many schools across the country are beginning to add robotics programs to their after school curriculum. Some major programs for afterschool robotics include FIRST Robotics Competition, Botball and B.E.S.T. Robotics.[137] Robotics competitions often include aspects of business and marketing as well as engineering and design.
The Lego company began a program for children to learn and get excited about robotics at a young age.[138]
Employment[edit]




A robot technician builds small all-terrain robots. (Courtesy: MobileRobots Inc)


Main article: Technological unemployment
Robotics is an essential component in many modern manufacturing environments. As factories increase their use of robots, the number of robotics–related jobs grow and have been observed to be steadily rising.[139] The employment of robots in industries has increased productivity and efficiency savings and is typically seen as a long term investment for benefactors. A frequently cited paper by Michael Osborne and Carl Benedikt Frey found that almost half of jobs are at risk to automation due to robots.[140]
Occupational safety and health implications[edit]
A discussion paper drawn up by EU-OSHA highlights how the spread of robotics presents both opportunities and challenges for occupational safety and health (OSH).[141]
The greatest OSH benefits stemming from the wider use of robotics should be substitution for people working in unhealthy or dangerous environments. In space, defence, security, or the nuclear industry, but also in logistics, maintenance, and inspection, autonomous robots are particularly useful in replacing human workers performing dirty, dull or unsafe tasks, thus avoiding workers' exposures to hazardous agents and conditions and reducing physical, ergonomic and psychosocial risks. For example, robots are already used to perform repetitive and monotonous tasks, to handle radioactive material or to work in explosive atmospheres. In the future, many other highly repetitive, risky or unpleasant tasks will be performed by robots in a variety of sectors like agriculture, construction, transport, healthcare, firefighting or cleaning services.[142]
Despite these advances, there are certain skills to which humans will be better suited than machines for some time to come and the question is how to achieve the best combination of human and robot skills. The advantages of robotics include heavy-duty jobs with precision and repeatability, whereas the advantages of humans include creativity, decision-making, flexibility and adaptability. This need to combine optimal skills has resulted in collaborative robots and humans sharing a common workspace more closely and led to the development of new approaches and standards to guarantee the safety of the "man-robot merger". Some European countries are including robotics in their national programmes and trying to promote a safe and flexible co-operation between robots and operators to achieve better productivity. For example, the German Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (BAuA) organises annual workshops on the topic "human-robot collaboration".
In future, co-operation between robots and humans will be diversified, with robots increasing their autonomy and human-robot collaboration reaching completely new forms. Current approaches and technical standards[143][144] aiming to protect employees from the risk of working with collaborative robots will have to be revised.
See also[edit]


Robotics portal



Anderson Powerpole connector
Artificial intelligence
Autonomous robot
Cloud robotics
Cognitive robotics
Evolutionary robotics
Glossary of robotics
Index of robotics articles
Mechatronics
Multi-agent system
Outline of robotics
Roboethics
Robot rights
Robotic governance
Soft robotics

References[edit]


^ Nocks, Lisa (2007). The robot : the life story of a technology. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ a b Zunt, Dominik. "Who did actually invent the word "robot" and what does it mean?". The Karel Čapek website. Archived from the original on 2013-01-23. Retrieved 2017-02-05. 
^ Asimov, Isaac (1996) [1995]. "The Robot Chronicles". Gold. London: Voyager. pp. 224–225. ISBN 0-00-648202-3. 
^ Asimov, Isaac (1983). "4 The Word I Invented". Counting the Eons. Doubleday. Robotics has become a sufficiently well developed technology to warrant articles and books on its history and I have watched this in amazement, and in some disbelief, because I invented … the word 
^ "Robotics: About the Exhibition". The Tech Museum of Innovation. Retrieved 2008-09-15. 
^ Needham, Joseph (1991). Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 2, History of Scientific Thought. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-05800-7. 
^ Fowler, Charles B. (October 1967). "The Museum of Music: A History of Mechanical Instruments". Music Educators Journal. 54 (2): 45–49. doi:10.2307/3391092. JSTOR 3391092. 
^ Rosheim, Mark E. (1994). Robot Evolution: The Development of Anthrobotics. Wiley-IEEE. pp. 9–10. ISBN 0-471-02622-0. 
^ al-Jazari (Islamic artist), Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ PhD, Renato M.E. Sabbatini,. "Sabbatini, RME: An Imitation of Life: The First Robots". 
^ Waurzyniak, Patrick (2006). "Masters of Manufacturing: Joseph F. Engelberger". Society of Manufacturing Engineers. 137 (1). Archived from the original on 2011-11-09. 
^ http://www.humanoid.waseda.ac.jp/booklet/kato_2-j.html
^ Robotics and Mechatronics: Proceedings of the 4th IFToMM International Symposium on Robotics and Mechatronics, page 66
^ "Historical Android Projects". androidworld.com. 
^ Robots: From Science Fiction to Technological Revolution, page 130
^ Handbook of Digital Human Modeling: Research for Applied Ergonomics and Human Factors Engineering, Chapter 3, pages 1–2
^ "KUKA Industrial Robot FAMULUS". Retrieved 2008-01-10. 
^ "History of Industrial Robots" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-12-24. Retrieved 2012-10-27. 
^ "Communist Robot ::". 
^ "OUCL Robot Sheepdog Project". 
^ Pinto, Jim (October 1, 2003). "Fully automated factories approach reality". AutomationWorld. 
^ "パナソニック電工株式会社 – 住まいと暮らし、制御機器、電子材料の総合メーカー – Panasonic". 
^ [1][dead link]
^ "At Hong Kong High-Tech Cafe, Everything Is Served With Microchips". 
^ "Communist Robot ::". 
^ "Robots may force chefs out of the kitchen". 
^ "Meet Boris, the robot that can load a dishwasher". 3 October 2014. 
^ https://www.iothub.com.au/news/ai-driven-robot-makes-perfect-flatbread-478288
^ One database, developed by the United States Department of Energy contains information on almost 500 existing robotic technologies and can be found on the D&D Knowledge Management Information Tool.
^ UIUC Agricultural Engineering | Faculty and Staff
^ service-robots.org – agriculture & harvesting
^ Dowling, Kevin. "Power Sources for Small Robots" (PDF). Carnegie Mellon University. Retrieved 11 May 2012. 
^ Bi-directional series-parallel elastic actuator and overlap of the actuation layers Raphaël Furnémont1, Glenn Mathijssen1,2, Tom Verstraten1, Dirk Lefeber1 and Bram Vanderborght1 Published 26 January 2016 • © 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd
^ "CiteSeerX — Series Elastic Actuators for legged robots". Citeseerx.ist.psu.edu. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ www.imagesco.com, Images SI Inc -. "Air Muscle actuators, going further, page 6". 
^ "Air Muscles". Shadow Robot. 
^ Tondu, Bertrand (2012). "Modelling of the McKibben artificial muscle: A review". Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures. 23 (3): 225–253. doi:10.1177/1045389X11435435. 
^ "TALKING ELECTRONICS Nitinol Page-1". Talkingelectronics.com. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "lf205, Hardware: Building a Linux-controlled walking robot". Ibiblio.org. 2001-11-01. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "WW-EAP and Artificial Muscles". Eap.jpl.nasa.gov. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "Empa – a117-2-eap". Empa.ch. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "Electroactive Polymers (EAP) as Artificial Muscles (EPAM) for Robot Applications". Hizook. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "Piezo LEGS – -09-26". 
^ "Squiggle Motors: Overview". Retrieved 2007-10-08. 
^ Nishibori; et al. (2003). "Robot Hand with Fingers Using Vibration-Type Ultrasonic Motors (Driving Characteristics)". Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics. Retrieved 2007-10-09. 
^ Otake; et al. (2001). "Shape Design of Gel Robots made of Electroactive Polymer trolo Gel" (PDF). Retrieved 2007-10-16. 
^ John D. Madden, 2007, /science.1146351
^ "Syntouch LLC: BioTac(R) Biomimetic Tactile Sensor Array". Retrieved 2009-08-10. 
^ Wettels, N; Santos, VJ; Johansson, RS; Loeb, Gerald E.; et al. (2008). "Biomimetic tactile sensor array". Advanced Robotics. 22 (8): 829–849. doi:10.1163/156855308X314533. 
^ "What is The SmartHand?". SmartHand Project. Retrieved 4 February 2011. 
^ "What is a robotic end-effector?". ATI Industrial Automation. 2007. Retrieved 2007-10-16. 
^ Crane, Carl D.; Joseph Duffy (1998). Kinematic Analysis of Robot Manipulators. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-57063-8. Retrieved 2007-10-16. 
^ G.J. Monkman, S. Hesse, R. Steinmann & H. Schunk – Robot Grippers – Wiley, Berlin 2007
^ a b I. Ben-Gal, Y. Bukchin, O. Goldstain (2007. "Remote learning for the manipulation and control of robotic cells" (PDF). European Journal of Engineering Education 32 (4), 481–494, 2007. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Annotated Mythbusters: Episode 78: Ninja Myths – Walking on Water, Catching a Sword, Catching an Arrow".  (Discovery Channel's Mythbusters making mechanical gripper from chain and metal wire)
^ Robonaut hand
^ Delft hand by TU Delft
^ M&C. "TU Delft ontwikkelt goedkope, voorzichtige robothand". 
^ "astrictive definition – English definition dictionary – Reverso". 
^ Tijsma, H. A.; Liefhebber, F.; Herder, J. L. (1 June 2005). "Evaluation of new user interface features for the MANUS robot arm" (PDF). pp. 258–263. doi:10.1109/ICORR.2005.1501097 – via IEEE Xplore. 
^ Allcock, Andrew (2006). "Anthropomorphic hand is almost human". Machinery. Retrieved 2007-10-17. 
^ "Welcome". 
^ "T.O.B.B". Mtoussaint.de. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "nBot, a two wheel balancing robot". Geology.heroy.smu.edu. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "ROBONAUT Activity Report". NASA. 2004. Archived from the original on 2007-08-20. Retrieved 2007-10-20. 
^ "IEEE Spectrum: A Robot That Balances on a Ball". Spectrum.ieee.org. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "Carnegie Mellon Researchers Develop New Type of Mobile Robot That Balances and Moves on a Ball Instead of Legs or Wheels" (Press release). Carnegie Mellon. 2006-08-09. Retrieved 2007-10-20. 
^ "Spherical Robot Can Climb Over Obstacles". BotJunkie. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "Rotundus". Rotundus.se. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "OrbSwarm Gets A Brain". BotJunkie. 2007-07-11. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "Rolling Orbital Bluetooth Operated Thing". BotJunkie. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "Swarm". Orbswarm.com. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "The Ball Bot : Johnnytronic@Sun". Blogs.sun.com. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "Senior Design Projects | College of Engineering & Applied Science| University of Colorado at Boulder". Engineering.colorado.edu. 2008-04-30. Retrieved 2010-11-27. 
^ "JPL Robotics: System: Commercial Rovers". 
^ "AMBER Lab". 
^ "Micromagic Systems Robotics Lab". 
^ AMRU-5 hexapod robot
^ "Achieving Stable Walking". Honda Worldwide. Retrieved 2007-10-22. 
^ "Funny Walk". Pooter Geek. 2004-12-28. Retrieved 2007-10-22. 
^ "ASIMO's Pimp Shuffle". Popular Science. 2007-01-09. Retrieved 2007-10-22. 
^ "The Temple of VTEC – Honda and Acura Enthusiasts Online Forums > Robot Shows Prime Minister How to Loosen Up > > A drunk robot?". 
^ "3D One-Leg Hopper (1983–1984)". MIT Leg Laboratory. Retrieved 2007-10-22. 
^ "3D Biped (1989–1995)". MIT Leg Laboratory. 
^ "Quadruped (1984–1987)". MIT Leg Laboratory. 
^ "MIT Leg Lab Robots- Main". 
^ "About the robots". Anybots. Archived from the original on 2007-09-09. Retrieved 2007-10-23. 
^ "Homepage". Anybots. Retrieved 2007-10-23. 
^ "Dexter Jumps video". YouTube. 2007-03-01. Retrieved 2007-10-23. 
^ Collins, Steve; Wisse, Martijn; Ruina, Andy; Tedrake, Russ (2005-02-11). "Efficient bipedal robots based on passive-dynamic Walkers" (PDF). Science. 307 (5712): 1082–1085. doi:10.1126/science.1107799. PMID 15718465. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-06-22. Retrieved 2007-09-11. 
^ Collins, Steve; Ruina, Andy. "A bipedal walking robot with efficient and human-like gait" (PDF). Proc. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. 
^ "Testing the Limits" (PDF). Boeing. p. 29. Retrieved 2008-04-09. 
^ Miller, Gavin. "Introduction". snakerobots.com. Retrieved 2007-10-22. 
^ ACM-R5
^ Swimming snake robot (commentary in Japanese)
^ "Commercialized Quadruped Walking Vehicle "TITAN VII"". Hirose Fukushima Robotics Lab. Retrieved 2007-10-23. 
^ "Plen, the robot that skates across your desk". SCI FI Tech. 2007-01-23. Retrieved 2007-10-23. 
^ Capuchin on YouTube
^ Wallbot on YouTube
^ Stanford University: Stickybot on YouTube
^ Sfakiotakis; et al. (1999). "Review of Fish Swimming Modes for Aquatic Locomotion" (PDF). IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-26. Retrieved 2007-10-24. 
^ Richard Mason. "What is the market for robot fish?". 
^ "Robotic fish powered by Gumstix PC and PIC". Human Centred Robotics Group at Essex University. Retrieved 2007-10-25. 
^ Witoon Juwarahawong. "Fish Robot". Institute of Field Robotics. Archived from the original on 2007-11-04. Retrieved 2007-10-25. 
^ "YouTube". 
^ "High-Speed Robotic Fish | iSplash". isplash-robot. Retrieved 2017-01-07. 
^ "iSplash-II: Realizing Fast Carangiform Swimming to Outperform a Real Fish" (PDF). Robotics Group at Essex University. Retrieved 2015-09-29. 
^ "iSplash-I: High Performance Swimming Motion of a Carangiform Robotic Fish with Full-Body Coordination" (PDF). Robotics Group at Essex University. Retrieved 2015-09-29. 
^ Jaulin, L.; Le Bars, F. (2012). "An interval approach for stability analysis; Application to sailboat robotics" (PDF). IEEE Transaction on Robotics. 27 (5). 
^ J. Norberto Pires, (2005). "Robot-by-voice: experiments on commanding an industrial robot using the human voice", Industrial Robot: An International Journal, Vol. 32, Issue 6, pp. 505–511, doi:10.1108/01439910510629244. Available: online and pdf
^ "Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology: 1.2: Speech Recognition". 
^ Fournier, Randolph Scott., and B. June. Schmidt. "Voice Input Technology: Learning Style and Attitude Toward Its Use." Delta Pi Epsilon Journal 37 (1995): 1_12.
^ "History of Speech & Voice Recognition and Transcription Software". Dragon Naturally Speaking. Retrieved 2007-10-27. 
^ M.L. Walters, D.S. Syrdal, K.L. Koay, K. Dautenhahn, R. te Boekhorst, (2008). Human approach distances to a mechanical-looking robot with different robot voice styles. In: Proceedings of the 17th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication, 2008. RO-MAN 2008, Munich, 1–3 Aug. 2008, pp. 707–712, doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2008.4600750. Available: online and pdf
^ Sandra Pauletto, Tristan Bowles, (2010). Designing the emotional content of a robotic speech signal. In: Proceedings of the 5th Audio Mostly Conference: A Conference on Interaction with Sound, New York, ISBN 978-1-4503-0046-9, doi:10.1145/1859799.1859804. Available: online
^ Tristan Bowles, Sandra Pauletto, (2010). Emotions in the Voice: Humanising a Robotic Voice. In: Proceedings of the 7th Sound and Music Computing Conference, Barcelona, Spain.
^ Waldherr, Romero & Thrun (2000). "A Gesture Based Interface for Human-Robot Interaction" (PDF). Kluwer Academic Publishers. Retrieved 2007-10-28. 
^ Markus Kohler. "Vision Based Hand Gesture Recognition Systems". University of Dortmund. Retrieved 2007-10-28. 
^ Frubber facial expressions
^ "Best Inventions of 2008 – TIME". 29 October 2008 – via www.time.com. 
^ "Kismet: Robot at MIT's AI Lab Interacts With Humans". Sam Ogden. Retrieved 2007-10-28. 
^ (Park et al. 2005) Synthetic Personality in Robots and its Effect on Human-Robot Relationship
^ "Robot Receptionist Dishes Directions and Attitude". 
^ New Scientist: A good robot has personality but not looks
^ "Playtime with Pleo, your robotic dinosaur friend". 
^ Jennifer Bogo (October 31, 2014). "Meet a woman who trains robots for a living". 
^ "A Ping-Pong-Playing Terminator". Popular Science. 
^ NOVA conversation with Professor Moravec, October, 1997. NOVA Online
^ Sandhana, Lakshmi (2002-09-05). A Theory of Evolution, for Robots. Wired Magazine. Retrieved 2007-10-28. 
^ Experimental Evolution In Robots Probes The Emergence Of Biological Communication. Science Daily. 2007-02-24. Retrieved 2007-10-28. 
^ Žlajpah, Leon (2008-12-15). "Simulation in robotics". Mathematics and Computers in Simulation. 79 (4): 879–897. doi:10.1016/j.matcom.2008.02.017. 
^ The Latest Technology Research News: Evolution trains robot teams
^ Agarwal, P.K. Elements of Physics XI. Rastogi Publications. 
^ "Career: Robotics Engineer". Princeton Review. 2012. Retrieved 2012-01-27. 
^ Saad, Ashraf; Kroutil, Ryan (2012). Hands-on Learning of Programming Concepts Using Robotics for Middle and High School Students. Proceedings of the 50th Annual Southeast Regional Conference of the Association for Computer Machinery. ACM. pp. 361–362. doi:10.1145/2184512.2184605. 
^ "Robotics Degree Programs at Worcester Polytechnic Institute". Worcester Polytechnic Institute. 2013. Retrieved 2013-04-12. 
^ "B.E.S.T. Robotics". 
^ "LEGO® Building & Robotics After School Programs". Retrieved 5 November 2014. 
^ Toy, Tommy (June 29, 2011). "Outlook for robotics and Automation for 2011 and beyond are excellent says expert". PBT Consulting. Retrieved 2012-01-27. 
^ "The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to computerisation?". Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 114: 254–280. 2017-01-01. doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2016.08.019. ISSN 0040-1625. 
^ "Focal Points Seminar on review articles in the future of work – Safety and health at work – EU-OSHA". osha.europa.eu. Retrieved 2016-04-19. 
^ "Robotics: Redefining crime prevention, public safety and security". SourceSecurity.com. 
^ "Draft Standard for Intelligent Assist Devices — Personnel Safety Requirements"
^ "ISO/TS 15066:2016 – Robots and robotic devices – Collaborative robots". 


Further reading[edit]

R. Andrew Russell (1990). Robot Tactile Sensing. New York: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-781592-1. 

External links[edit]

Find more aboutRoboticsat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Robotics at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
IEEE Robotics and Automation Society
Future Robotics – The Human Algorithm
Investigation of social robots – Robots that mimic human behaviors and gestures.
Wired's guide to the '50 best robots ever', a mix of robots in fiction (Hal, R2D2, K9) to real robots (Roomba, Mobot, Aibo).
Notable Chinese Firms Emerging in Medical Robots Sector(GCiS)







v
t
e


Robotics



Main articles



Outline
Glossary
Index
History
Future
Geography
Hall of Fame
Ethics
Laws
AI competitions








Types



Anthropomorphic

Humanoid
Android
Cyborg


Claytronics
Animatronic
Industrial
Articulated

arm


Domestic
Entertainment
Juggling
Military
Medical
Service
Disability
Agricultural
Food service
Retailing
BEAM robotics
Soft robotics
Uncrewed vehicle





Classifications



Aerial vehicle
Ground vehicle
Mobile robot

navigation


Microbotics
Nanorobotics
Robotic spacecraft

Space probe


Swarm
Underwater





Locomotion



Tracks
Walking

Hexapod


Climbing
Self-balancing unicycle





Research



Evolutionary
Kits
Simulator
Suite
Open-source
Software
Adaptable
Developmental
Paradigms
Ubiquitous





Related



Technological unemployment
Fictional robots








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Emerging technologies



Fields




Agriculture



Agricultural robot
Closed ecological systems
Cultured meat
Genetically modified food
Precision agriculture
Vertical farming





Architecture



Arcology
Building printing

Contour crafting
D-Shape


Domed city





Biomedical



Artificial uterus
Ampakine
Brain transplant
Cryonics

Cryoprotectant
Cryopreservation
Vitrification
Suspended animation


De-extinction
Genetic engineering

Gene therapy


Head transplant
Isolated brain
Life extension

Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence


Nanomedicine
Nanosensors
Personalized medicine
Regenerative medicine

Stem-cell therapy
Tissue engineering


Robot-assisted surgery
Synthetic biology

Synthetic genomics


Virotherapy

Oncolytic virus


Tricorder
Whole genome sequencing





Displays




Next generation



FED
FLCD
iMoD
Laser
LPD
OLED
OLET
QD-LED
SED
TPD
TDEL
TMOS





Screenless



Bionic contact lens
Head-mounted display
Head-up display
Optical head-mounted display
Virtual retinal display





Other



Autostereoscopy
Flexible display
Holographic display

Computer-generated holography


Multi-primary color display
Ultra HD
Volumetric display








Electronics



Electronic nose
E-textiles
Flexible electronics
Molecular electronics
Nanoelectromechanical systems
Memristor
Spintronics
Thermal copper pillar bump





Energy




Production



Airborne wind turbine
Artificial photosynthesis
Biofuels
Carbon-neutral fuel
Concentrated solar power
Fusion power
Home fuel cell
Hydrogen economy
Methanol economy
Molten salt reactor
Nantenna
Photovoltaic pavement
Space-based solar power
Vortex engine





Storage



Beltway battery
Compressed air energy storage
Flywheel energy storage
Grid energy storage
Lithium–air battery
Molten-salt battery
Nanowire battery
Research in lithium-ion batteries
Silicon–air battery
Thermal energy storage
Ultracapacitor





Other



Smart grid
Wireless power









Information and
communications




Ambient intelligence

Internet of things


Artificial intelligence

Applications of artificial intelligence
Progress in artificial intelligence
Machine translation
Mobile translation
Machine vision
Semantic Web
Speech recognition


Atomtronics
Carbon nanotube field-effect transistor
Cybermethodology
Fourth-generation optical discs

3D optical data storage
Holographic data storage


GPGPU
Memory

CBRAM
FRAM
Millipede
MRAM
NRAM
PRAM
Racetrack memory
RRAM
SONOS


Optical computing
RFID

Chipless RFID


Software-defined radio
Three-dimensional integrated circuit





Manufacturing



3D printing
Claytronics
Molecular assembler
Utility fog





Materials science



Aerogel
Amorphous metal
Artificial muscle
Conductive polymer
Femtotechnology
Fullerene
Graphene
High-temperature superconductivity
High-temperature superfluidity
Linear acetylenic carbon
Metamaterials

Metamaterial cloaking


Metal foam
Multi-function structures
Nanotechnology

Carbon nanotubes
Molecular nanotechnology
Nanomaterials


Picotechnology
Programmable matter
Quantum dots
Silicene
Superalloy
Synthetic diamond





Military



Antimatter weapon
Caseless ammunition
Directed-energy weapon

Laser
Maser
Particle-beam weapon
Sonic weapon
Coilgun
Railgun


Plasma weapon
Pure fusion weapon
Stealth technology
Vortex ring gun





Neuroscience



Artificial brain

Blue Brain Project


Brain–computer interface
Electroencephalography
Mind uploading

Brain-reading
Neuroinformatics


Neuroprosthetics

Bionic eye
Brain implant
Exocortex
Retinal implant







Quantum



Quantum algorithms
Quantum amplifier
Quantum bus
Quantum channel
Quantum circuit
Quantum complexity theory
Quantum computing
Quantum cryptography
Quantum dynamics
Quantum electronics
Quantum error correction
Quantum imaging
Quantum information
Quantum key distribution
Quantum logic
Quantum logic gates
Quantum machine
Quantum machine learning
Quantum metamaterial
Quantum metrology
Quantum network
Quantum neural network
Quantum optics
Quantum programming
Quantum sensing
Quantum simulator
Quantum teleportation





Robotics



Domotics
Nanorobotics
Powered exoskeleton
Self-reconfiguring modular robot
Swarm robotics
Uncrewed vehicle





Space science




Launch



Fusion rocket
Non-rocket spacelaunch

Mass driver
Orbital ring
Skyhook
Space elevator
Space fountain
Space tether


Reusable launch system





Propulsion



Beam-powered propulsion
Ion thruster
Laser propulsion
Plasma propulsion engine

Helicon thruster
VASIMR


Project Orion
Nuclear pulse propulsion
Solar sail





Other



Interstellar travel
Propellant depot








Transport




Aerial



Adaptive compliant wing
Aeroscraft
Backpack helicopter
Delivery drone
Flying car
High-altitude platform
Jet pack
Pulse detonation engine
Scramjet
Spaceplane

Skylon


Supersonic transport





Land



Airless tire

Tweel


Alternative fuel vehicle

Hydrogen vehicle


Driverless car
Ground effect train
Maglev train
Personal rapid transit
Vactrain

ET3 Global Alliance
Hyperloop


Vehicular communication systems





Pipeline



Pneumatic transport

Automated vacuum collection
Foodtubes










Other



Anti-gravity
Cloak of invisibility
Digital scent technology
Force field

Plasma window


Immersive virtual reality

VirtuSphere


Magnetic refrigeration
Phased-array optics








Topics



Collingridge dilemma
Differential technological development
Ephemeralization
Exploratory engineering
Fictional technology
Proactionary principle
Technological change

Technological unemployment


Technological convergence
Technological evolution
Technological paradigm
Technology forecasting

Accelerating change
Moore's law
Technological singularity
Technology scouting


Technology readiness level
Technology roadmap
Transhumanism








 Category
 List









Authority control



LCCN: sh85114628
GND: 4261462-4
BNF: cb11983019n (data)
BNE: XX550609











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robotics&oldid=818421077"					Categories: RoboticsHidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2017CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles containing Chinese-language textAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from May 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2011Articles with unsourced statements from May 2009Articles needing additional references from July 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers