For other uses, see Rose (disambiguation), Roses (disambiguation), and Rosa.


Rose





Rosa rubiginosa


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Plantae


Clade:
Angiosperms


Clade:
Eudicots


Clade:
Rosids


Order:
Rosales


Family:
Rosaceae


Subfamily:
Rosoideae


Genus:
Rosa
L.


Species



See List of Rosa species



Synonyms




Hulthemia Dumort.
×Hulthemosa Juz. (Hulthemia × Rosa)




A rose is a woody perennial flowering plant of the genus Rosa, in the family Rosaceae, or the flower it bears. There are over a hundred species and thousands of cultivars. They form a group of plants that can be erect shrubs, climbing or trailing with stems that are often armed with sharp prickles. Flowers vary in size and shape and are usually large and showy, in colours ranging from white through yellows and reds. Most species are native to Asia, with smaller numbers native to Europe, North America, and northwestern Africa. Species, cultivars and hybrids are all widely grown for their beauty and often are fragrant. Roses have acquired cultural significance in many societies. Rose plants range in size from compact, miniature roses, to climbers that can reach seven meters in height. Different species hybridize easily, and this has been used in the development of the wide range of garden roses.[1]
The name rose comes from French, itself from Latin rosa, which was perhaps borrowed from Oscan, from Greek ρόδον rhódon (Aeolic βρόδον wródon), itself borrowed from Old Persian wrd- (wurdi), related to Avestan varəδa, Sogdian ward, Parthian wâr.[2][3]



Contents


1 Botany

1.1 Species


2 Uses

2.1 Ornamental plants
2.2 Cut flowers
2.3 Perfume
2.4 Food and drink
2.5 Medicine
2.6 Culture

2.6.1 Art
2.6.2 Symbolism




3 Pests and diseases
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Botany




Longitudinal section through a developing rose hip






Exterior view of rose buds






Rose leaflets






Size can be as small as a thumbnail


The leaves are borne alternately on the stem. In most species they are 5 to 15 centimetres (2.0 to 5.9 in) long, pinnate, with (3–) 5–9 (–13) leaflets and basal stipules; the leaflets usually have a serrated margin, and often a few small prickles on the underside of the stem. Most roses are deciduous but a few (particularly from South east Asia) are evergreen or nearly so.




The hybrid garden rose "Amber Flush"


The flowers of most species have five petals, with the exception of Rosa sericea, which usually has only four. Each petal is divided into two distinct lobes and is usually white or pink, though in a few species yellow or red. Beneath the petals are five sepals (or in the case of some Rosa sericea, four). These may be long enough to be visible when viewed from above and appear as green points alternating with the rounded petals. There are multiple superior ovaries that develop into achenes.[4] Roses are insect-pollinated in nature.
The aggregate fruit of the rose is a berry-like structure called a rose hip. Many of the domestic cultivars do not produce hips, as the flowers are so tightly petalled that they do not provide access for pollination. The hips of most species are red, but a few (e.g. Rosa pimpinellifolia) have dark purple to black hips. Each hip comprises an outer fleshy layer, the hypanthium, which contains 5–160 "seeds" (technically dry single-seeded fruits called achenes) embedded in a matrix of fine, but stiff, hairs. Rose hips of some species, especially the dog rose (Rosa canina) and rugosa rose (Rosa rugosa), are very rich in vitamin C, among the richest sources of any plant. The hips are eaten by fruit-eating birds such as thrushes and waxwings, which then disperse the seeds in their droppings. Some birds, particularly finches, also eat the seeds.




Rose thorns are actually prickles – outgrowths of the epidermis.


While the sharp objects along a rose stem are commonly called "thorns", they are technically prickles—outgrowths of the epidermis (the outer layer of tissue of the stem). (True thorns, as produced by e.g. Citrus or Pyracantha, are modified stems, which always originate at a node and which have nodes and internodes along the length of the thorn itself.) Rose prickles are typically sickle-shaped hooks, which aid the rose in hanging onto other vegetation when growing over it. Some species such as Rosa rugosa and Rosa pimpinellifolia have densely packed straight prickles, probably an adaptation to reduce browsing by animals, but also possibly an adaptation to trap wind-blown sand and so reduce erosion and protect their roots (both of these species grow naturally on coastal sand dunes). Despite the presence of prickles, roses are frequently browsed by deer. A few species of roses have only vestigial prickles that have no points.
Species
Further information: List of Rosa species
The genus Rosa is subdivided into four subgenera:

Hulthemia (formerly Simplicifoliae, meaning "with single leaves") containing one or two species from southwest Asia, R. persica and Rosa berberifolia which are the only roses without compound leaves or stipules.
Hesperrhodos (from the Greek for "western rose") contains Rosa minutifolia and Rosa stellata, from North America.
Platyrhodon (from the Greek for "flaky rose", referring to flaky bark) with one species from east Asia, Rosa roxburghii (also known as the chestnut rose).
Rosa (the type subgenus, sometimes incorrectly called Eurosa) containing all the other roses. This subgenus is subdivided into 11 sections.

Banksianae – white and yellow flowered roses from China.
Bracteatae – three species, two from China and one from India.
Caninae – pink and white flowered species from Asia, Europe and North Africa.
Carolinae – white, pink, and bright pink flowered species all from North America.
Chinensis – white, pink, yellow, red and mixed-color roses from China and Burma.
Gallicanae – pink to crimson and striped flowered roses from western Asia and Europe.
Gymnocarpae – one species in western North America (Rosa gymnocarpa), others in east Asia.
Laevigatae – a single white flowered species from China
Pimpinellifoliae – white, pink, bright yellow, mauve and striped roses from Asia and Europe.
Rosa (syn. sect. Cinnamomeae) – white, pink, lilac, mulberry and red roses from everywhere but North Africa.
Synstylae – white, pink, and crimson flowered roses from all areas.







Rosa gallica Evêque, painted by Redouté


Uses
Roses are best known as ornamental plants grown for their flowers in the garden and sometimes indoors. They have been also used for commercial perfumery and commercial cut flower crops. Some are used as landscape plants, for hedging and for other utilitarian purposes such as game cover and slope stabilization. They also have minor medicinal uses.
Ornamental plants
Main article: Garden roses
The majority of ornamental roses are hybrids that were bred for their flowers. A few, mostly species roses are grown for attractive or scented foliage (such as Rosa glauca and Rosa rubiginosa), ornamental thorns (such as Rosa sericea) or for their showy fruit (such as Rosa moyesii).




Hybrid tea rose cultivar 'Mrs. Herbert Stevens'


Ornamental roses have been cultivated for millennia, with the earliest known cultivation known to date from at least 500 BC in Mediterranean countries, Persia, and China.[5] Many thousands of rose hybrids and cultivars have been bred and selected for garden use as flowering plants. Most are double-flowered with many or all of the stamens having mutated into additional petals.
In the early 19th century the Empress Josephine of France patronized the development of rose breeding at her gardens at Malmaison. As long ago as 1840 a collection numbering over one thousand different cultivars, varieties and species was possible when a rosarium was planted by Loddiges nursery for Abney Park Cemetery, an early Victorian garden cemetery and arboretum in England.
Cut flowers




Bouquet of pink roses


Roses are a popular crop for both domestic and commercial cut flowers. Generally they are harvested and cut when in bud, and held in refrigerated conditions until ready for display at their point of sale.
In temperate climates, cut roses are often grown in glasshouses, and in warmer countries they may also be grown under cover in order to ensure that the flowers are not damaged by weather and that pest and disease control can be carried out effectively. Significant quantities are grown in some tropical countries, and these are shipped by air to markets across the world.[6]
Some kind of roses are artificially coloured using dyed water, like rainbow roses.
Perfume
Main articles: Rose oil and Rose water
Rose perfumes are made from rose oil (also called attar of roses), which is a mixture of volatile essential oils obtained by steam distilling the crushed petals of roses. An associated product is rose water which is used for cooking, cosmetics, medicine and religious practices. The production technique originated in Persia and then spread through Arabia and India, and more recently into eastern Europe. In Bulgaria, Iran and Germany, damask roses (Rosa × damascena 'Trigintipetala') are used. In other parts of the world Rosa × centifolia is commonly used. The oil is transparent pale yellow or yellow-grey in colour. 'Rose Absolute' is solvent-extracted with hexane and produces a darker oil, dark yellow to orange in colour. The weight of oil extracted is about one three-thousandth to one six-thousandth of the weight of the flowers; for example, about two thousand flowers are required to produce one gram of oil.




Geraniol (C10H18O)


The main constituents of attar of roses are the fragrant alcohols geraniol and L-citronellol and rose camphor, an odorless solid composed of alkanes, which separates from rose oil.[7] β-Damascenone is also a significant contributor to the scent.
Food and drink
See also: Rose hip
Rose hips are occasionally made into jam, jelly, marmalade, and soup or are brewed for tea, primarily for their high vitamin C content. They are also pressed and filtered to make rose hip syrup. Rose hips are also used to produce rose hip seed oil, which is used in skin products and some makeup products. [8]




Rosa canina hips


Rose water has a very distinctive flavour and is used heavily in Middle Eastern, Persian, and South Asian cuisine—especially in sweets such as barfi, baklava, halva, gulab jamun, gumdrops, kanafeh, nougat, and Turkish delight.




Gulab jamun made with rose water


Rose petals or flower buds are sometimes used to flavour ordinary tea, or combined with other herbs to make herbal teas.
In France, there is much use of rose syrup, most commonly made from an extract of rose petals. In the Indian subcontinent, Rooh Afza, a concentrated squash made with roses, is popular, as are rose-flavoured frozen desserts such as ice cream and kulfi.[9][10]
Rose flowers are used as food, also usually as flavouring or to add their scent to food.[11] Other minor uses include candied rose petals.[12]
Rose creams (rose-flavoured fondant covered in chocolate, often topped with a crystallised rose petal) are a traditional English confectionery widely available from numerous producers in the UK.
Under the American Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act,[13] there are only certain Rosa species, varieties, and parts are on the Generally Recognized as Safe lists.

Rose absolute: Rosa alba L., Rosa centifolia L., Rosa damascena Mill., Rosa gallica L., and vars. of these spp.
Rose (otto of roses, attar of roses): Ditto
Rose buds: Ditto
Rose flowers: Ditto
Rose fruit (hips):Ditto
Rose leaves: Rosa spp.[14]

Medicine
The rose hip, usually from R. canina, is used as a minor source of vitamin C. The fruits of many species have significant levels of vitamins and have been used as a food supplement. Many roses have been used in herbal and folk medicines. Rosa chinensis has long been used in Chinese traditional medicine. This and other species have been used for stomach problems, and are being investigated for controlling cancer growth.[15] In pre-modern medicine, diarrhodon (Gr διάρροδον, "compound of roses", from ῥόδων, "of roses"[16]) is a name given to various compounds in which red roses are an ingredient.
Culture
Art
Roses are a favored subject in art and appear in portraits, illustrations, on stamps, as ornaments or as architectural elements. The Luxembourg-born Belgian artist and botanist Pierre-Joseph Redouté is known for his detailed watercolours of flowers, particularly roses.




Codex Manesse illuminated with roses, illustrated between 1305 and 1340 in Zürich. It contains love songs in Middle High German


Henri Fantin-Latour was also a prolific painter of still life, particularly flowers including roses. The rose 'Fantin-Latour' was named after the artist.
Other impressionists including Claude Monet, Paul Cézanne and Pierre-Auguste Renoir have paintings of roses among their works.
Symbolism
Further information: Rose (symbolism)
The long cultural history of the rose has led to it being used often as a symbol. They symbolised the Houses of York and Lancaster in a conflict known as the Wars of the Roses.
Pests and diseases
Main article: List of pests and diseases of roses
Wild roses are host plants for a number of pests and diseases. Many of these are also shared with other plants, including especially other genera of the Rosaceae.
Cultivated roses are often subject to severe damage from insect, arachnid and fungal pests and diseases. In many cases they cannot be usefully grown without regular treatment to control these problems.
See also


Plants portal
Gardening portal





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rosa.





Wikispecies has information related to Rosa





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Roses



ADR rose
List of Award of Garden Merit roses
List of rose cultivars named after people
Rose Hall of Fame
Rose (color)
Rose garden
Rose show
Rose trial grounds

References


^ "rose (plant) – Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Britannica.com. 2007-11-19. Retrieved 2009-12-07. 
^ American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition, s.v. "rose."
^ "GOL – Encyclopaedia Iranica". Iranicaonline.org. Retrieved 2013-03-13. 
^ Mabberley, D.J. 1997. The plant book: A portable dictionary of the vascular plants. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
^ Jack Goody. The culture of flowers. Cambridge University Press, 1993
^ "FOODNET Uganda 2009. Commercialisation bulletin: Fresh cut roses" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-06-30. Retrieved 2013-03-13. 
^ Stewart, D. (2005). The Chemistry Of Essential Oils Made Simple: God's Love Manifest In Molecules. Care. ISBN 978-0-934426-99-2. 
^ "Rose Hip / Rosehip". herbwisdom.com. Retrieved 17 January 2017. 
^ "Rose Flavored Ice Cream with Rose Petals". ecurry.com. 
^ Samanth Subramanian. "Rooh Afza, the syrup that sweetens the subcontinent's summers". thenational.ae. 
^ "St. Petersburg Times – Google News Archive Search". google.com. 
^ "rosepetal candy – Google Search". google.co.uk. 
^ "Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS)". 
^ "§182.20 Essential oils, oleoresins (solvent-free), and natural extractives (including distillates)". 
^ "Rosa chinensis China Rose PFAF Plant Database". Pfaf.org. Retrieved 2013-03-13. 
^ "dia-". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)


External links

World Federation of Rose Societies
 Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Rose". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 







v
t
e


Roses




List of Rosa species



Rose cultivars



Abraham Darby
ADR rose
Alain
Albéric Barbier
American Beauty
Angel Face
Anne Harkness
Arthur Bell
Beirut Rose
Belmonte
Blush Noisette
Bridge of Sighs
Buff Beauty
Camp David
Cécile Brünner
Charles Austin
Chopin
Chrysler Imperial
Conquista rose
Double Delight
Duchess of Cornwall
Eden
Elina
English Miss
Garden Party
Général Jacqueminot
Great Maiden's Blush
Harison's Yellow
Rosa Iceberg
Ingrid Bergman
Ispahan
Jeanie Deans
Julia Child rose
Heidi Klum rose
La France
Line Renaud
Louis de Funès rose
Mister Lincoln
Mrs Fred Danks
Mrs. Harkness
Nevada
Oklahoma
Old Blush
Rosa Peace
Perle d'Or
Pink Wonder
Precious Platinum
Queen Sirikit
Royal William rose
Schoener's Nutkana
Souvenir de la Malmaison
Spice Twice
SPIcup
Sun Flare
Sunsprite
Veilchenblau
Violet Carson
Wife of Bath





Rose classification



Floribunda
Hybrid tea rose





Uses and products



Cut flowers
Garden roses
Rose hip
Rose hip seed oil
Rose hip soup
Rose oil
Rose water





Threats




Diseases



Anthracnose
Black spot
Canker
Downy mildew
Grey mould
Powdery mildew
Phragmidium mucronatum (rust)
Sooty moulds
Specific replant disease
Verticillium wil





Pests



Helicotylenchus nannus
Lepidoptera
Meloidogyne hapla
Pratylenchus penetrans
Pratylenchus vulnus
Tylenchorhynchus
Xiphinema diversicaudatum








Culture



Blue rose
Gold dipped roses
Kutno Rose Festival
Rainbow rose
Red Rose of Lancaster
Rosalia (festival)
Rose (color)
Rose Hall of Fame
Rose of the Year
Rose show
Rose symbolism
Thousand-year Rose
Tudor rose
White Rose of York





Rose gardens



Alister Clark Memorial Rose Garden
All-American Rose Garden
Berkeley Rose Garden
Château de Bagatelle
Europa-Rosarium
Exposition Park Rose Garden
Fontvieille Park and Princess Grace Rose Garden
Garden Society of Gothenburg
Giardino delle rose
Government Rose Garden, Ooty
Heritage Rose District of New York City
Hex Castle
International Rose Test Garden
McGill Rose Garden
Mottisfont Abbey
Nieuwesteeg Heritage Rose Garden
Parc de la Tête d'or
Parnell Rose Gardens
Peninsula Park
Rome Rose Garden
Rosarium Uetersen
Rose Garden, Coburg
Rose trial grounds
Rosendals Trädgård
Roseraie de L'Haÿ
Royal National Rose Society Gardens
Różanka Rose Garden
San Jose Municipal Rose Garden
The Gardens of the American Rose Center
Villa Ephrussi de Rothschild
White House Rose Garden
Wohl Rose Park
Zakir Hussain Rose Garden





Rose competitions



Concours international de roses nouvelles de Bagatelle





Organizations



Royal National Rose Society
World Federation of Rose Societies





Related articles



List of Award of Garden Merit roses
List of rose breeders
List of rose cultivars named after people
Miracle of the roses
Roses in Portland, Oregon








 Category












v
t
e


National symbols of the United States



Symbols



Flag of the United States
Seal of the United States
Bald eagle
Uncle Sam
Columbia
General Grant (tree)
American's Creed
Pledge of Allegiance
Rose
Oak
American bison
Phrygian cap





Songs



"The Star-Spangled Banner"
"Dixie"
"America the Beautiful"
"The Stars and Stripes Forever"
"Hail to the Chief"
"Hail, Columbia"
"My Country, 'Tis of Thee"
"God Bless America"
"Lift Every Voice and Sing"
"The Army Goes Rolling Along"
"Anchors Aweigh"
"Marines' Hymn"
"Semper Fidelis"
"The Air Force Song"
"Semper Paratus"
"National Emblem"
"The Washington Post March"
"The Battle Hymn of the Republic"
"Yankee Doodle"
"You're a Grand Old Flag"
"When Johnny Comes Marching Home"





Mottos



In God We Trust
E Pluribus Unum
Novus ordo seclorum
Annuit cœptis





Landmarks



Statue of Liberty (Liberty Enlightening the World)
Liberty Bell
Mount Rushmore
National Mall

West Potomac Park














v
t
e


 National Symbols of Saint Lucia






National flag
National coat of arms
National anthem: Sons and Daughters of Saint Lucia
National bird: St. Lucia amazon
National flowers: Rose & Marguerite daisy
National plant: Bamboo
National tree: Calabash tree












Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q34687
APDB: 194483
EoL: 29911
FloraBase: 21507
FoC: 128746
Fossilworks: 157343
GBIF: 3002148
GRIN: 10544
iNaturalist: 53438
IPNI: 34015-1
ITIS: 24807
NCBI: 3764
PLANTS: ROSA5
Tropicos: 40026937
VASCAN: 1627
WoRMS: 425714









Authority control



LCCN: sh85115443
GND: 4050536-4
NDL: 00560519











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rose&oldid=813156283"					Categories: RosesCatalan symbolsFlowersGarden plantsMedicinal plantsNational symbols of the United StatesPlants used in AyurvedaPlants used in traditional Chinese medicineRosoideaeHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesArticles with 'species' microformatsWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers