This article is about the non-departmental public body. For the botanical gardens in Kew, south-west London, see Kew Gardens.

Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew




Type
Non-departmental public body


Location



Kew, London Borough of Richmond upon Thames






Key people




Marcus Agius (Chairman)
Richard Deverell (Director)
Kathy Willis (Director of Science)






Budget

£197 million[1]



Employees

723 (FTE)[1]


Mission
To be the global resource for plant and fungal knowledge, building an understanding of the world's plants and fungi upon which all our lives depend[2]


Website
www.kew.org






Palm House, Kew Gardens









Audio description of the Palm House at Kew Gardens by Baroness Lola Young


Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (brand name Kew) is a non-departmental public body in the United Kingdom sponsored by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. An internationally important botanical research and education institution, it employs 723 staff (FTE).[1] Its board of trustees is chaired by Marcus Agius,[1] a former chairman of Barclays.
The organisation manages botanic gardens at Kew in Richmond upon Thames in southwest London, and at Wakehurst Place, a National Trust property in Sussex which is home to an internationally important Millennium Seed Bank, whose scientists work with partner organisations in more than 95 countries.[3] Seed stored at the bank fulfils two functions: it provides an ex-situ conservation resource and also facilitates research around the globe by acting as a repository for seed scientists. Kew, jointly with the Forestry Commission, founded Bedgebury Pinetum in Kent, specialising in growing conifers.
The organisation has an average of 1 million paying visitors per year. Its 326-acre site at Kew has 40 historically important buildings and collections of over 40,000 species of plants and it became a United Nations World Heritage Site on 3 July 2003.[4]



Contents


1 Governance
2 Scientific staff
3 Resources at Kew

3.1 International Plant Names Index
3.2 The Plant List


4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Governance[edit]
Kew is governed by a board of trustees which comprises a chairman and eleven members. Ten members and the chairman are appointed by the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. Her Majesty the Queen appoints her own trustee on the recommendation of the Secretary of State. As of 2017[update] the Board members are:[1]

Marcus Agius (Chairman)
Sir Henry Keswick (appointed by HM The Queen)
Nick Baird
Professor Liam Dolan
Catherine Dugmore
Sarah Flannigan
Valerie Gooding
Professor Sue Hartley
Ian Karet
Sir Derek Myers
Professor Malcolm Press

Scientific staff[edit]
The Director of Science is University of Oxford Professor Kathy Willis. Her deputy is Professor Monique Simmonds. Professor Mark Chase is Senior Research Professor.[5]
Resources at Kew[edit]
International Plant Names Index[edit]
Main article: International Plant Names Index
The Harvard University Herbaria and the Australian National Herbarium co-operate with Kew in the IPNI (International Plant Names Index) database, a project which was launched in 1999 to produce an authoritative source of information on botanical nomenclature including publication details. The IPNI includes information from the Index Kewensis, a project which began in the 19th century to provide an "Index to the Names and Authorities of all known flowering plants and their countries".[6]
The Plant List[edit]
Kew also cooperates with the Missouri Botanical Garden in a related project called The Plant List; unlike the IPNI, it provides information on which names are currently accepted. The Plant List is an Internet encyclopedia project which was launched in 2010 to compile a comprehensive list of botanical nomenclature.[7] The Plant List has 1,040,426 scientific plant names of species rank of which 298,900 are accepted species names. In addition, the list has 620 plant families and 16,167 plant genera.[8]
See also[edit]


Biology portal
Gardening portal



Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew's two main sites:

Kew Gardens
Wakehurst Place


Botanists active at Kew Gardens
Curtis's Botanical Magazine, an illustrated publication which began in 1787 and is published by Wiley-Blackwell for the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
Directors of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
GrassBase
Index Kewensis, a massive index of plant names started and maintained by Kew Gardens
Joseph Dalton Hooker, who succeeded his father, William Jackson Hooker, as director in 1865
Kew Bulletin, a peer-reviewed scientific journal published by Springer Science+Business Media on behalf of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
The Great Plant Hunt, a primary school science initiative created by Kew Gardens, commissioned and funded by the Wellcome Trust

References[edit]


^ a b c d e "Annual report and accounts 2016–17" (PDF). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. 10 July 2017. Retrieved 26 August 2017. 
^ "Our mission and strategy". 26 August 2017. 
^ "How we work". Millennium Seed Bank. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 26 August 2017. 
^ Guinness World Records 2011. Guinness World Records. 2010. p. 69. ISBN 978 1 904994 57 2. 
^ "People". London: Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 26 August 2017. 
^ Hooker, Joseph Dalton, 1893 Preface. In Index Kewensis: an enumeration of the genera and species of flowering plants from the time of Linnaeus to the year 1885 inclusive (ed. B D Jackson). Oxford: Clarendon
^ Bates, Claire (5 January 2011). "Botanical A–Z via Kew: British experts complete database of every plant name on the planet – all 1.25million of them". Daily Mail. London. Retrieved 19 May 2015. 
^ Satter, Raphael G. (29 December 2010). "US, British scientists draw up comprehensive list of world's known land plants". boston.com. Retrieved 15 September 2014. 


External links[edit]
 Media related to Kew Gardens at Wikimedia Commons

Official website
BBC A Year at Kew documentary behind the scenes at Kew Gardens
Kew Diploma students talk about the course and their allotments which form part of the course







v
t
e


Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew



Locations



Kew Gardens
Wakehurst Place
Bedgebury National Pinetum





Buildings



Kew Palace





History



Directors of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew





Other



The Great Plant Hunt
Index Kewensis
International Plant Names Index
Kew Bulletin
Kew Constabulary
Kew Gardens (short story)
Kew Rule
Kingdom of Plants 3D
Millennium Seed Bank Partnership
The Plant List
The Queen's Beasts












v
t
e


London Borough of Richmond upon Thames



Districts



Barnes
East Sheen
Fulwell
Ham
Hampton
Hampton Hill
Hampton Wick
Kew
Mortlake
Petersham
Richmond
St Margarets
Strawberry Hill
Teddington
Twickenham
Whitton








Railway stations



 Barnes
 Barnes Bridge
 Fulwell
 Hampton
 Hampton Wick
 Kew Gardens
 Mortlake
 North Sheen
 Richmond
 St Margarets
 Strawberry Hill
 Teddington
 Twickenham
 Whitton





River Thames bridges, islands
and river services



Bridges
Benn's Island
Corporation Island
Eel Pie Island
Glover's Island
Platts Eyot
Swan Island
Tagg's Island
Trowlock Island
Hammerton's Ferry
Hampton Ferry
Kew Pier
Richmond Lock
Teddington Lifeboat Station
Teddington Lock
former Twickenham Ferry





Other rivers and streams



Beverley Brook
River Crane
Duke of Northumberland's River
Longford River
Sudbrook and Latchmere stream
River Thames





Sports venues



Athletic Ground, Richmond
Barn Elms Playing Fields
The Championship Course
Cricket clubs and grounds
Golf clubs and courses
Hampton Pool
The Lensbury
Pools on the Park
Royal Tennis Court, Hampton Court
Teddington Pools and Fitness Centre
Thames Young Mariners
Twickenham Stadium
Twickenham Stoop
former Ranelagh Club
former Richmond Ice Rink





Events



Annual sports events
Hampton Court Palace Festival
Hampton Court Palace Flower Show
IRB Rugby Aid Match





Breweries and pubs



Britannia, Richmond
The Bull's Head
The Crown, Twickenham
Dysart Arms
The Fox, Twickenham
The George, Twickenham
Hare and Hounds, Sheen
Jolly Coopers, Hampton
Old Ship, Richmond
Park Hotel, Teddington
Richmond Brewery Stores
Sun Inn, Barnes
Twickenham Fine Ales
Watney Combe & Reid
White Cross, Richmond
The White Swan, Twickenham‎





Theatres, cinemas
and music venues



The Bull's Head
Crawdaddy Club
The Exchange
Olympic Studios
Orange Tree Theatre
Puppet Theatre Barge
Richmond Theatre
TwickFolk
Wathen Hall
former Eel Pie Island Hotel





Film and recording studios



Astoria
The Boathouse, Twickenham
Eel Pie Studios
Olympic Studios
Teddington Studios
Twickenham Film Studios





Media and publishing



Richmond and Twickenham Times
former Gaydar Radio
former Hogarth Press





Historical royal palaces



Hampton Court Palace
Kew Palace
Richmond Palace





Other places
of interest



123 Mortlake High Street
18 Station Road, Barnes
70 Barnes High Street
Asgill House
Brinsworth House
Bushy House
Chapel House
Chapel in the Wood
Clarence House
Diana Fountain, Bushy Park
Doughty House
Douglas House
Downe House
East Sheen Filling Station
Fulwell bus garage
Garrick's Temple to Shakespeare
Garrick's Villa
Grove House, Hampton
Ham House
Hampton Youth Project
Harrods Furniture Depository
Hogarth House
The Homestead, Barnes
King's Observatory
Kneller Hall
Langham House
Langham House Close
Latchmere House
Lichfield Court
Marble Hill House
Montrose House
The Naked Ladies
National Physical Laboratory
Normansfield Theatre
The Old Court House
Ormeley Lodge
Pembroke Lodge
Pope's Grotto
Poppy Factory
The Queen's Beasts
Royal Military School of Music
Royal Star and Garter Home
St Leonard's Court
Strawberry Hill House
Sudbrook House and Park
The Terrace, Barnes
Thatched House Lodge
University Boat Race Stones
Victoria Working Men's Club
West Hall, Kew
White Lodge
The Wick
Wick House
Yelverton Lodge
York House





History



Adana Printing Machines
Admiralty Research Laboratory
Alcott House
Ashe baronets
Barnes rail crash
Camp Griffiss
Cross Deep House
GHQ Liaison Regiment
Hampton Court Conference
Kew Letters
Mortlake Tapestry Works
Mount Ararat, Richmond
Murder of Amélie Delagrange
Murder of Julia Martha Thomas
Petersham Hole
Pocock baronets
Pope's villa
Radnor House
Richmond Flyers
Richmond, Petersham and Ham Open Spaces Act 1902
Ringway 2
Sheen Priory
Star and Garter Hotel, Richmond
Towpath murders
Treaty of Hampton Court (1562)
Twickenham Park
Vandeput baronets
Warren-Lambert
Wigan baronets





Parliamentary constituencies



Richmond Park
Twickenham
former Richmond and Barnes
former Richmond (Surrey)





Other topics



Almshouses
Archives, museums and art galleries
Cemeteries, crematoria and memorials
Grade I listed buildings
Grade II* listed buildings
Hospitals
Local government
People
Places of worship
Public art
Schools, colleges and universities
Sports clubs






Parks, open spaces and nature reserves in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Royal_Botanic_Gardens,_Kew&oldid=805405159"					Categories: 1759 establishments in EnglandBotanical research institutesCharities based in LondonDepartment for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (United Kingdom)Exempt charitiesKew, LondonNon-departmental public bodies of the United Kingdom governmentOrganisations based in the London Borough of Richmond upon ThamesRoyal Botanic Gardens, KewHidden categories: Use dmy dates from January 2014Use British English from January 2014Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2017All articles containing potentially dated statements