"Mountie" redirects here. For other uses, see Mountie (disambiguation).
"RCMP" redirects here. For the TV series, see R.C.M.P. (TV series).
"Royal Mounted Police" redirects here. For the film, see Giubbe rosse.


Royal Canadian Mounted Police
Gendarmerie royale du Canada (French)


Abbreviation
RCMP/GRC






Heraldic badge of the RCMP




Shoulder flash of the RCMP




Ensign



Motto
Maintiens le droit
"Defending the Law"[1][2]


Agency overview


Formed
February 1, 1920; 97 years ago (1920-02-01)[3]


Preceding agencies


Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP) (1904)
North-West Mounted Police (NWMP) (23 May 1873)
Dominion Police (1868)




Employees
28,461 (2015)


Volunteers
Approximately 1,600 Auxiliary Constables[4]


Legal personality
Governmental: Government agency


Jurisdictional structure


Federal agency
Canada


Constituting instruments


Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act
Provincial Police Acts




General nature


Federal law enforcement
Gendarmerie




Operational structure


Headquarters
M. J. Nadon Government of Canada Building
73 Leikin Drive
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0R2[5]


Sworn members


22,130[6] (Sept. 2015)



Commissioner: 1
Deputy Commissioners: 7
Assistant Commissioners: 26
Chief Superintendents: 58
Superintendents: 179
Inspectors: 348
Corps Sergeant Major: 1
Sergeants Major: 1
Staff Sergeants Major: 13
Staff Sergeants: 812
Sergeants: 1,923
Corporals: 3,377
Constables: 11,491
Special Constables: 55
Civilian Members: 3,838







Unsworn members


6,331[6] (Sept. 2015)



Public Servants: 6,331







Elected officer responsible
The Honourable Ralph Goodale, Minister of Public Safety


Agency executives


Queen Elizabeth II, Commissioner-in-Chief
Charles, Prince of Wales, Honorary Commissioner
Prince Edward, Earl of Wessex, Honorary Deputy Commissioner
Dan Dubeau, (Acting) Commissioner




Parent agency
Public Safety Canada


Divisions


15[6]



National Division: National Capital Region
B Division: Newfoundland and Labrador
C Division: Quebec
D Division: Manitoba
E Division: British Columbia
F Division: Saskatchewan
G Division: Northwest Territories
H Division: Nova Scotia
J Division: New Brunswick
K Division: Alberta
L Division: Prince Edward Island
M Division: Yukon
O Division: Ontario
V Division: Nunavut
Depot Division: Regina, Saskatchewan







Facilities


Detachments


712[7]



 Alberta: 119
 British Columbia: 154
 Manitoba: 88
 New Brunswick: 44
 Newfoundland: 43
 Northwest Territories: 22
 Nova Scotia: 53
 Nunavut: 26
 Ontario: 16
 Prince Edward Island: 6
 Quebec: 14
 Saskatchewan: 113
 Yukon: 14







Vehicles


8,677

Cars: 5,600
Trucks: 2,350
Motorcycles: 34
Snowmobiles: 481
All-terrain vehicles: 181





Patrol vessels
5


Fixed-wings
26[8]


Helicopters
9[8]





Notables


Significant incidents


Mayerthorpe tragedy
Spiritwood Incident
2014 Moncton shootings




Awards


Battle honours
Canadian Newsmaker of the Year (2007)







Website


www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca


Footnotes


While a federal agency, the RCMP also provides direct policing to dependent[clarification needed] territories.


The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP; French: Gendarmerie royale du Canada (GRC), "Royal Gendarmerie of Canada"; colloquially known as the Mounties, and internally as "the Force") is both a federal and a national police force of Canada. The RCMP provides law enforcement at the federal level. It also provides policing on a contract basis to the three territories (Northwest Territories, Nunavut, and Yukon), and to eight of Canada's provinces (Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and Saskatchewan), as well as to more than 150 municipalities, 600 aboriginal communities, and three international airports. The RCMP does not provide provincial or municipal policing in either Ontario or Quebec.[9]



Contents


1 Overview
2 History

2.1 Founding
2.2 Post-war
2.3 Modern era
2.4 Notable cases


3 History of the RCMP uniform

3.1 Tunic
3.2 Hat
3.3 Breeches
3.4 Boots
3.5 Spurs
3.6 Everyday Uniform
3.7 Decorations


4 Women in the RCMP
5 Military status

5.1 Service in wartime
5.2 Honours


6 Legacy
7 Organization

7.1 International
7.2 National
7.3 Divisions
7.4 Detachments
7.5 Personal Protection Group


8 Personnel

8.1 Regular members
8.2 Auxiliary constables and other staff
8.3 Ranks


9 Equipment and vehicles

9.1 Land fleet
9.2 Marine craft
9.3 Aircraft fleet
9.4 Weapons and intervention options

9.4.1 Past weapons and intervention options
9.4.2 Ceremonial weapons and symbols of office




10 Popular awareness of the RCMP

10.1 Early depictions
10.2 Modern culture
10.3 Mountie merchandise
10.4 Trademark


11 Controversies and criticism
12 Fallen officers and civilian members
13 See also
14 References
15 External links



Overview[edit]
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) was formed in 1920 by the merger of the Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP), founded in 1873, with the Dominion Police founded in 1868. The former was originally named the North-West Mounted Police (NWMP), and was given the Royal prefix by King Edward VII in 1904. Much of the present day organization's symbolism has been inherited from its days as the NWMP and RNWMP, including the distinctive Red Serge uniform, paramilitary heritage, and mythos as a frontier force. The RCMP-GRC wording is protected under the Trade-marks Act.[10]




RCMP at Montreal St. Patrick's Day Parade 2017.


Despite its name, the RCMP is not an actual mounted police, with horses only being used at ceremonial events. The predecessor NWMP and RNWMP had relied on horses for transport for most of their history, though the RNWMP was switching to automobiles at the time of the merger.
As Canada's national police force, the RCMP is primarily responsible for enforcing federal laws throughout Canada while general law and order including the enforcement of the Criminal Code and applicable provincial legislation is constitutionally the responsibility of the provinces and territories. Larger cities may form their own municipal police departments.
The two most populous provinces, Ontario and Quebec, maintain provincial forces: the Ontario Provincial Police and Sûreté du Québec. The other eight provinces contract policing responsibilities to the RCMP. The RCMP provides front-line policing in those provinces under the direction of the provincial governments. When Newfoundland joined the confederation in 1949, the RCMP entered the province and absorbed the then Newfoundland Ranger Force, which patrolled most of Newfoundland's rural areas. The Royal Newfoundland Constabulary patrols urban areas of the province. In the territories, the RCMP is the sole territorial police force. Many municipalities throughout Canada contract to the RCMP. Thus, the RCMP polices at the federal, provincial, and municipal level. In several areas of Canada, it is the only police force.
The RCMP is responsible for an unusually large breadth of duties. Under their federal mandate, the RCMP police throughout Canada, including Ontario and Quebec (albeit under smaller scales there). Federal operations include: enforcing federal laws including commercial crime, counterfeiting, drug trafficking, border integrity, organized crime, and other related matters; providing counter-terrorism and domestic security; providing protection services for the Monarch, Governor General, Prime Minister, their families and residences, and other ministers of the Crown, visiting dignitaries, and diplomatic missions; and participating in various international policing efforts.
Under provincial and municipal contracts the RCMP provides front-line policing in all areas outside of Ontario and Quebec that do not have an established local police force. There are detachments located in small villages in the far north, remote First Nations reserves, and rural towns, but also larger cities such as Surrey, British Columbia (population 468,251+). There, support units investigate for their own detachments, and smaller municipal police forces. Investigations include major crimes, homicides, forensic identification, collision forensics, police dogs, emergency response teams, explosives disposal, and undercover operations. Under its National Police Services branch the RCMP supports all police forces in Canada via the Canadian Police Information Centre, Criminal Intelligence Service Canada, Forensic Science and Identification Services, Canadian Firearms Program, and the Canadian Police College.
The RCMP Security Service was a specialized political intelligence and counterintelligence branch with national security responsibilities, replaced by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service in 1984, following revelations of illegal covert operations relating to the Quebec separatist movement.[11] CSIS is not part of the RCMP, but is its own entity.

History[edit]
Founding[edit]
Main article: North-West Mounted Police § history




North-West Mounted Police trooper, c.1900


Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald first began planning a permanent force to patrol the North-West Territories after the Dominion of Canada purchased the territory from the Hudson's Bay Company. Reports from Army officers surveying the territory led to the recommendation that a mounted force of between 100 to 150 mounted riflemen could maintain law and order. The Prime Minister first announced the force as the North West Mounted Rifles. However, officials in the United States raised concerns that an armed force along the border was a prelude to a military buildup. Macdonald then renamed the force the North-West Mounted Police (NWMP) when formed in 1873.[12]
The force added "Royal" to its name in 1904. It merged with the Dominion Police, the main police force for all points east of Manitoba, in 1920 and was renamed as the "Royal Canadian Mounted Police". The new organization was charged with federal law enforcement in all the provinces and territories, and immediately established its modern role as protector of Canadian national security, as well as assuming responsibility for national counterintelligence.
As part of its national security and intelligence functions, the RCMP infiltrated ethnic or political groups considered to be dangerous to Canada. This included the Communist Party of Canada, but also a variety of minority cultural and nationalist groups. The force was also deeply involved in immigration matters, and especially deportations of suspected radicals. They were especially concerned with Ukrainian groups, both nationalist and socialist.[13] The Chinese community was also targeted because of a perceived link to opium dens. Historians estimate fully two per cent of the Chinese community was deported between 1923 and 1932, largely under the provisions of the Opium and Narcotics Drugs Act (ONDA).[14] Besides the RCMP's new responsibilities in intelligence, drugs enforcement, and immigration, the force also assisted numerous other federal agencies with tasks such as enforcing the residential school system for Aboriginal children.




Mountie, c.1935


In 1935, the RCMP, collaborating with the Regina Police Service, crushed the On-to-Ottawa Trek by sparking the Regina Riot, in which one city police officer and one protester were killed. The Trek, which had been organized to call attention to the abysmal conditions in relief camps, therefore failed to reach Ottawa, but nevertheless had profound political reverberations.
The RCMP employed special constables to assist with strikebreaking in the interwar period. For a brief period in the late 1930s, a volunteer militia group, the Legion of Frontiersmen were affiliated with the RCMP. Many members of the RCMP belonged to this organization, which was prepared to serve as an auxiliary force. In later years, special constables performed duties such as policing airports and, in some Canadian provinces, the court houses.
In 1932, men and vessels of the Preventive Service, National Revenue, were absorbed, creating the RCMP Marine Section. The acquisition of the RCMP schooner St. Roch facilitated the first effective patrol of Canada's Arctic territory. It was the first vessel to navigate the Northwest Passage from west to east (1940–42), the first to navigate the Passage in one season (from Halifax to Vancouver in 1944), the first to sail either way through the Passage in one season, and the first to circumnavigate North America (1950).[15]
Counterintelligence work was moved from the RCMP's Criminal Investigation Department to a specialized intelligence branch, the RCMP Security Service, in 1939.
Post-war[edit]
On April 1, 1949, Newfoundland joined in full confederation with Canada and the Newfoundland Ranger Force amalgamated with the RCMP.
Following the 1945 defection of Soviet cipher clerk, Igor Gouzenko, and his revelations of espionage, the RCMP Security Service implemented measures to screen out "subversive" elements from the public sector.[16]
Queen Elizabeth II approved in Regina, Saskatchewan on July 4, 1973, a new badge for the RCMP, in recognition of which the force presented the sovereign with a tapestry rendering of the new design.[17]
In the late 1970s, revelations surfaced that the RCMP Security Service force had in the course of their intelligence duties engaged in crimes such as burning a barn and stealing documents from the separatist Parti Québécois, and other abuses. This led to the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Certain Activities of the RCMP, better known as the "McDonald Commission," named for the presiding judge, Mr Justice David Cargill McDonald. The Commission recommended that the force's intelligences duties be removed in favour of the creation of a separate intelligence agency, the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS).
Modern era[edit]




Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) Sunset Ceremony 2012


In 1993, the Special Emergency Response Team (SERT), were transferred to the Canadian Forces (CF), creating a new unit called Joint Task Force 2 (JTF2). JTF2 inherited some equipment and SERT's former training base near Ottawa.
In 2006, the United States Coast Guard's Ninth District and the RCMP began a program called "Shiprider," in which 12 Mounties from the RCMP detachment at Windsor and 16 US Coast Guard boarding officers from stations in Michigan ride in each other's vessels. The intent is to allow for seamless enforcement of the international border.[18]
On June 3, 2013, the RCMP renamed its 'A' Division to National Division and tasked it with handling corruption cases "at home and abroad".[19]
On December 6, 2006, RCMP Commissioner Giuliano Zaccardelli resigned after admitting that his earlier testimony about the Maher Arar terrorist case was inaccurate. The RCMP's actions were scrutinized by the Commission of Inquiry into the Actions of Canadian Officials in Relation to Maher Arar.
Two officers were found guilty of perjury and sentenced to jail for their actions in the 2007 Robert Dziekański Taser incident in Vancouver.
In 2007, the RCMP was named Newsmaker of the Year by The Canadian Press.[20]
Notable cases[edit]

The American stagecoach robber Bill Miner was captured by the RCMP in 1906.[21]
Albert Johnson, known as the Mad Trapper of Rat River, was killed in a shoot-out with the RCMP in 1932.[21]
RCMP officers in Saskatchewan arrested the perpetrator of the Shell Lake murders in 1967.
Anarchist militants known as the Squamish Five were arrested by the RCMP in 1983.
The suspected driver of the reconnaissance vehicle involved in the 1996 Khobar Towers bombing fled to Canada where he was arrested by the RCMP in the winter of 1997, and was extradited to the United States.
Four RCMP officers were fatally shot during an operation in Alberta in March 2005: the Mayerthorpe tragedy was the single worst multiple killing of RCMP officers since the killing of 3 officers in Kamloops British Columbia by a mentally ill assailant. Prior to that the Force had not felt such a loss since the North-West Rebellion.[22]
In July 2007, two RCMP officers were shot dead in the Spiritwood Incident near Mildred, Saskatchewan.
Three RCMP officers were murdered during the 2014 Moncton shootings in New Brunswick.[23]
The perpetrator of the 2014 shootings at Parliament Hill, Ottawa was shot and killed at the scene by the RCMP.

History of the RCMP uniform[edit]




RCMP in dress uniform Canada Day 2015 on Saint Catherine Street - 063


The RCMP are famous for their distinctive dress uniform, or "Review Order," popularly known as the "Red Serge." It has a high collared scarlet tunic, midnight blue breeches with yellow leg stripe, Sam Browne belt with white sidearm lanyard, oxblood riding boots (possibly with spurs), brown felt campaign hat (wide, flat brimmed) with the characteristic "Montana crease", and brown gloves (with brown leather gauntlets for riders). Members wear the Review Order during the Musical Ride, an equestrian drill in which mounted members show their riding skills and handling of the cavalry lance. On normal duties, the RCMP uses standard police methods, equipment, and uniforms. The RCMP uses horses for ceremonial operations such as escorting the Governor General's open landau to the Opening of Parliament.
Tunic[edit]
The Red Serge tunic that identified the NWMP and later the RNWMP and RCMP, is the standard British military pattern (based on the civilian Norfolk jacket[24]). Originally kitted from militia stores, the NWMP later adopted a standard style that emphasized the force's British heritage and differentiated it from the blue American military uniforms. In 1904, dark blue shoulder straps and collars replaced the uniform's scarlet facings[25] when King Edward VII granted the Force "Royal" status for its service in the Second Boer War. Today, RCMP personnel under the rank of inspector wear blue "gorget" patches on the collar, while officers from inspector to commissioner wear solid blue collars and blue pointed-sleeve cuffs.
Members once wore a white haversack on top of this jacket and white gauntlets,[24] which contrasted with the red tunic. The modern dress uniform replaces these easily-dirtied items with brown leather riding gloves and carrying pouches on the belt.
Hat[edit]
Although the NWMP contingent at Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee wore the flat-brimmed Stetson, the RCMP did not adopt it until about 1904. The original primary summer headdress was the white British foreign service helmet, also known as a pith helmet. This was an impractical choice for the Canadian west, and RCMP members wore a Stetson type hat on patrol and around camp. Sam Steele is often credited with introducing the Stetson-type hat, and when he left the force to command Lord Strathcona's Horse in South Africa, his unit adopted the Stetson. During winter, members wore a Canadian military fur wedge cap or busby. In British Columbia, the hat features a black bearskin rim belt.
Breeches[edit]
The NWMP wore buff or steel grey breeches[24] until they adopted dark blue breeches with yellow-gold strapping (stripes). Members often exchanged kit with U.S. cavalry units, and while some believe this was the source for the breeches, the NWMP considered adopting blue breeches with a white strap. Dark blue with yellow-gold strapping is a British cavalry tradition, and most cavalry (later armoured) regiments' dress uniforms feature yellow stripes.
Boots[edit]
Black riding boots changed to the modern brown style called "Strathcona Boots" or informally as "high browns" (See link to Lord Strathcona's Horse) and the original crossbelts changed to the brown Sam Browne type. The brown colour of the boots and belt the RCMP wear with the Red Serge are from members who applied coats of polish, often during training at Depot Division.
Spurs[edit]
The RCMP's original spurs, known as "long shank spurs," were solid nickel. Their owners occasionally had their regimental number engraved on the inside, and some replaced the rowel with a US buffalo nickel[citation needed] to complement the Mounted Police capbadge and avoid using a Canadian coin that would deface the monarch. The RCMP last issued long shank spurs in 1968.
Sidearms are standard now, but were often not worn in the early years.[citation needed]
Everyday Uniform[edit]




RCMP in everyday uniform


The everyday uniform is a grey shirt with dark blue tie, dark blue trousers with gold strapping, regular patrol boots called "ankle boots," regular duty equipment, and a regular policeman's style cap. Members on operational duty wear a blue Gore-Tex open-collar jacket (patrol jacket), while sergeants major and certain non-commissioned officers (NCOs) involved in recruit training or media relations wear a dark blue jacket (blue serge). Depending on their duties, officers wear white shirts and the patrol jacket or blue serge. During the summer, officers wear a tie with a short-sleeved shirt, and other members wear short-sleeved shirts. Winter dress is a long-sleeved shirt without tie for all members except officers, who wear a tie with the long-sleeved shirt. In colder weather, members may wear heavier boots, winter coats (storm coats) and a fur cap.
In 1990, Baltej Singh Dhillon became the RCMP's first Sikh officer to be allowed to wear a turban instead of the traditional Stetson.[26] On March 15, the federal government, despite protests, decided they would allow Sikhs to wear turbans while on duty as RCMP officers as had been the practice for Sikh members of Canadian Forces for decades.
Despite ongoing pressure from groups such as the Association for the Protection of Fur-Bearing Animals,[27] the RCMP uses muskrat fur in their winter dress uniform. The RCMP originally decided not to use fur, but the government overruled them.
Decorations[edit]
The RCMP awards its Royal Canadian Mounted Police Long Service Medal to members who have completed 20 years' service. A clasp is awarded for each successive 5 years to 40 years. Members also receive a Service Badge star for each five years' service, which is worn on the left sleeve. There are specialist insignia for positions such as first aid instructor and dog handler, and pilot's wings are worn by aviators. Sharpshooter badges for proficiency in pistol or rifle shooting are each awarded in two grades.[28]
Women in the RCMP[edit]
On May 23, 1974, RCMP Commissioner Maurice Nadon announced that the RCMP would accept applications from women as regular members of the force. Troop 17 was the first group of 32 females at Depot in Regina on September 18 and 19, 1974 for regular training. This first all-female troop graduated from Depot on March 3, 1975.




RCMP officer, 2011


After initially wearing different unflattering uniforms, women officers were finally issued the standard RCMP uniforms. Now all officers are identically attired, with two exceptions. The ceremonial dress uniform, or "walking-out order", for female members has a long, blue skirt and higher-heeled slip-on pumps plus small black clutch purse (however, in 2012 the RCMP began to allow women to wear trousers and boots with all their formal uniforms.[29]) The second exception is the official maternity uniform for pregnant female officers assigned to administrative duties.
The following years saw the first women attain certain positions.

1981: corporal, musical ride
1987: foreign post
1990: detachment commander
1992: commissioned officer
1998: Assistant Commissioner
2000: Deputy Commissioner

Beverley Busson is the only woman to have held the top position in the force. She served as the interim Commissioner from December 15, 2006, to July 6, 2007.[30][31]
Military status[edit]


Royal Canadian Mounted Police
Gendarmerie royale du Canada



Guidon of the RCMP



Active
1873–present


Country
Canada


Type
Dragoons


Size
15 divisions


Garrison/HQ
RHQ—Ottawa


Nickname(s)
The Mounties


Motto(s)
Maintiens le droit (Defending the law)[2][32]


Battle honours
see Battle honours


Commanders


Current
commander
Dan Dubeau (Acting Commissioner)


Commissioner-in-Chief
HM The Queen


Honorary Commissioner
HRH The Prince of Wales[33]


Honorary Deputy Commissioner
HRH The Earl of Wessex[34]


Insignia


Tartan
RCMP


Abbreviation
RCMP/GRC


Although the RCMP is a civilian police force, in 1921, following the service of many of its members during the First World War, King George V awarded the force the status of a regiment of dragoons, entitling it to display the battle honours it had been awarded.
Service in wartime[edit]
During the Second Boer War, members of the North-West Mounted Police were given leaves of absence to join the 2nd Battalion, Canadian Mounted Rifles (CMR) and Strathcona's Horse. The force raised the Canadian Mounted Rifles, mostly from NWMP members, for service in South Africa. For the CMR's distinguished service there, King Edward VII honoured the NWMP by changing the name to the Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP) on June 24, 1904.
During the First World War, the Royal Northwest Mounted Police (RNWMP) conducted border patrols, surveillance of enemy aliens, and enforcement of national security regulations within Canada. However, RNWMP officers also served overseas. On August 6, 1914, a squadron of volunteers from the RNWMP was formed to serve with the Canadian Light Horse in France. In 1918, two more squadrons were raised, A Squadron for service in France and Flanders and B Squadron for service in the Canadian Siberian Expeditionary Force
In September 1939, at the outset of the Second World War, the Canadian Army had no military police. Five days after war was declared the Royal Canadian Mounted Police received permission to form a Provost Company of Force volunteers. It was designated No. 1 Provost Company (RCMP), and became the Canadian Provost Corps. Six months after war was declared its members were overseas in Europe and served throughout the Second World War as military police.
Honours[edit]
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police were accorded the status of a regiment of Dragoons in 1921. As a cavalry regiment, the RCMP was entitled to wear battle honours for its war service as well as carry a guidon, with its first guidon presented in 1935.[35][36] The RCMP mounted the King's Life Guard at Horse Guards Parade in 1937 leading up to the coronation of King George VI. The RCMP mounted the Queen's Life Guard in May 2012 during celebrations of Queen Elizabeth II's Diamond Jubilee.[37]
Battle honours

North West Canada 1885
South Africa 1900–02
The Great War: France and Flanders 1918, Siberia 1918–19
The Second World War: Europe, 1939–45

Honorary distinction:

The badge of the Canadian Provost Corps (Military Police), presented September 21, 1957, at a Parliament Hill ceremony for contributions to the Corps during the Second World War

Legacy[edit]
In 1975, the RCMP dedicated a memorial beside the Fred Light Museum in Battleford, Saskatchewan, consisting of a cemetery with gate, cairn and list of honour plaque to the members of the North-West Mounted Police (1873–1904) and the RCMP.[38]
Organization[edit]
International[edit]
The RCMP International Operations Branch assists the Liaison Officer (LO) Program to deter international crime relating to Canadian criminal laws. The IOB is a section of the International Policing, which is part of the RCMP Federal and International Operations Directorate. Thirty-seven Liaison Officers are placed in 23 other countries and are responsible for organizing Canadian investigations in other countries, developing and maintaining the exchange of criminal intelligence, especially national security with other countries, to provide assistance in investigations that directly affect Canada, to coordinate and assist RCMP officers on foreign business and to represent the RCMP at international meetings.[39] Liaison Officers are located in:


Africa & Middle East:

 Rabat, Morocco
 Pretoria, South Africa
 Amman, Jordan
 Dubai, U.A.E.


Asia-Pacific:

 New Delhi, India
 Islamabad, Pakistan
 Bangkok, Thailand
 Hong Kong SAR
 Beijing, China
 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
 Colombo, Sri Lanka


Europe:

 London, United Kingdom
 Paris, France
 Berlin, Germany
 The Hague, Netherlands
 Rome, Italy


The Americas:

 Kingston, Jamaica
 Mexico City, Mexico
 Bogota, Colombia
 Caracas, Venezuela
 Brasilia, Brazil
 Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic
 Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago
 United States:

 Miami, Florida
 New York, New York
 Seattle, Washington
 Washington, D.C.






The RCMP was a member agency in the Afghan Threat Finance Cell, and RCMP officers were embedded with military units in Afghanistan.[40]
National[edit]
The RCMP is organized under the authority of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act. In accordance with the Act, it is headed by the Commissioner, who, under the direction of the Minister of Public Safety, has the control and management of the Force and all matters connected therewith. The RCMP is provided with a senior executive committee (SEC) which[41]


“
is the senior decision making forum established by the Commissioner for the development and approval of strategic, force-wide policies, pursuant to and consistent with the Commissioner's authority under section 5 of the RCMP Act. The role of [the] SEC is to develop, promote and communicate strategic priorities, strategic objectives, management strategies and performance management for the purpose of direction and accountability.
”


The Commissioner is assisted by Deputy Commissioners in charge of:[42]

Federal and International Policing
Police Support Services
Contract and Aboriginal Policing
Human Resources
East

Ontario ("O" Division)
National Division (Formerly "A" Division)
National Headquarters
Quebec ("C" Division)
New Brunswick ("J" Division)
Nova Scotia ("H" Division)
Prince Edward Island ("L" Division)
Newfoundland and Labrador ("B" Division)


West

British Columbia ("E" Division)
Alberta ("K" Division)
Saskatchewan ("F" Division)
Manitoba ("D" Division)
Yukon ("M" Division)
Northwest Territories ("G" Division)
Nunavut ("V" Division)



Divisions[edit]
The RCMP divides the country into divisions for command purposes. In general, each division is coterminous with a province (for example, C Division is Quebec). The province of Ontario, however, is divided into two divisions: National Division (Ottawa) and O Division (rest of the province). There is one additional division –  Depot Division, which is the RCMP Academy at Regina, Saskatchewan, and the Police Dog Service Training Centre[43] at Innisfail, Alberta. The RCMP headquarters are located in Ottawa, Ontario.




National Division building in Ottawa



National Division (formerly A Division): National Capital Region (Ottawa, Ontario, and Gatineau, Quebec)[44]
B Division: Newfoundland and Labrador[45]
C Division: Quebec[46]
D Division: Manitoba[46]
E Division: British Columbia[47]
F Division: Saskatchewan[48]
G Division: Northwest Territories[49]
H Division: Nova Scotia[50]
J Division: New Brunswick[51]
K Division: Alberta[52]
L Division: Prince Edward Island[53]
M Division: Yukon[54]
O Division: Ontario[55]
V Division: Nunavut[56]
Depot Division at Regina and the Police Dog Service Training Centre[43] at Innisfail.

Detachments[edit]
The RCMP formerly had many single-officer detachments in small, isolated rural communities,[57][58] but in 2012 the RCMP announced that it would be closing these detachments as it moves to have all detachments with a minimum of three Mounties.[58]
The largest single RCMP detachment is in the City of Surrey in British Columbia, with over a thousand employees. Surrey has contracted with the RCMP for policing services since 1951.[59] The second-largest RCMP detachment is in Burnaby, also in British Columbia.[60]
Personal Protection Group[edit]
The Personal Protection Group or PPG is a 180-member group responsible for security details for VIPs, the prime minister, and the governor general.[61] It was created after the 1995 incident at 24 Sussex Drive.[62]
Units under the PPG consists of:

Prime Minister Protective Detail provides bodyguards to protect the Prime Minister of Canada in Canada and abroad. This unit is based in Ottawa with operations at 24 Sussex Drive and Harrington Lake near Chelsea, Quebec.
Governor General’s Protection Detail provides bodyguards to protect the Governor General of Canada in Canada and abroad. This unit is based in Ottawa with operations at Rideau Hall.
Very Important Persons Security Section (VIPSS) provides security details to VIP (including the Chief Justice of Canada, federal ministers, and diplomats) and others under the direction of the Minister of Public Safety.

Personnel[edit]




DHS unveils new Operational Integration Center 110324-G-JL323-030


As of September 1, 2015[update], the RCMP employed 28,461 men and women, including police officers, civilian members, and Public Service Employees.[6]
Actual personnel strength by ranks:

Commissioner 1
Deputy commissioner 7
Assistant commissioner 26
Chief superintendent 58
Superintendent 179
Inspector 345
Corps sergeant major 1
Sergeants major 1
Staff sergeants major 13
Staff sergeants 812
Sergeants 1,923
Corporals 3,377
Constables 11,491
Special constables 55
Civilian members 3,838
Public servants 6,331
Total 28,461

Regular members[edit]
The term regular member, or RM, originates from the RCMP Act and refers to the 18,988 regular RCMP officers who are trained and sworn as peace officers, and include all the ranks from constable to commissioner. They are the police officers of the RCMP and are responsible for investigating crime and have the authority to make arrests. RMs operate in over 750 detachments, including 200 municipalities and more than 600 Aboriginal communities. RMs are normally assigned to general policing duties at an RCMP detachment for a minimum of three years. These duties allow them to experience a broad range of assignments and experiences, such as responding to alarms, foot patrol, bicycle patrol, traffic enforcement, collecting evidence at crime scenes, testifying in court, apprehending criminals and plain clothes duties. Regular members also serve in over 150 different types of operational and administrative opportunities available within the RCMP, these include: major crime investigations, emergency response, forensic identification, forensic collision reconstruction, international peacekeeping, bike or marine patrol, explosives disposal and police dog services. Also included are administrative roles including human resources, corporate planning, policy analysis and public affairs.
Auxiliary constables and other staff[edit]
Besides the regular RCMP officers, several types of designations exist which give them assorted powers and responsibilities over policing issues.
Currently, there are:

Community Constables: not reported
Reserve Constables : Approximately 100 in British Columbia[63]
Auxiliary Constables: 2,400+[64]
Community Safety Officers: 16
Aboriginal Community Constables: 7[65]
Special Constables: 78[6]
Civilian Members: 3,760[6]
Public servants: 6,194[6]


Community Constables (CC)
A new designation introduced in 2014 as a replacement to the Community Safety Officers & Aboriginal Community Constables pilot programs.[66][67] Community Constables are armed, paid members holding the rank of Special Constables, with peace officer power.[68] They are to provide a bridge between the local citizens and the RCMP using their local and cultural knowledge[69] They will mostly be focused on crime prevention, liaison with the community, and to provide resources in the event of a large-scale event.[70]


Reserve Constables (R/Cst.)
A program reinstated in 2004 in British Columbia to allow for retired, regular RCMP members or other provincially trained officers to provide extra manpower when a shortage is identified.[71] R/Cst. are appointed under Section 11 of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act as paid part-time, armed officers with the same powers as regular members.[72] However, they are not allowed to carry force-issued sidearms and use of force options unless they are called upon to duty.[71] They generally carry out community policing roles but may also be called upon if an emergency occurs.[71][73]


Auxiliary constables (A/Cst.)
Volunteers within their own community, appointed under provincial police acts.[64] They are not police officers and can not identify themselves as such. However, they are given peace officer powers when on duty with a regular member (RM). Their duties consist mainly of assisting the RM in routine events, for example cordoning off crime scene areas, crowd control, participating in community policing, assistance during situations where regular members might be overwhelmed with their duties (e.g., keep watch of a backseat detainee while RM interviews a victim). They are identified by the wording of "RCMP Auxiliary" on cars, jackets and shoulder flashes.


Community Safety Officers (CSO)
In 2008, a new pilot designation within the RCMP in British Columbia was created based on the UK Police Community Support Officer program. Community safety officers are paid, unarmed RCMP staff members with similar RCMP uniform but distinct shoulder badges with baton, pepper spray and handcuffs.[74][75] CSOs work with regular members in five areas: community safety; crime prevention; traffic support; community policing and investigation support.[76] They are peace officers but are not police officers.[77] CSOs are appointed as special constable under the RCMP Act.[78] The CSO program is scheduled to be dismantled in 2015.[67]


Aboriginal Community Constables (ACC)
A pilot program that began in April 2011 where ACCs are armed, uniformed peace officers who are engaged in policing activities in their home First Nations and Inuit communities in Northwest Territories, Manitoba, Alberta, and Nunavut.[78] Their function is to engage their communities in active crime prevention/reduction activities, and building positive relationships between their communities and the RCMP but can also provide tactical, enforcement and investigational support to core resources as a secondary function.[78][79] The program is scheduled to be merged into the Community Constable program in 2015.[66]


Special constables (S/Cst.)
Employees of the RCMP, they have varied duties depending on where they are deployed, but are often given this designation because of an expertise they possess which needs to be applied in a certain area. For example, an Aboriginal person might be appointed a special constable in order to assist regular members as they police an Aboriginal community where English is not well understood, and where the special constable speaks the language well.


From the early years of policing in northern Canada, and well into the 1950s, local aboriginal people were hired by the RCMP as special constables and were employed as guides and to obtain and care for sled dog teams. Many of these former special constables still reside in the North to this day and are still involved in regimental functions of the RCMP.


Civilian members of the RCMP
While not delegated the powers of police officers, they are instead hired for their specialized scientific, technological, communications and administrative skills. Since the RCMP is a multi-faceted law enforcement organization with responsibilities for federal, provincial and municipal policing duties, it offers employment opportunities for civilian members as professional partners within Canada's national police force.

Civilian members represent approximately 14% of the total RCMP employee population, and are employed within RCMP establishments in most geographical areas of Canada. The following is a list of the most common categories of employment that may be available to interested and qualified individuals.

Operations

Telecommunications Operator (Dispatcher)[80]


Scientific

Toxicology
Chemistry
Biology – DNA
Law


Technical

Forensic Identification Services
Instrument Technology
Document Examination
Counterfeit Analysis
Firearms Technology
Electronics Technology
Information Technology
Communications
Computer Systems Development
Telecommunications
Information Services/Public Affairs


Administrative

Policy Development and Analysis
Staff Development and Training
Human Resource Management
Translation
Police Records Information Management Environment (PRIME-BC)




Public Service Employees
Also referred to as Public Servants, PSes or PSEs, they provide much of the administrative support for the RCMP in the form of detachment clerks and other administrative support at the headquarters level. They are not police officers, do not wear a uniform, have no police authority and are not bound by the RCMP Act.


Municipal Employees

Abbreviated as "ME" they are found in RCMP detachments where a contract exists with a municipality to provide front-line policing. MEs are not actually employees of the RCMP, but are instead employed by the local municipality to work in the RCMP detachment. They conduct the same duties that a PSE would and are required to meet the same reliability and security clearance to do so. Many detachment buildings house a combination of municipal and provincially funded detachments, and therefore there are often PSEs and MEs found working together in them.
Ranks[edit]
The rank system of the RCMP is partly a result of their origin as a paramilitary force. Upon its founding, the RCMP adopted the rank insignia of the Canadian Army (which in turn came from the British Army), which is almost identical to that of the current Canadian Army. Like in a military, the RCMP also has a distinction between commissioned and non-commissioned officers. The non-commissioned ranks are mostly based off military ranks (apart from constable). Non-commissioned officer ranks above staff sergeant resemble those that formerly existed in the Canadian Army, but have since been replaced by warrant officers.[81]
The commissioned officer ranks, by contrast, use a set of non-military titles that are often used in Commonwealth police services. The number of higher ranks has increased since the formation of the force. The rank of inspector, which was initially a subaltern, is now a field officer level, while several lower officer ranks have been dropped.
The numbers are current as of September 1, 2015:[6]


COMMISSIONED OFFICERS


Commissioner
Deputy Commissioner
Assistant Commissioner
Chief Superintendent
Superintendent
Inspector


Commissaire
Sous-commissaire
Commissaire adjoint
Surintendant principal
Surintendant
Inspecteur


1
7
26
58
179
348




































NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS


Corps Sergeant Major
Sergeant Major
Staff Sergeant Major
Staff Sergeant
Sergeant
Corporal
Constable


Sergent-major du corps
Sergent-major
Sergent-major d'état major
Sergent d'état-major
Sergent
Caporal
Gendarme


1
1
13
812
1,923
3,377
11,491
































No Insignia


The ranks of inspector and higher are commissioned ranks and are appointed by the Governor-in-Council. Depending on the dress, badges are worn on the shoulder as slip-ons, on shoulder boards, or directly on the epaulettes. The lower ranks are non-commissioned officers and the insignia continues to be based on British army patterns. Since 1990, the non-commissioned officers' rank insignia has been embroidered on the epaulette slip-ons. Non-commissioned rank badges are worn on the right sleeve of the scarlet/blue tunic and blue jacket. The constables wear no rank insignia. There are also Special Constables, Reserve Constables, Auxiliary Constables, and Students who wear identifying insignia.
The Bath star represents the military Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath.
Equipment and vehicles[edit]




A Ford Taurus cruiser in an Ottawa field.






RCMP truck at the G20 summit in Toronto


Land fleet[edit]
RCMP Land Transport Fleet Inventory includes:[82]

Cars: 5,330
Unmarked vehicles: 2,811
Light Trucks: 2,090
Heavy Trucks: 123
SUVs: 616
Motorcycles: 34
Small snowmobiles: 481
All-terrain vehicles: 181
Gas railway car: 1
Tractors: 27
Buses: 3
Total: 11,697

Marine craft[edit]




RCMP-CCG vessel Simmonds with CCGS Cape Hurd


The RCMP polices Canadian Internal Waters, including the territorial sea and contiguous zone as well as the Great Lakes and Saint Lawrence Seaway; such operations are provided by the RCMP's Federal Services Directorate and includes enforcing Canada's environment, fisheries, customs and immigration laws. In provinces and municipalities where the RCMP performs contract policing, the force polices freshwater lakes and rivers.
To meet these challenges, the RCMP operates the Marine Division, with five Robert Allan Ltd.–designed high-speed catamaran patrol vessels; Inkster and the Commissioner-class Nadon, Higgitt, Lindsay and Simmonds, based on all three coasts and manned by officers specially trained in maritime enforcement. Inkster is based in Prince Rupert, BC, Simmonds is stationed on Newfoundland's south coast, and the rest are on the Pacific Coast.[83] Simmonds sports the RCMP badge, but is otherwise painted with Canadian Coast Guard colours and the marking Coast Guard Police. The other four vessels are painted with blue and white RCMP colours.
The RCMP operates 377 smaller boats, defined as vessels less than 9.2 m (30 ft) long, at locations across Canada. This category ranges from canoes and car toppers to rigid-hulled inflatables and stable, commercially built, inboard/outboard vessels. Individual detachments often have smaller high-speed rigid-hulled inflatable boats and other purpose-built vessels for inland waters, some of which can be hauled by road to the nearest launching point.[83]

RCMP Ship Fleet

Ship Name
Type
Class
Base
Specifications
Propulsion
Top Speed
Builder
Year Commissioned
Crew


Inkster
Patrol vessel
n/a
Prince Rupert, BC
19.75 m (64.8 ft)
fast patrol aluminum catamaran

25 kn (46 km/h; 29 mph)+
Allied Shipbuilders Limited of North Vancouver, BC
1996
4


Nadon
Patrol vessel
Commissioner Class PV (Raven Class)
Nanaimo, BC
17.7 m (58 ft)
fast patrol catamaran
2 × 820 hp (610 kW) D2840 LE401 V-10 MAN Diesel engines
36 kn (67 km/h; 41 mph)
Robert Allan Ltd.
1991
4


Higgitt
Patrol vessel
Commissioner Class PV
Campbell River, BC
17.7 m (58 ft)
fast patrol catamaran
2 × 820 hp (610 kW) D2840 LE401 V-10 MAN Diesel engines
36 kn (67 km/h; 41 mph)
Robert Allan Ltd.
1992
4


Lindsay
Patrol vessel
Commissioner Class PV
Patricia Bay, Victoria, BC
17.7 m (58 ft)
fast patrol catamaran
2 × 820 hp (610 kW) D2840 LE401 V-10 MAN Diesel engines
36 kn (67 km/h; 41 mph)
Robert Allan Ltd.
1993
4


Simmonds
Patrol vessel
Commissioner Class PV
South coast Newfoundland
17.7 m (58 ft)
fast patrol catamaran
2 × 820 hp (610 kW) D2840 LE401 V-10 MAN Diesel engines
36 kn (67 km/h; 41 mph)
Robert Allan Ltd.
1995
4


Aircraft fleet[edit]




RCMP Pilatus PC-12


As of June 2017 the RCMP had 35 aircraft (9 helicopters and 26 fixed-wing aircraft) registered with Transport Canada (TC).[8] All aircraft are operated and maintained by the Air Services Branch. Only the Twin Otter is a twin-engine aircraft, all the others, including the helicopters, are single engine.

RCMP Fleet

Aircraft
Number[8]
Variants
Notes


Eurocopter AS350 Écureuil
7
AS 350B3
Helicopter, AStar 350 or "Squirrel"


Cessna 206
5
U206G, T206H
Fixed wing, Stationair (Station wagon of the Air), general aviation aircraft


Cessna 208 Caravan
3
208, 208B
Fixed wing, Caravan, short-haul regional airliner and utility aircraft


de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter
1
300 Series
Fixed wing, 20-passenger STOL feederliner and utility aircraft


Eurocopter EC120 Colibri
2
EC 120B
Light helicopter, "Hummingbird"


Pilatus PC-12
16
PC-12/45, PC-12/47, PC-12/47E
Fixed wing, turboprop passenger and cargo aircraft


Quest Kodiak
1
100
Fixed wing, un-pressurized, turboprop-powered fixed-tricycle-gear, STOL


Weapons and intervention options[edit]




RCMP issue Smith & Wesson Model 5946 service pistol with Hogue grip






RCMP issue Taser International X-26 conducted energy weapon



Smith & Wesson Model 5946
Smith & Wesson model 3953
Heckler & Koch MP5
Remington Model 700 .308 centrefire rifle
Winchester Model 70 .308 rifle. (This rifle is being phased out and replaced by the Remington 700)
Remington 870 12-gauge shotgun
SIG Sauer 220R - .45 ACP / SIG Sauer 226R - 9×19mm
Colt Canada C7 rifle
Colt Canada C8 carbine
Taser International M26, X26, & X26P
Oleoresin capsicum spray
ASP and Monadnock expandable defensive batons

Past weapons and intervention options[edit]

Fabrique Nationale (FN) C1A1 variant of the L1A1 and FN FAL produced under licence by Canadian Arsenals Limited (CAL) (Long Branch).
Lee–Enfield No. 4 Mk1
Winchester Model 1876 saddle carbine—issued in .45-75 Winchester, and used from 1878 until 1914.[84]
Enfield Mark II revolver—issued in .476 Enfield, about 1080 Mark IIs obtained from Britain's Ministry of Defence, after it was learned the Beaumont–Adams had been discontinued.[85]
Beaumont–Adams revolver—first issue weapon, in .450 Adams. 330 Mark Is purchased from Britain's Ministry of Defence; later, 330 Mark IIs added.[86]
Webley & Scott Bull Dog revolver[87]
Colt New Service revolver—700 ordered in .455 Webley, with .45 Long Colt versions being delivered from 1919; in all, over 3200 issued.[88]
Smith & Wesson Model 10 revolver—issued with 5 in (130 mm) barrel, in .38 Special. It served more than forty years. Halfway through its service, the loading was changed to a .38 Special +P. (The loading was a 158 gr (0.36 oz; 10.2 g) hollowpoint, a violation of the Hague Convention if used in a military context.[88])
Smith & Wesson Model 3 revolver
Snider–Enfield
Tranter revolver
1822 and 1853 pattern light cavalry swords
Straightstick baton manufactured in wood and plastic
Sap gloves

Ceremonial weapons and symbols of office[edit]

1912 pattern cavalry officer's sword carried by officers. Blade is acid etched both sides with the monarch's crown, Canadian coat of Arms, royal cypher and RCMP badge.
1908 pattern cavalry sword carried by NCOs on the Musical Ride
Bamboo lance
Drill cane
Swagger stick
Commissioner's tipstaff

In 1973, Wilkinson Sword produced a number of commemorative swords to celebrate the RCMP centennial. None of these swords were ever used ceremonially, and were strictly collectibles. Wilkinson Sword also made a commemorative centennial tomahawk and miniature "letter opener" models of their centennial swords. In 1973, Winchester Repeating Arms Company produced an RCMP commemorative centennial version of their Model 94 rifle in .30-30 Winchester, with a 22 in (560 mm) round barrel. The receiver, buttplate, and forend cap (on the musket-style forend) were plated in gold. Commemorative medallions were embedded in the right-hand side of the stock, with an "MP" engraving. There was engraving on the barrel and receiver indicating the rifle was a centennial commemorative edition. Sights were open notch rear, with a flip-up rear ladder, graduated to 2,000 yd (1,800 m). Two versions were produced, 9500 with serial numbers beginning "RCMP" for commercial sale, 5000 with the prefix "MP" sold only to serving RCMP members. In addition, ten presentation models were produced, serialled RCMP1P to RCMP10P. (The production of this commemorative is ironic, since the Winchester 94 was never used by the force.)[89])
Popular awareness of the RCMP[edit]

File:Canadian flag carried by RCMP at the opening ceremonies of the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver (4355036201).jpg
Canadian flag carried by RCMP at the opening ceremonies of the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver


The Mounties have been immortalized as symbols of Canadian culture in numerous Hollywood Northwestern movies and television series, which often feature the image of the Mountie as square-jawed, stoic, and polite, yet with a steely determination and physical toughness that sometimes appears superhuman. Coupled with the adage that the Mountie "always gets his man," the image projects them as fearsome, incorruptible, dogged yet gentle champions of the law. The RCMP's motto is actually Maintiens le droit, French for "Defending the Law".[1][2] The Hollywood motto derives from a comment by a Montana newspaper, the Fort Benton Record: "They fetch their man every time".[90]
Early depictions[edit]
In 1912, Ralph Connor's Corporal Cameron of the North-West Mounted Police: A Tale of the MacLeod Trail appeared, becoming an international best-selling novel. Mounties fiction became a popular genre in both pulp magazines and book form. Among the best-selling authors who specialized in tales of the Mounted Police were James Oliver Curwood, Laurie York Erskine, James B Hendryx, T Lund, Harwood Steele (the son of Sam Steele), and William Byron Mowery.
In other media, a famous example is the radio and television series, Sergeant Preston of the Yukon. Dudley Do-Right (of The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show) is a 1960s example of the comic aspect of the Mountie myth, as is Klondike Kat, from Total Television. The Broadway musical and Hollywood movie Rose-Marie is a 1930s example of its romantic side. A successful combination were a series of Renfrew of the Royal Mounted boy's adventure novels written by Laurie York Erskine beginning in 1922 running to 1941. In the 1930s Erskine narrated a Sgt Renfrew of the Mounties radio show and a series of films with actor-singer James Newill playing Renfrew were released between 1937 and 1940. In 1953 portions of the films were mixed with new sequences of Newill for a Renfrew of the Mounted television series.
A former Mounted Police corporal (1919–1923), Bruce Carruthers, served as an unofficial technical advisor to Hollywood in many films with RCMP characters.[91]
Modern culture[edit]
In 1959, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation aired R.C.M.P., a half-hour dramatic series about an R.C.M.P. detachment keeping the peace and fighting crime. Filmed in black and white, in and around Ottawa by Crawley Films, the series was co-produced with the BBC and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and ran for 39 episodes. It was noted for its pairing of Québécois and Anglo officers.
Canadians also poke fun at the RCMP with Sergeant Renfrew and his faithful dog Cuddles in various sketches produced by the Royal Canadian Air Farce comedy troupe. On That '70s Show Mounties were played by SCTV alumni Joe Flaherty and Dave Thomas. The British have also exploited the myth: the BBC television series Monty Python's Flying Circus featured a group of Mounties singing the chorus in The Lumberjack Song in the lumberjack sketch.
The 1972–90 CBC series The Beachcombers featured a character named Constable John Constable who attempted to enforce the law in the town of Gibsons, British Columbia.
In comic books, the Marvel Comics characters of Alpha Flight were described on several occasions as "RCMP auxiliaries," and two of their members, Snowbird and the second Major Mapleleaf were depicted as serving members of the force. In the latter case, due to trademark issues, Major Mapleleaf was described as a "Royal Canadian Mountie" in the opening roll call pages of each issue of Alpha Flight he appeared in.
Charles Bronson and Lee Marvin starred in the 1981 movie Death Hunt that fictionalized the RCMP pursuit of Albert Johnson.
In the early 1990s, Canadian professional wrestler Jacques Rougeau utilized the gimmick of "The Mountie" while wrestling for the WWF. He typically wore the Red Serge to the ring, and carried a shock stick as an illegal weapon. As his character was portrayed as an evil Mountie, the RCMP ultimately won an injunction preventing Rougeau from wrestling as this character in Canada, though he was not prevented from doing so outside the country. He briefly held the Intercontinental Championship in 1992.
The 1998 swan song of Nick Berry's time on UK drama Heartbeat featured his character, Sergeant Nick Rowan, transferring to Canada and taking the rank of constable in the Mounties. The special telemovie was titled Heartbeat: Changing Places.
The 1994–98 TV series Due South paired a Mountie (and his deaf half-wolf) with a streetwise American detective cleaning up the streets of Chicago, mainly deriving its entertainment from the perceived differences in attitude between these two countries' police forces.
A pair of Mounties staffed the RCMP detachment in the fictional town of Lynx River, Northwest Territories, in the CBC series North of 60. The series, which aired from 1992 to 1998, was about events in the mostly native community, but the Mounties featured prominently in each episode.
Another TV series from the 1990s, Bordertown featured a NWMP corporal paired with a U.S. marshal securing law and order on a frontier U.S.-Canada border town. In the ABC TV mini-series Answered by Fire, at least three mounties are featured. Mounties also appears in the TV series When Calls the Heart (Hallmark Channel)
The 1987 Brian De Palma film The Untouchables featured cooperation between the Treasury Department task force, led by Eliot Ness, and the Mounties against liquor smuggling across the Canada–United States border.
The 1995 album C'est Cheese by Canadian musical comedy group The Arrogant Worms includes "The Mountie Song", which tells the story of a dissatisfied Mountie.
In his 1999, album Soiree Newfoundland musician A. Frank Willis included "Savage Cop in Savage Cove" which was based on a true story & went on to become a big hit.[92]
From 2011, the CTV fantasy drama series "The Listener" began to regularly feature characters who worked for the Integrated Investigative Bureau, a fictional division of the R.C.M.P. that brought together various specialists, officers and civilian consultants to work on high profile or federal cases. Although characters in the employ of the IIB were rarely, if ever, depicted wearing uniform, they were often addressed by their ranks - two main characters were Sergeant Michelle McClusky and Corporal Dev Clark.
Mountie merchandise[edit]
There are products and merchandise that are made in the image of the RCMP, like Mounties statues or hats. Before 1995, the RCMP had little control over these products.
The RCMP Heritage Centre is a multi-million dollar museum designed by Arthur Erickson that opened May 2007 in Regina, Saskatchewan at the RCMP Academy, Depot Division. It replaced the old RCMP museum and is designed to celebrate the role of the force in Canada's history.
Trademark[edit]
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police received an international licence on April 1, 1995, requiring those who use the RCMP to pay a licensing fee. Proceeds from the fees is used for community awareness programmes.[93] Those that do not pay the licensing fee are legally unable to use the name of the RCMP or their correct uniforms, though a film such as Canadian Bacon used the name "Royal Mounted Canadian Police" (RMCP) and the character in the Dudley Do-Right film did not wear accurate insignia.
Through a Master Licensing Agreement (MLA) with the RCMP, the RCMP Foundation is responsible for managing the commercial use of the RCMP name, image, and protected marks.[94] The Foundation issues selected companies a royalty-based agreement allowing them to produce and market high quality official RCMP merchandise. Walt Disney Co. (Canada) Ltd. was contracted to aid in the initial set up of the Licensing Program[95] but contrary to popular belief, Disney never owned or controlled any of the RCMP's protected marks.
Following the expiration of the Disney contract in 2000, all responsibilities and activities were taken over by the then Executive Director and his staff, reporting to the Foundation President and Board of Directors. In 2007, through a decree signed by Commissioner Beverley Busson, the operating name was changed to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Foundation.
Controversies and criticism[edit]
Further information: List of controversies involving the Royal Canadian Mounted Police
American historian Andrew Graybill has argued that the Mounted Police closely resemble the Texas Rangers in many ways. He argues that each protected the established order by confining and removing Indians, by tightly controlling the mixed blood peoples (the African Americans in Texas and the Métis in Canada), assisted the large-scale ranchers against the small-scale ranchers and farmers who fenced the land, and broke the power of labour unions that tried to organize the workers of industrial corporations.[96]
The RCMP have been involved in training and logistically supporting the Haitian National Police since 1994, a controversial matter in Canada considering allegations of widespread human rights violations on the part of the HNP. Some Canadian activist groups have called for an end to the RCMP training.[97] The RCMP has also provided training overseas in Iraq and other peace-keeping missions.
In October 2016, the RCMP issued an apology for harassment, discrimination, and sexual abuse of female officers and civilian members. Additionally they set aside a $100 million fund to compensate these victims. Over 20,000 current and past female employees that were employed after 1974 are eligible.[98]
Fallen officers and civilian members[edit]
As of December 12th, 2017,[99][100] the RCMP has 240 fallen officers, and one fallen civilian employee, for a total of 241 fallen members.
Note: Murdered is used in this table to express the cause of death of an officer at the hands of another individual, through unknown methods.


Rank and Name
Date
Cause of Death


Sub Constable John Nash
March 11, 1876
Accidental


Sub Constable George Mahoney
June 19, 1877
Drowning


Constable Marmaduke Graburn
November 17, 1879
Murdered


Constable Claudius S. Hooley
July 24, 1880
Drowning


Constable George Hamilton Johnston
May 23, 1882
Accidental gunshot


Constable Adam Wahl
May 25, 1882
Drowning


Constable Thomas James Gibson
March 26, 1885
Murdered/Killed in action at Battle of Duck Lake


Constable George Knox Garrett
March 27, 1885
Murdered/Killed in action at Battle of Duck Lake


Constable George Pearce Arnold
March 27, 1885
Murdered/Killed in action at Battle of Duck Lake


Constable David Latimer Cowan
April 15, 1885
Murdered


Corporal Ralph Bateman Sleigh
May 2, 1885
Killed in action at Battle of Cut Knife


Constable Patrick Burke
May 3, 1885
Killed in action at Battle of Cut Knife


Corporal William Hay Talbot Lowry
May 3, 1885
Killed in action at Battle of Cut Knife


Constable Frank Orlando Elliot
May 14, 1885
Murdered


Constable Alfred Perry
June 8, 1889
Drowning


Sergeant Albert Ernest Garland Montgomery
August 10, 1890
Injuries from being thrown off his horse


Constable George Quiqueran Rene Saveuse DeBeaujeu
September 8, 1890
Drowning


Corporal Harry Oliver Morphy
September 9, 1890
Drowning


Constable William Tyrrell Reading
December 14, 1890
Injuries from being crushed by a falling horse


Constable James Herron
March 2, 1891
Blizzard


Sergeant Colin Campbell Colebrook
October 29, 1895
Murdered


Constable Oscar Alexander Kern
April 27, 1896
Drowning


Sergeant William Brock Wilde
November 10, 1896
Murdered


Constable John Randolph Kerr
May 28, 1897
Murdered


Corporal Charles Horne Sterling Hockin
May 29, 1897
Murdered


Constable Norman Malcolm Campbell
December 26, 1901
Drowning


Constable Spencer Gilbert Heathcote
December 26, 1901
Drowning


Special Constable Stick Sam
July 29, 1903
Drowning


Staff Sergeant Arthur F.M. Brooke
September 26, 1903
Drowning


Constable Joseph Russell
July 5, 1905
Drowning


Constable Thomas Robert Jackson
June 8, 1906
Drowning


Corporal Alexander Gardner Haddock
June 14, 1906
Drowning


Assistant Surgeon Walter Stafford Flood
November 29, 1906
Exposure


Constable George Ernest Willmett
April 12, 1908
Murdered


Sergeant Ralph Morton L. Donaldson
April 14, 1908
Drowning


Special Constable Samuel Carter
February 14, 1911
Starvation. exposure, and exhaustion


Inspector Francis Joseph Fitzgerald
February 14, 1911
Starvation, exposure, and exhaustion


Constable George Frances Kinney
February 14, 1911
Starvation, exposure, and exhaustion


Constable Richard O'Hara Taylor
February 14, 1911
Starvation, exposure, and exhaustion


Constable Francis Walter Davies
June 3, 1912
Murdered


Corporal Maxwell George Bailey
April 23, 1913
Murdered


Constable Michael James Fitzgerald
August 27, 1913
Drowning


Constable Alexander Lamont
February 16, 1918
Typhoid fever


Staff Sergeant George Henry Leopold Bossange
June 21, 1919
Lightning


Corporal Ernest Usher
August 7, 1920
Murdered


Sergeant Arthur George Searle
May 15, 1921
Drowning


Corporal William Andrew Doak
April 1, 1922
Gunfire


Constable Ian M. Macdonald
August 28, 1924
Drowning


Constable Leo Francis Cox
June 28, 1925
Drowning


Constable Frederick Rhodes
December 6, 1926
Injuries sustained in a fire


Sergeant Richard Henry Nicholson
December 31, 1928
Murdered


Constable Donald Ross Macdonell
April 19, 1931
Drowning


Special Constable Norman Massan
April 19, 1931
Drowning


Constable Edgar Millen
January 30, 1932
Murdered


Constable Peter Seddon Oliver
February 10, 1932
Killed in action


Corporal Leonard Victor Ralls
July 5, 1932
Murdered


Corporal John Lorne Halliday
October 14, 1932
Accidental self-inflicted wound


Inspector Lorne James Sampson
May 8, 1933
Injuries from falling off his horse


Corporal Michael Moriarty
April 26, 1935
Murdered


Constable John George Shaw
October 5, 1935
Murdered


Constable George Campbell Harrison
October 8, 1935
Murdered


Sergeant Thomas Seller Wallace
October 8, 1935
Murdered


Constable Daniel Miller
October 14, 1935
Injuries sustained in an automobile accident


Constable George Edward Horan
March 10, 1937
Automobile accident


Constable William George Boorman
May 26, 1937
Accidental gunfire


Constable Willis Edward Rhodeniser
August 26, 1939
Gunfire


Constable Norman Alfred Gleadow
October 11, 1939
Murdered


Sergeant Arthur Julian Barker
March 16, 1940
Gunfire


Constable Frederick Gordon Frank Counsell
May 22, 1940
Gunfire


Constable Harry G. Rapeer
May 23, 1940
Accidental


Engineer Third Class Daniel Everett Gillis
March 26, 1941
Exposure caused by a ship fire


Constable Charles James Johnstone
May 1, 1941
Lost at sea after an enemy U-boat attack


Special Constable Henry Clare Jarvis
July 15, 1941
Drowning


Sergeant Louis Romeo Dubuc
September 27, 1941
Killed in action


Special Constable Joseph Henry Kent
November 5, 1941
Injuries from being struck by a vehicle


Constable Charles Floyd Patterson
November 25, 1941
Accidental


First Officer Patrick Reginald Fairburn Milthorpe
February 10, 1942
Shipwrecking


Constable Albert Joseph Chartrand
February 13, 1942
Heart attack


Master John Willard Bonner
September 11, 1942
Shipwrecking


Corporal Laurance Percival Ryder
January 20, 1943
Pneumonia after a cerebral haemorrhage, possibly caused by injuries sustained on duty


Constable James Harvard Delamere Bedlington
April 30, 1943
Motorcycle accident


Surgeon Maurice Powers, B.A., M.D., C.M.
October 20, 1943
Aircraft accident


Constable Terence Graham Newcomen Watts
December 28, 1943
Shellfire


Constable Edison Alexander Cameron
December 28, 1943
Killed in action


Constable David Charles Gardner Moon
December 28, 1943
Shellfire wounds


Constable Gordon Evan Bondurant
January 8, 1944
Wounds from bomb fragments


Constable Kenneth Laurence d'Albena
May 15, 1944
Destruction of his Jeep by a Teller mine


Constable John Francis Joseph Nelson
May 22, 1944
Killed in action


Constable Donald Gilbert Stackhouse
May 31, 1944
His motorcycle hitting a Teller mine


Constable Wilfred James Cobble
December 4, 1946
Struck by a vehicle


Second Class Constable James Boyd Henderson
August 7, 1948
Drowning


Constable Carl Frizzle Wilson
September 9, 1948
Struck by a vehicle


Constable Alexander Gamman
May 26, 1950
Murdered


Constable Herschel Taylor Wood
July 16, 1950
Injuries sustained in an automobile accident


Constable Stephen Kasper
May 11, 1953
Aircraft accident


Constable Joseph Kasimir Sander
July 9, 1954
Drowning


Constable Ronald Charles Bloomfield
July 9, 1954
Drowning


Special Constable Andrew Ooyoumut
July 21, 1954
Drowning


Constable Douglas Earl Fergusen
September 17, 1954
Carbon monoxide poisoning


Constable Roy Eldon Laird
August 26, 1955
Automobile accident


Constable Charles William Reay
October 6, 1955
Drowning


Inspector David James McCombe
December 12, 1955
Exposure


Constable William Lawrence Melsom
February 8, 1956
Automobile accident


Second Class Constable Henry Charles Arlington Chandler
June 15, 1956
Injuries sustained in an automobile accident


Constable John Roland Cobley
January 5, 1957
Struck by a vehicle


Corporal Herbert Milton Smart
June 7, 1958
Drowning


Second Class Constable Maurice Melnychuk
June 7, 1958
Drowning


Second Class Constable Glen Frederick Farough
June 7, 1958
Drowning


Second Class Constable David Melvyn Perry
June 7, 1958
Drowning


Second Class Constable George Herbert Edward Ransom
June 7, 1958
Drowning


Constable Cart Lennart Sundell
July 14, 1958
Accidental gunfire


Staff Sergeant Stanley Samuel Rothwell
August 6, 1958
Aircraft accident


Constable Richard William Green
August 6, 1958
Aircraft accident


Special Constable Joseph Edouard Raymond Cormier
August 6, 1958
Aircraft accident


Third Class Constable John Terence Hoey
November 7, 1958
Gunfire


Constable Colin Eric Lelliot
January 12, 1960
Gunfire


Constable Ronald Arthur Elkstrom
April 12, 1961
Non-collision automobile accident


Constable Wayne Sinclair
September 16, 1961
Severe internal injuries received in a non-collision automobile accident


Constable Joseph Thor Thompson
December 18, 1961
Injuries sustained in an aircraft-vehicle collision


Constable Elwood Joseph Keck
June 18, 1962
Gunfire


Constable Donald George Weisgerber
June 18, 1962
Gunfire


Constable Gordon Eric Petersen
June 18, 1962
Gunfire


Constable Archille Octave Maxime Lepine
July 19, 1962
Automobile accident


Constable James Walter Forman
April 24, 1963
Injuries sustained by being struck by a vehicle


Sergeant Kenneth Morley Laughland
July 13, 1963
Aircraft accident


Corporal Robert William Asbil
July 13, 1963
Aircraft accident


Constable Proctor Laurence Anthony Malcolm
July 13, 1963
Aircraft accident


Constable William John David Annand
July 13, 1963
Aircraft accident


Constable Joseph Pierre Francois Dubois
January 3, 1964
Automobile accident


Corporal Ervin Jack Giesbrecht
June 20, 1964
Drowning


Constable Robert Weston Amey
December 17, 1964
Gunfire


Third Class Constable Reginald Wayne Williams
December 19, 1964
Drowning


Constable David Brian Robinson
February 2, 1965
Accidental gunshot


Constable Neil McArthur Bruce
April 14, 1965
Pneumonia from complications caused by a gunshot wound


Constable Thomas Percy Carroll
February 11, 1966
Aircraft accident


Third Class Constable Philip John Francis Tidman
April 20, 1966
Automobile accident


Constable Gordon Donald Pearson
November 22, 1966
Gunshot wound


Third Class Constable Terry Eugene Tomfohr
June 3, 1967
Accidental


Corporal Donald Archibald Harvey
June 23, 1967
Gunshot wound


Third Class Constable Robert William Varney
August 17, 1967
Automobile accident


Corporal George Ronald Hawkins
June 6, 1968
Encephalitis


Second Class Constable James Alexander Kerr
December 11, 1968
Automobile accident


Corporal Terry Gerrard Williams
June 8, 1969
Drowning


Constable William Joseph Green
October 4, 1970
Injuries sustained in an automobile accident


Sergeant Robert James Schrader
October 9, 1970
Gunfire


Constable Douglas Bernard Anson
October 9, 1970
Gunfire


Sergeant James Aldridge O'Malley
October 28, 1970
Drowning


Constable Derek Thomas Ivany
June 25, 1971
Automobile accident


Constable Harold Stanley Siegel
September 26, 1971
Gunfire


Constable Michael Robert Mason
November 26, 1971
Drowning


Constable Roger Emile Pierlet
March 29, 1974
Gunfire


Constable Joseph Michel Benoit Létourneau
April 2, 1974
Automobile accident


Constable Joseph Henri Clément Tremblay
April 2, 1974
Automobile accident


Constable John Terrance Draginda
September 29, 1974
Automobile accident


Constable John Brian Baldwinson
October 28, 1975
Automobile accident


Constable Dennis Modest Nicklos Shwaykowski
April 6, 1977
Thrown off a moving vehicle


Corporal Barry Warren Lidstone
January 6, 1978
Gunfire


Constable Joseph Perry Brophy
January 6, 1978
Gunfire


Constable Dennis Anthony Onofrey
January 23, 1978
Gunfire


Constable William Iraneus Seward
February 15, 1978
Automobile accident


Constable Thomas Brian King
April 25, 1978
Gunfire


Special Constable George David Foster
September 4, 1978
Aircraft accident


Constable Lindberg Bruce Davis
January 8, 1979
Car-train collision


Constable Mark Percy McLachlan
February 2, 1979
Automobile accident


Constable Joseph Léon Michel Doucet
August 18, 1979
Aircraft accident


Constable Gordon Alfred Brooks
November 12, 1979
Drowning


Special Constable Ningeoseak Etidloi
November 12, 1979
Drowning


Constable Roy John William Karwaski
May 24, 1980
Internal injuries sustained in an automobile accident


Auxiliary Constable Dennis Lenard Fraser
June 4, 1980
Automobile accident


Constable Richard John Sedgwick
August 16, 1980
Injuries sustained in an Automobile accident


Constable Thomas James Agar
September 19, 1980
Gunfire


Corporal Ole Roust Larsen
August 11, 1981
Gunfire


Constable James Franklin Thomas
August 31, 1981
Automobile accident


Constable Barry Flynn McKinnon
December 16, 1981
Automobile accident


Constable Douglas Mark Ambrose Butler
October 16, 1982
Automobile accident


Constable Richard Allan Bourgoin
August 31, 1983
Murdered


Special Constable Wayne Graham Myers
December 14, 1983
Aircraft accident


Corporal Francis Eugene Jones
December 14, 1983
Aircraft accident


Constable Allen Garry Giesbrecht
January 13, 1985
Gunfire


Constable Michael Joseph Buday
March 19, 1985
Gunfire


Constable Joseph Eddy Mario Tessier
December 27, 1985
Gunfire


Special Constable Wayne Philip Boskill
January 8, 1986
Aircraft accident


Special Constable James Frederick Wilson
January 8, 1986
Aircraft accident


Special Constable Robert William Cochrane Thomas
March 6, 1986
Gunfire


Corporal Budd Maurice Johanson
April 4, 1986
Automobile accident


Auxiliary Constable Frederick Allan Abel
April 4, 1986
Automobile accident


Constable Scott Gordon Berry
June 29, 1986
Electrocution


Special Constable Gordon Zigmund Kowalczyk
January 26, 1987
Murdered


Corporal Derek John Flanagan
February 20, 1989
Injuries sustained while on special duty in Thailand


Constable Della Sonya Beyak
March 15, 1989
Automobile accident


Special Constable Nancy Puttkemery
December 9, 1989
Aircraft accident


Special Constable Norman Timms, C.D.
December 9, 1989
Aircraft accident


Constable Gerald Vernon Maurice Breese
October 24, 1990
Motorcycle accident


Constable Brian John Hutchinson
August 16, 1991
Aneurysm, directly related to injuries sustained from a blow to the head suffered on duty


Constable Christopher Colin Riglar
September 28, 1991
Injuries sustained by being struck by a vehicle


Auxiliary Constable Joseph Ernest (Sam) Balmer
August 29, 1992
Automobile accident


Constable Norman Harry Atkins
July 8, 1995
Automobile accident


Constable Joseph Ernest André Claude Gagné
September 6, 1995
Automobile accident


Constable Derek Cameron Burkholder
June 14, 1996
Gunfire


Constable Joseph Luc François (Frank) Carrière
November 30, 1997
Scuba diving accident


Corporal Graeme Charles Cumming
August 12, 1998
Automobile accident resulting in an automobile fire


Constable Joseph Ernest Jean-Guy Daniel Bourdon
May 7, 1999
Automobile accident


Sergeant Edwin Michael Mobley
August 15, 2000
Aircraft accident


Special Constable Timothy James Nicholson
August 15, 2000
Aircraft accident


Constable Jurgen Siegfried Seewald
March 5, 2001
Gunfire


Constable Peter Magdic
November 18, 2001
Automobile accident


Constable Dennis Douglas Strongquill
December 21, 2001
Gunfire


Constable Christine Elizabeth Diotte
March 12, 2002
Struck by a vehicle


Constable Wael Toufic Audi
March 29, 2002
Automobile accident


Constable Jimmy Ng
September 15, 2002
Automobile accident


Constable Joseph Léo Ghislain Maurice
June 10, 2003
Automobile accident


Corporal James Wilbert Gregson Galloway
February 28, 2004
Gunfire


Auxiliary Constable Glen Gregory Evely
November 13, 2004
Automobile accident


Constable Anthony Fitzgerald Orion Gordon
March 3, 2005
Gunfire


Constable Lionide (Leo) Nicholas Johnston
March 3, 2005
Gunfire


Constable Brock Warren Myrol
March 3, 2005
Gunfire


Constable Peter Christopher Schiemann
March 3, 2005
Gunfire


Constable Joseph Martial Maurice Jean Minguy
June 3, 2005
Drowning


Constable José Manuel Agostinho
July 4, 2005
Internal injuries sustained in an automobile accident


Constable Robin Lynelle Cameron
July 15, 2006
Gunfire


Constable Marc Joseph Denis Boudrages
July 16, 2006
Gunshot wounds


Constable Christopher John Worden
October 6, 2007
Gunshot wounds


Constable Douglas Allen Scott
November 7, 2007
Gunshot wound


Constable James Lloyd Lundblad
May 5, 2009
Automobile accident


Constable Chelsey Alice Robinson
June 21, 2010
Automobile accident


Sergeant Mark Charles Gallagher
January 12, 2010
2010 Haiti earthquake


Chief Superintendent Douglas Edward Coates
January 16, 2010
2010 Haiti earthquake


Constable Michael Bernard Potvin
July 30, 2010
Drowning


Civilian Member David John Brolin
January 17, 2012
Aircraft accident


Constable Derek Henry William Pineo
July 20, 2012
Automobile accident


Constable Adrian Johann Oliver
November 13, 2012
Automobile accident


Constable Fabrice Georges Gevaudan
June 4, 2014
Gunfire


Constable Douglas James Larche
June 4, 2014
Gunfire


Constable David Joseph Ross
June 4, 2014
Gunfire


Constable David Matthew Wynn
January 21, 2015
Gunshot wound


Constable Sarah Anne Beckett
April 5, 2016
Automobile accident caused by another officer's pursuit of an impaired driver.


Constable Richer Dubuc
March 6, 2017
Injuries sustained in an automobile accident


Constable Austin MacDougall
July 22, 2017
Struck by an automobile while cycling.


Corporal Trevor O'Keefe
September 11, 2017
Suicide


Constable Francis Deschenes
September 12, 2017
Struck by a vehicle in an automobile accident


See also[edit]

Civilian Review and Complaints Commission for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the civilian complaints review body
Courage in Red, a 13-part documentary about the RCMP
Emergency Response Team (RCMP)
List of Canadian organizations with royal patronage

References[edit]


^ a b "Royal Canadian Mounted Police - Badges and Insignia". Rcmp-grc.gc.ca. February 16, 2005. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ a b c "Royal Canadian Mounted Police". Quebec400.gc.ca. February 8, 2008. Archived from the original on July 16, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ "History of the RCMP". Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Retrieved 2016-04-14. 
^ "Auxiliary Constable Program". Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Retrieved 2016-05-05. 
^ "New RCMP National Headquarters Building: The M.J. Nadon Government of Canada Building". Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 2011-10-05. Retrieved 2016-04-11. 
^ a b c d e f g h "Organization of the RCMP". Rcmp-grc.gc.ca. September 1, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2016. 
^ "Find a detachment". Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 2016-05-06. Retrieved 2016-05-07. 
^ a b c d "Canadian Civil Aircraft Register: Quick Search Result for Royal Canadian Mounted Police". Transport Canada. Retrieved 2017-06-18. 
^ "About the RCMP". Royal Canadian Mounted Police. April 26, 2016. Retrieved May 7, 2016. 
^ "Trade-marks Act". Laws.justice.gc.ca. May 18, 2010. Archived from the original on June 5, 2011. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ "Inquiry Into Certain Activities of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Royal Commission of," Canadian Encyclopedia. Retrieved August 26, 2007.
^ p.52 Sendzikas, Aldona Stanley Barracks: Toronto's Military Legacy Dundurn Press Ltd., 01/01/2011
^ Hewitt, Steve. "Policing the Promised Land: The RCMP and Negative Nation-building in Alberta and Saskatchewan in the Interwar Period", The Prairie West as Promised Land ed. R. Douglas Francis and Chris Kitzan (Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2007), 318-320.
^ Hewitt, 322
^ Kelly, Nora and William. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police - A Century of History 1873-1973. (Edmonton, Hurtig Publishers. 1973) pp 199-200.
^ Reg Whitaker, "Left-Wing Dissent and the State: Canada in the Cold War Era." In C. E. S. Franks, Dissent and the State, Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1988, 195. ISBN 0-19-540742-3
^ The Royal Collection. "e-Gallery > Exhibitions > Queen & Commonwealth > Gifts > Badge of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police". Queen's Printer. Retrieved July 26, 2009. 
^ PA1 John Masson, "Territorial Teamwork," Coast Guard Magazine 2/2006, pp. 26–27
^ "RCMP National Division, a renamed A Division, to take on corruption". Maclean's. 2013-06-03. Retrieved 2013-10-25. 
^ Canoe.ca News December 25, 2007 Archived December 26, 2007, at Archive.is
^ a b Famous cases, events and people
^ CBC Archived May 20, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Gil Aegerter. "Three Canadian Officers Killed in Spray of Gunfire". NBC News. 
^ a b c North-West Mounted Police Uniform - Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Rcmp-grc.gc.ca (2011-08-12). Retrieved on 2014-04-12.
^ Ross, David. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police 1873–1987. p. 36. ISBN -0-85045-834-X. 
^ "1990: Sikh Mounties permitted to wear turbans". CBC Archives. Retrieved 3 February 2017. 
^ RCMP Hats Archived November 1, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Furbearerdefenders.com. Retrieved on 2013-10-30.
^ "Badges and Insignia". Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Retrieved 3 February 2017. 
^ Moore, Dene. (2012-08-16) Female Mounties earn right to wear pants and boots with all formal uniforms. Vancouversun.com. Retrieved on 2014-04-12.
^ "William Elliott sworn in as RCMP commissioner". CBC News. July 16, 2007. Retrieved July 30, 2008. ...the organization's first chief not to have served on a police force. 
^ Andrew Mayada (December 15, 2007). "RCMP commissioner promises sweeping changes". CanWest News Service. Archived from the original on December 17, 2007. Retrieved July 30, 2008. Elliott was appointed the first civilian commissioner in the RCMP's history 
^ Vancouver, The (December 7, 2006). "New commissioner for RCMP must restore faith in the famed force". Canada.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ PM announces charitable donations on behalf of The Prince of Wales and The Duchess of Cornwall Archived 2013-04-04 at the Wayback Machine.
^ All The Queen's Horses: fourth RCMP steed crosses Atlantic to join Royal Mews[dead link]
^ "Royal Canadian Mounted Police". Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. 
^ heraldist1
^ "Daily Telegraph, London, 23 May 2012". 
^ "North-West Mounted Police and Battleford memorial: Memorial 47001-047 Battleford, SK". National Inventory of Canadian Military Memorials. Veterans Affairs Canada. Retrieved 5 January 2017. 
^ "Fact Sheet: International Operations Branch" (PDF). Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Retrieved April 28, 2010. 
^ "DEA Afghanistan Unit Receives Prestigious Joint Chiefs of Staff Award". KETK NBC. February 8, 2012. Archived from the original on February 10, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2017. The ATFC began operations in mid-2009 and is a multi-agency organization led by DEA with the Treasury Department and Department of Defense as co-deputies. Additional personnel staff ATFC from the Department of Defense's CENTCOM, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Internal Revenue Service. In the past, the FBI and RCMP also were members. The ATFC’s purpose is to attack insurgence funding and financing networks by providing threat finance expertise and actionable intelligence to U.S. civilian and military leaders. The RCMP have also participated in United Nations Peacekeeping operations, sending members to participate actively in various U.N. missions from the late 1980's including observer missions in Namibia, policing missions in Haiti and Kosovo, and CIVPOL operations in Croatia, Bosnia-Hercegovina, and Sudan. 
^ rcmp-grc.ca: "RCMP executive"
^ RCMP Executive Archived September 24, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b "RCMP Police Dog Service Training Centre". Archived from the original on June 25, 2008. 
^ National Division – RCMP. Rcmp-grc.gc.ca (2013-10-17). Retrieved on 2013-10-30.
^ "Newfoundland and Labrador". 
^ a b "The RCMP in Quebec". 
^ E Division
^ "RCMP in Saskatchewan". 
^ "Northwest Territories". 
^ "RCMP in Nova Scotia". 
^ "New Brunswick". 
^ "RCMP in Alberta". 
^ "Prince Edward Island". 
^ "RCMP - Yukon (M Division)". Archived from the original on February 5, 2009. 
^ "RCMP in Ontario". 
^ "Nunavut". 
^ Renato Gandia, RCMP pays tribute to wives who supported officers posted to smallest detachments, Calgary Sun (April 12, 2013).
^ a b B.C.'s single-officer RCMP detachments to be closed, CBC News (September 28, 2012).
^ Your Surrey RCMP, Royal Canadian Mounted Police (last modified March 31, 2016).
^ Canada's second largest RCMP detachment integrates dispatch with E-Comm Regional communications centre (press release), E-Comm (October 2, 2013).
^ Switched on - Blue Line. Blueline.ca. Retrieved on 2013-10-30.
^ Tightened tactics breed dissent in Harper’s security detail. The Globe and Mail (2012-06-23). Retrieved on 2013-10-30.
^ RCMP Reserve Constables in B.C.
^ a b "Auxiliary Constable Program". 
^ "News". January 6, 2016. 
^ a b "Community Constable Program (Synopsis)". 
^ a b Surrey RCMP's Community Safety Officer program chopped Archived September 7, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Community Constables". 
^ "Community-level knowledge sought in new RCMP program". 
^ "Community constables link citizens and police". Thompson Citizen. 
^ a b c "RCMP Reserve Program". Rcmpvetsnb.ca. January 1, 1995. Archived from the original on 2009-06-05. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ RCMP Reserve Constables in B.C.
^ Retired Mounties back in saddle[dead link]
^ Community Safety Officers
^ Enhanced Policing Options—Community Safety Officers[dead link]
^ "New category of RCMP member a first for British Columbia". Bc.rcmp.ca. July 5, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ Surrey RCMP. "Surrey RCMP - CSO Program". 
^ a b c "Community Safety Officer Pilot Program Evaluation Report". 
^ Aboriginal Community Constable Archived June 27, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Telecommunications Operators". rcmp-grc.gc.ca. July 30, 2010. Retrieved September 1, 2010. 
^ "Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP¨) / Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) / Gendarmerie royale du Canada (GRC)". 
^ "Land Transport". Rcmp-grc.gc.ca. November 14, 2006. Archived from the original on June 20, 2010. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ a b "Marine Services". Rcmp-grc.gc.ca. Archived from the original on June 22, 2010. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ Petzal, David E. and Bourjaily, Phil, with Fenson, Brad. The Total Gun Manual (Canadian edition) (San Francisco: WeldonOwen, 2014) Note 44.
^ Petzal and Bourjaily with Fenson, The Total Gun Manual (Canadian edition), Note 45
^ Petzal and Bourjaily, Phil, with Fenson. The Total Gun Manual (Canadian edition), Note 44
^ Phillips, Roger F., & Klancher, Donald J. Arms &  [sic] Accoutrements of the Mounted Police 1873-1973 (Bloomfield, ON: Museum Restoration Service, 1982), p.24.
^ a b Petzal and Bourjaily with Fenson. The Total Gun Manual (Canadian edition), Note 44
^ Petzal and Bourjaily with Fenson. The Total Gun Manual (Canadian edition), Note 45
^ Force's legacy endures, Toronto Star, March 5, 2005
^ Barr, William Red Serge and Polar Bear Pants" The Biography of Harry Stallworthy, RCMP University of Alberta Press 2004
^ "Newfoundland music books food videos images arts crafts". 
^ Farnsworth, Clyde H. (February 4, 1995). "For the Mounties, Justice Is Now a Licensing Fee—New York Times". New York Times. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ Royal Canadian Mounted Police, "[1]", Retrieved July 28, 2011
^ CBC Digital Archives "[2]", Retrieved July 28, 2011
^ Andrew R. Graybill, Policing the Great Plains: Rangers, Mounties, and the North American Frontier, 1875-1910 (University of Nebraska Press, 2007) excerpt and text search
^ RCMP Website and "Haiti Support Hits the Streets"[dead link]
^ Harris, Kathleen. "RCMP could pay up to $100M to female employees who were sexually harassed, abused". CBC News. Retrieved 6 October 2016. 
^ "RCMP Honour Roll". www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca. Retrieved 2017-12-14. 
^ "RCMP constable killed in Lacolle collision remembered at funeral as 'a gentle giant'". Montreal Gazette. 2017-03-19. Retrieved 2017-07-08. 


External links[edit]

Official website







v
t
e


 Law enforcement agencies in Canada



Federal



Canada Border Services Agency
Canadian Forces Military Police
Canadian Forces National Investigation Service
Canada Revenue Agency
Competition Bureau
Correctional Service of Canada
Environment and Climate Change Canada Enforcement Branch
Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Parliamentary Protective Service
Parks Canada Wardens
Royal Canadian Mounted Police
Transport Canada





Provincial




Provincial police



Ontario Provincial Police
Royal Newfoundland Constabulary
Sûreté du Québec





Other law
enforcement



Alberta Law Enforcement Response Teams
Alberta Sheriffs Branch
British Columbia Sheriff Service
British Columbia Commercial Vehicle Safety and Enforcement
British Columbia Conservation Officer Service
Combined Forces Special Enforcement Unit – British Columbia
Manitoba Justice Sheriff's Office
Unité permanente anticorruption








Regional and
municipal



Abbotsford Police Department
Barrie Police Service
Belleville Police
Brockville Police Service
Calgary Police Service
Camrose Police Service
Central Saanich Police Service
Cobourg Police Service
Charlottetown Police Department
Delta Police Department
Durham Regional Police Service
Edmonton Police Service
Fredericton Police
Greater Sudbury Police Service
Guelph Police Service
Halifax Regional Police
Halton Regional Police Service
Hamilton Police Service
Kingston Police
Lacombe Police Service
Lethbridge Police Service
London Police Service
Medicine Hat Police Service
Nelson Police Department
New Westminster Police Department
Niagara Regional Police Service
North Bay Police Service
Ottawa Police Service
Peel Regional Police
Port Moody Police Department
Régie intermunicipale de police de la Rivière-du-Nord
Regina Police Service
Rothesay Regional Police Force
Saanich Police Department
Saskatoon Police Service
Service de police de la Ville de Laval
Service de police de Longueuil
Service de police de la Ville de Montréal
Service de police de la Ville de Québec
Saugeen Shores Police Service
Shelburne Police Service
South Simcoe Police Service
Summerside Police Department
Taber Police Service
Thunder Bay Police Service
Toronto Police Service
Vancouver Police Department
Victoria Police Department
Waterloo Regional Police Service
West Grey Police
West Vancouver Police Department
Windsor Police Service
Winnipeg Police Service
York Regional Police





Specialized



Anishinabek Police Service
Calgary Transit Public Safety and Enforcement Section
Canadian Pacific Police Service
CN Police
GO Transit Special Constables
Integrated National Security Enforcement Teams
Integrated Security Unit
Niagara Parks Police Service
Nishnawbe-Aski Police Service
Ottawa By-law Services
South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority Police Service
McMaster University Security Service
TTC Transit Enforcement Unit
Treaty Three Police Service
University of Alberta Protective Services
University of Toronto Campus Community Police Service
YRT/Viva Special Constable Services
Stl’atl’imx Tribal Police Service





Police Oversight



Alberta Serious Incident Response Team
Independent Investigations Office (BC)
Independent Investigation Unit (MB)
Serious Incident Response Team (NS)
Special Investigations Unit and Office of the Independent Police Review Director (ON)





Defunct



Alberta Provincial Police
British Columbia Provincial Police
Dominion Police
Manitoba Provincial Police
New Brunswick Highway Patrol
New Brunswick Provincial Police
Newfoundland Ranger Force
North-West Mounted Police
Nova Scotia Police
Organized Crime Agency of British Columbia
Prince Edward Island Provincial Police
Saskatchewan Provincial Police





Manpower



Aircraft Protective Officers
Auxiliary Constables
Bylaw enforcement officers
Firearms Officers
Peace officers
Special Constables





Boards
and Commissions



Civilian Review and Complaints Commission for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police
Military Police Complaints Commission
Toronto Police Services Board
Police board





Lists



Aboriginal police in Canada
List of law enforcement agencies in British Columbia
List of law enforcement agencies in Canada
List of police firearms in Canada
Provincial correctional services in Canada





Museums



Ontario Provincial Police Museum
RCMP Heritage Centre
Rotary Museum of Police and Corrections
Vancouver Police Museum
Winnipeg Police Museum












v
t
e


 Departments of the Government of Canada



Principal
departments



Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canadian Heritage
Employment and Social Development
Environment and Climate Change
Finance
Fisheries and Oceans
Global Affairs
Health
Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship
Indigenous and Northern Affairs
Innovation, Science and Economic Development
Justice
National Defence
Natural Resources
Privy Council Office
Public Safety
Public Services and Procurement
Transport
Veterans Affairs





Major agencies



Canada Border Services Agency
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation
Canada Pension Plan
Canada Revenue Agency
Canadian Armed Forces
Canadian Coast Guard
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission
Canadian Space Agency
Geological Survey of Canada
National Research Council of Canada
Parks Canada
Public Health Agency of Canada
Public Prosecution Service of Canada
Royal Canadian Mounted Police
Service Canada
Statistics Canada





Historic departments



Canadian International Development Agency
Department of Soldiers' Civil Re-establishment
Passport Canada
Solicitor General of Canada












v
t
e


Canadian Newsmaker of the Year






Igor Gouzenko

1946


Barbara Ann Scott

1947


William Lyon Mackenzie King

1948


Louis St. Laurent

1949


Lester B. Pearson

1950–1953


Marilyn Bell

1954


Lester B. Pearson

1955–1956


John Diefenbaker

1957–1960


Joey Smallwood

1959


James Coyne

1961


Réal Caouette

1962


Lester B. Pearson

1963–1964


Lucien Rivard

1965


John Diefenbaker

1966


Lester B. Pearson

1967


Pierre Trudeau

1968–1975


René Lévesque

1976–1977


Pierre Trudeau

1978


Joe Clark

1979


Terry Fox

1980–1981


Wayne Gretzky

1982


Brian Mulroney

1983–1984


Steve Fonyo

1985


Rick Hansen

1986–1987


Ben Johnson

1988


Michael Wilson

1989


Elijah Harper

1990


Brian Mulroney

1991


The referendum on the Charlottetown Accord

1992


Kim Campbell

1993


Jacques Parizeau

1994


Lucien Bouchard

1995


Donovan Bailey

1996


Sheldon Kennedy

1997


Jean Chrétien

1998


Pierre Trudeau

1999, as Newsmaker of the 20th Century


Pierre Trudeau

2000


Stockwell Day

2001


Jean Chrétien

2002


Paul Martin

2003–2004


John Gomery

2005


The Canadian Soldier

2006


RCMP

2007


Stephen Harper

2008–2009


Russell Williams

2010


Jack Layton

2011


Luka Magnotta

2012


Rob Ford

2013


Patrice Vincent and Nathan Cirillo

2014


Justin Trudeau

2015


Gord Downie

2016–2017










 Book:Canadian Newsmakers of the Year
 Portal:History of Canada












v
t
e


Police forces by country



Africa



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Asia



Afghanistan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
China




Hong Kong
Macau, China




India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Palestine
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Republic of China (Taiwan)
Thailand
Tajikistan
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates




Abu Dhabi Police
Dubai Police Force




Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





Europe



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
|Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain




National Police Corps (National)
Catalonian Police Force
Euskadi Police Force
Chartered Police of Navarra




Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





North America



Canada
United States
Mexico





Caribbean



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
St. Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago





Central America



Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Nicaragua
Panama





South America



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile




Chilean National Police
Chilean Investigations Police




Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand





Non-recognized



Kosovo
Northern Cyprus





Defunct



Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Serbia and Montenegro
Soviet Union
Yugoslavia












v
t
e


Customs services by country



Africa



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Customs services of Ivory Coast Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Asia



Afghanistan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
Mainland China
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Macau, China
Malaysia
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Palestine
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Republic of China (Taiwan)
Thailand
Tajikistan
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





Europe



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





North America



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
St. Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States





South America



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand





Non-recognized



Kosovo
Northern Cyprus





Defunct



Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Serbia and Montenegro
Soviet Union
Yugoslavia








Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects


Media
from Commons
News stories
from Wikinews
Source texts
from Wikisource
Data
from Wikidata






Canada portal
Criminal justice portal
Law enforcement portal


Coordinates: 45°25′N 75°40′W﻿ / ﻿45.42°N 75.66°W﻿ / 45.42; -75.66





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Royal_Canadian_Mounted_Police&oldid=818233925"					Categories: Federal law enforcement agencies of CanadaGendarmerieRoyal Canadian Mounted PoliceCanadian federal departments and agenciesPublic Safety CanadaCanadian intelligence agenciesGovernment agencies established in 1920Legal history of Canada1920 establishments in CanadaOrganizations based in Canada with royal patronageOrganizations based in OttawaUniformed services of CanadaNunavut lawNorthwest Territories lawYukon lawNational symbols of CanadaHidden categories: Webarchive template archiveis linksWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2016Use mdy dates from November 2015Articles containing French-language textWikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2017Pages using infobox law enforcement with automatic label pluralizationAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing potentially dated statements from September 2015All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with missing filesCoordinates on Wikidata