

Royal Australian Navy





Active
1911–present


Country
Australia


Type
Navy


Size
14,215 Permanent personnel[1]
8,493 Reserve personnel[1]
47 commissioned ships
3 non-commissioned ships


Part of
Australian Defence Force


Headquarters
Russell Offices, Canberra


Motto(s)
Serving Australia with Pride


March
"Royal Australian Navy"


Anniversaries
10 July


Engagements


World War I
World War II
Korean War
Malayan Emergency
Indonesian Confrontation
Vietnam War
Gulf War
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War




Website
www.navy.gov.au


Commanders


Commander-in-chief
General Sir Peter Cosgrove
As Governor-General of Australia


Chief of the Defence Force
Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin


Vice Chief of the Defence Force
Vice Admiral Ray Griggs


Chief of Navy
Vice Admiral Tim Barrett


Deputy Chief of Navy
Rear Admiral Michael Noonan


Commander Australian Fleet
Rear Admiral Stuart Mayer


Insignia


Naval Ensign (1967–present)



Naval Jack



Aircraft flown


Reconnaissance
Sikorsky MH-60R


Trainer
Bell 429 GlobalRanger, Eurocopter AS350 Squirrel


Transport
NHIndustries NH90


The Royal Australian Navy (RAN) is the naval branch of the Australian Defence Force. Following the Federation of Australia in 1901, the ships and resources of the separate colonial navies were integrated into a national force: the Commonwealth Naval Forces. Originally intended for local defence, the navy was granted the title of 'Royal Australian Navy' in 1911, and became increasingly responsible for defence of the region.
Britain's Royal Navy continued to support the RAN and provided additional blue-water defence capability in the Pacific up to the early years of World War II. Then, rapid wartime expansion saw the acquisition of large surface vessels and the building of many smaller warships. In the decade following the war, the RAN acquired a small number of aircraft carriers, the last of these paying off in 1982.
Today, the RAN consists of 47 commissioned vessels, 3 non-commissioned vessels and over 16,000 personnel. The navy is one of the largest and most sophisticated naval forces in the South Pacific region, with a significant presence in the Indian Ocean and worldwide operations in support of military campaigns and peacekeeping missions. The current Chief of Navy is Vice Admiral Tim Barrett.



Contents


1 History
2 RAN today

2.1 Command structure
2.2 Fleet

2.2.1 Current ships


2.3 Aviation

2.3.1 Fleet Air Arm
2.3.2 LADS Flight
2.3.3 Gallery


2.4 Clearance Diving Branch


3 Future
4 Current operations
5 Personnel
6 Ranks and uniforms

6.1 Commissioned officers
6.2 Chaplain
6.3 Other ranks


7 Special insignia
8 See also
9 References

9.1 Notes
9.2 Bibliography


10 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the Royal Australian Navy
The Commonwealth Naval Forces were established on 1 March 1901, two months after the federation of Australia, when the naval forces of the separate Australian colonies were amalgamated. A period of uncertainty followed as the policy makers sought to determine the newly established force's requirements and purpose, with the debate focusing upon whether Australia's naval force would be structured mainly for local defence or whether it would be designed to serve as a fleet unit within a larger imperial force, controlled centrally by the British Admiralty.[2] In 1908–09, the decision was made to pursue a compromise solution, and the Australian government agreed to establish a force that would be used for local defence but which would be capable of forming a fleet unit within the imperial naval strategy, albeit without central control. As a result, the navy's force structure was set at "one battlecruiser, three light cruisers, six destroyers and three submarines".[3]
On 10 July 1911, King George V granted the service the title of "Royal Australian Navy".[4] The first of the RAN's new vessels, the destroyer Yarra, was completed in September 1910 and by the outbreak of the First World War the majority of the RAN's planned new fleet had been realised.[3] The Australian Squadron was placed under control of the British Admiralty,[5] and initially it was tasked with capturing many of Germany's South Pacific colonies and protecting Australian shipping from the German East Asia Squadron. Later in the war, most of the RAN's major ships operated as part of Royal Navy forces in the Mediterranean and North Seas, and then later in the Adriatic, and then the Black Sea following the surrender of the Ottoman Empire.[3]
In 1919, the RAN received a force of six destroyers, three sloops and six submarines from the Royal Navy,[6] but throughout the 1920s and early 1930s, the RAN was drastically reduced in size due to a variety of factors including political apathy and economic hardship as a result of the Great Depression.[7] In this time the focus of Australia's naval policy shifted from defence against invasion to trade protection,[8] and several fleet units were sunk as targets or scrapped. By 1923, the size of the navy had fallen to eight vessels,[7] and by the end of the decade it had fallen further to five, with just 3,500 personnel.[8] In the late 1930s, as international tensions increased, the RAN was modernised and expanded, with the service receiving primacy of funding over the Army and Air Force during this time as Australia began to prepare for war.[8]
Early in the Second World War, RAN ships again operated as part of Royal Navy formations, many serving with distinction in the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Indian Ocean, and off the West African coast.[9] Following the outbreak of the Pacific War and the virtual destruction of British naval forces in south-east Asia, the RAN operated more independently, or as part of United States Navy formations. As the navy took on an even greater role, it was expanded significantly and at its height the RAN was the fourth-largest navy in the world, with 39,650 personnel operating 337 warships.[8] A total of 34 vessels were lost during the war, including three cruisers and four destroyers.[10]
After the Second World War, the size of the RAN was again reduced, but it gained new capabilities with the acquisition of two aircraft carriers, Sydney and Melbourne.[11] The RAN saw action in many Cold War–era conflicts in the Asia-Pacific region and operated alongside the Royal Navy and United States Navy off Korea, Malaysia, and Vietnam.[12] Since the end of the Cold War, the RAN has been part of Coalition forces in the Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean, operating in support of Operation Slipper and undertaking counter piracy operations. It was also deployed in support of Australian peacekeeping operations in East Timor and the Solomon Islands.[13]
RAN today[edit]
Command structure[edit]
The strategic command structure of the RAN was overhauled during the New Generation Navy changes. The RAN is commanded through Naval Headquarters (NHQ) in Canberra. The professional head is the Chief of Navy (CN), who holds the rank of Vice Admiral. NHQ is responsible for implementing policy decisions handed down from the Department of Defence and for overseeing tactical and operational issues that are the purview of the subordinate commands.[citation needed]
Beneath NHQ are two subordinate commands:

Fleet Command: fleet command is led by Commander Australian Fleet (COMAUSFLT). COMAUSFLT holds the rank of rear admiral; previously, this post was Flag Officer Commanding HM's Australian Fleet (FOCAF), created in 1911,[14] but the title was changed in 1988 to the Maritime Commander Australia. On 1 February 2007, the title changed again, becoming Commander Australian Fleet.[15] The nominated at-sea commander is Commodore Warfare (COMWAR), a one-star deployable task group commander. Fleet command has responsibility to CN for the full command of assigned assets, and to Joint Operations command for the provision of operationally ready forces.
Navy Strategic Command: the administrative element overseeing the RAN's training, engineering and logistical support needs. Instituted in 2000, the Systems Commander was appointed at the rank of commodore; in June 2008, the position was upgraded to the rank of rear admiral.

Fleet Command was previously made up of seven Force Element Groups, but after the New Generation Navy changes, this was restructured into four Force Commands:[16]

Fleet Air Arm, responsible for the navy's aviation assets
Mine Warfare, Hydrographic and Patrol Boat Force, an amalgamation of the previous Patrol Boat, Hydrographic, and Mine Warfare and Clearance Diving Forces, operating what are collectively termed the RAN's "minor war vessels"
Submarine Force, operating the Collins-class submarines
Surface Force, covering the RAN's surface combatants (generally ships of frigate size or larger)

Fleet[edit]
As of September 2017, the RAN fleet consisted of 47 warships, including destroyers, frigates, submarines, patrol boats and auxiliary ships.[17] Ships commissioned into the RAN are given the prefix HMAS (His/Her Majesty's Australian Ship).[18]
The RAN has two primary bases for its fleet:[19][20]

Fleet Base East, located at HMAS Kuttabul, Sydney; and
Fleet Base West, located at HMAS Stirling, near Perth.

In addition, three other bases are home to the majority of the RAN's minor war vessels:[21][22][23]

HMAS Cairns, at Cairns;
HMAS Coonawarra, at Darwin; and
HMAS Waterhen, at Sydney.

Current ships[edit]
Further information: Current Royal Australian Navy ships
The RAN currently operates 47 commissioned vessels, made up of eight ship classes and three individual ships, plus three non-commissioned vessels. In addition, DMS Maritime operates a large number of civilian-crewed vessels under contract to the Australian Defence Force.


Commissioned vessels


Image
Class/name
Type
Number
Entered service
Details







Collins class
Submarine
6
2000
Anti-shipping, intelligence collection. Diesel-electric powered.







Canberra class
Landing helicopter dock
2
2014
Amphibious warfare ships.



Hobart class
Destroyer
1 (2)
2017
Air Warfare Destroyer. Two more to be commissioned.







Anzac class
Frigate
8
1996
Anti-submarine and anti-aircraft frigate with 1 helicopter. Two more were built for the Royal New Zealand Navy.







Adelaide class
Frigate
2
1985
General-purpose guided-missile frigate with 2 helicopters. Four more ships have been decommissioned.







Armidale class
Patrol boat
13
2005
Coastal defence, maritime border, and fishery protection







Huon class
Minehunter
6
1997
Minehunting. Four active, two laid up.







Leeuwin class
Survey ship
2
2000
Hydrographic survey







Paluma class
Survey launch
4
1989
Hydrographic survey



HMAS Choules
(Bay class)
Landing Ship Dock
1
2011
Heavy sealift and transport







HMAS Success
(Durance class)
Replenishment ship
1
1986
Replenishment at sea and afloat support







HMAS Sirius
Replenishment ship
1
2006
Replenishment at sea and afloat support. Modified commercial tanker.


Non-commissioned vessels







Cape class
Patrol boat
2
2015
Cape Byron and Cape Nelson were leased from the Australian Border Force to supplement Armidales during classwide remediation maintenance. ADV (Australian Defence Vessel) ship prefix.







STS Young Endeavour
Tall Ship
1
1988
Sail training ship


Aviation[edit]
Fleet Air Arm[edit]
Main article: Fleet Air Arm (RAN)
The Fleet Air Arm (previously known as the Australian Navy Aviation Group) provides the RAN's aviation capability. As of 2013, the FAA consists of three active squadrons plus a fourth being activated, operating five helicopter types in the anti-submarine warfare and maritime support roles.[24] The Fleet Air Arm is based at HMAS Albatross in Nowra, New South Wales, and operates from the RAN's frigates, large amphibious warfare vessels, and large support ships.
LADS Flight[edit]
Main article: Laser Airborne Depth Sounder Flight RAN
In addition to the helicopter squadrons of the Fleet Air Arm, the RAN operates an additional flying unit that comes under the operational responsibility of the Australian Hydrographic Service. The Laser Airborne Depth Sounder Flight contains the sole remaining fixed-wing aircraft operated by the RAN, and is based at HMAS Cairns in Cairns, Queensland.[25]
Gallery[edit]







MRH-90 of 808 Squadron









S-70 Seahawk of 816 Squadron









Bombardier Dash 8 of the LADS Flight




Clearance Diving Branch[edit]




Clearance Divers during a ship boarding exercise in 2006 as a part of RIMPAC exercises.


Main article: Clearance Diving Branch (RAN)
The Clearance Diving Branch is composed of two Clearance Diving Teams (CDT) that serve as parent units for naval clearance divers:

Clearance Diving Team 1 (AUSCDT ONE), based at HMAS Waterhen in New South Wales; and
Clearance Diving Team 4 (AUSCDT FOUR), based at HMAS Stirling in Western Australia.

When clearance divers are sent into combat, Clearance Diving Team Three (AUSCDT THREE) is formed.
The CDTs have two primary roles:

Mine counter-measures (MCM) and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD); and
Maritime tactical operations.

Future[edit]






This section needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (February 2015)







HMAS Canberra, a Canberra-class landing helicopter dock, being fitted out in 2013


Main article: Procurement programme of the Royal Australian Navy




Hobart, the lead ship of the RAN's new class of air-warfare destroyers, under construction in 2015


There are currently several major projects underway that will see upgrades to RAN capabilities:

Project AIR 9000 Phase 8 is a project to replace the RAN's Seahawk (and cancelled Kaman SH-2G(A) Super Seasprite) helicopters with 24 MH-60R Seahawk helicopters.
Project JP 2048 Phase 3 will provide six Heavy Landing Craft to replace the RAN's Balikpapan-class vessels. The project is planned to deliver capability in 2014–2016.
Project SEA 1429 will upgrade the Collins-class submarines with state-of-the-art heavyweight torpedoes.
Project SEA 1439 Phase 4A will equip the Collins-class submarines with a new tactical combat system.
Project SEA 1654 Phase 3 is a project to acquire a Sea Logistic Support and Replenishment Support vessel to replace the supply ship HMAS Success.
Project SEA 4000, under which the RAN will acquire three Hobart-class air warfare destroyers, built around the United States Navy Aegis air and surface combat management system. The vessels are to be based on the Spanish Álvaro de Bazán-class frigate.[26][27]

To boost the RAN's amphibious capability during the construction of the Canberra-class LHDs, the RAN acquired HMAS Choules (a former Bay-class landing ship of the British Royal Fleet Auxiliary) in December 2011, and the support vessel ADV Ocean Shield in June 2012.[28][29]
Future procurement plans include:

twelve Future Submarines, under Project SEA 1000, to replace the Collins-class (up to 4,000 tons, potentially equipped with cruise missiles and minisubs); and
nine Future Frigates to replace the Anzac-class frigates (possibly up to 7,000 tons and equipped with cruise missiles).[30] RAN expects to let 6 countries tender for $30 billion in 2016, and make a selection in 2018. Ships are to be built in Australia.[31]

Current operations[edit]
Main article: Current Australian Defence Force deployments
The RAN currently has forces deployed on four major operations:[32]

Operation Slipper: Australia's commitment to the International Coalition forces in Afghanistan;
Operation Resolute: border protection;
Operation Manitou: counter-piracy, counter-terrorism and maritime stability in the Middle East; and
Operation Accordion: support operation to provide sustainment to forces deployed on Operations Slipper and Manitou.

Personnel[edit]




A female RAN officer in 2014. Women serve in the RAN in combat roles and at sea.


As of June 2011, the RAN has 14,215 permanent full-time personnel, 161 gap year personnel, and 2,150 reserve personnel.[33] The permanent full-time force consisted of 3,357 commissioned officers, and 10,697 enlisted personnel.[33] In June 2010, male personnel made up 82% of the permanent full-time force, while female personnel made up 18%.[34] The RAN has the highest percentage of women in the ADF, compared to the RAAF's 17.8% and the Army's 9.7%.[34]
The following are the current senior Royal Australian Navy officers:

Vice Admiral Ray Griggs – Vice Chief of the Defence Force
Vice Admiral David Johnston – Chief of Joint Operations
Vice Admiral Tim Barrett – Chief of Navy
Rear Admiral Michael Noonan – Deputy Chief of Navy
Rear Admiral Stuart Mayer – Commander Australian Fleet
Rear Admiral Jonathan Mead – Head Navy Capability
Rear Admiral Colin Lawrence – Head Navy Engineering
Rear Admiral Bruce Kafer – Director-General Australian Navy Cadets and Reserves[35]
Commodore Brett Brace – Hydrographer of Australia[35]
Warrant Officer Gary Wight – Warrant Officer of the Navy

The RAN needs 2,000 recruits, including 700 apprentices,[36] to crew the next generation of warships, such as air warfare destroyers, which enter service next decade. To overcome a lack of Australian recruits, the RAN began to recruit sailors who have been laid off from other western navies.[37]
Ranks and uniforms[edit]




Royal Australian Navy sailors in 2010


See also: Australian Defence Force ranks
The uniforms of the Royal Australian Navy are very similar in cut, colour and insignia to their British Royal Navy forerunners. However, beginning with the Second World War all RAN personnel began wearing shoulder flashes reading Australia, a practice continuing today. These are cloth arcs at shoulder height on uniforms, metallic gold on officers' shoulder boards, and embroidered on shoulder slip-ons.
Commissioned officers[edit]
Commissioned officers of the Australian Navy have pay grades ranging from S-1 to O-11. The only O-11 position in the navy is honorary and has only ever been held by royalty, currently being held by HRH The Duke of Edinburgh. The highest position occupied in the current Royal Australian Navy structure is O-9, a vice admiral who serves as the Chief of the Navy. O-8 (rear admiral) to O-11 (admiral of the fleet) are referred to as flag officers, O-5 (commander) and above are referred to as senior officers, while S-1 (midshipman) to O-4 (lieutenant commander) are referred to as junior officers. All officers of the Navy receive a commission from Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Australia. The Commissioning Scroll issued in recognition of the commission is signed by the Governor General of Australia as Commander-in-Chief and the serving Minister for Defence.[citation needed]
Naval officers are trained at the Royal Australian Naval College (HMAS Creswell) in Jervis Bay, New South Wales and the Australian Defence Force Academy in Canberra.[38]



Commissioned officer rank structure of the Royal Australian Navy


Admiral of the Fleet
Admiral
Vice Admiral
Rear Admiral
Commodore
Captain


O-11
O-10
O-9
O-8
O-7
O-6


 
 
 
 
 



AF
ADML
VADM
RADM
CDRE
CAPT




Commander
Lieutenant Commander
Lieutenant
Sub Lieutenant
Acting Sub Lieutenant
Midshipman


O-5
O-4
O-3
O-2
O-1
S-1










CMDR
LCDR
LEUT
SBLT
ASLT
MIDN


Chaplain[edit]
Chaplains in the Royal Australian Navy are Commissioned Officers who complete the same training as other Officers in the RAN at the Royal Australian Naval College, HMAS Creswell. RAN regulations group RAN Chaplains with Commanders for purposes of protocol such as marks of respect (saluting), however RAN Chaplains have no other rank other than "Chaplain" and their rank emblem is identifiable by a Maltese cross with gold anchor. Senior Chaplains are grouped with Captains and Principal Chaplains are grouped with Commodores, but their Chaplain rank slide remains the same. Principal Chaplains however have gold braid on the peak of their white service cap.[citation needed]




depiction of RAN Chaplains shoulder rank slide


Other ranks[edit]


Other ranks


Warrant Officer of the Navy
Warrant Officer
Chief Petty Officer

Petty Officer
Leading Seaman

Able Seaman
Seaman


E-9
E-8
E-7
E-6
E-5
E-4
E-3
E-2





(No rank)


(No rank)




WO-N
WO
CPO

PO
LS

AB
SMN






Royal Australian Navy sailors from HMAS Sydney during Operation Northern Trident 2009


Royal Australian Navy Other Ranks wear "right arm rates" insignia, called "Category Insignia" to indicate speciality training qualifications.[39][better source needed] The use pattern mirrors that of the Royal Navy, and has since formation.[citation needed] Stars or a Crown are added to these to indicate higher qualifications.[citation needed]
Special insignia[edit]
The Warrant Officer of the Navy (WO-N) is an appointment held by the most senior sailor in the RAN, and holds the rank of warrant officer (WO). However, the WO-N does not wear the WO rank insignia; instead, they wear the special insignia of the appointment.[40] The WO-N appointment has similar equivalent appointments in the other services, each holding the rank of warrant officer, each being the most senior sailor/soldier/airman in that service, and each wearing their own special insignia rather than their rank insignia. The Australian Army equivalent is the Regimental Sergeant Major of the Army (RSM-A)[41] and the Royal Australian Air Force equivalent is the Warrant Officer of the Air Force (WOFF-AF).[42]
See also[edit]


Royal Australian Navy portal
Military of Australia portal



Australian Navy Cadets
Australian White Ensign
Battle and theatre honours of the Royal Australian Navy
Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine

References[edit]
Notes[edit]


^ a b Defence Issues Paper (PDF). Commonwealth of Australia. 2014. p. 29. Retrieved 16 November 2014. 
^ Dennis et al 1995, p. 516.
^ a b c Whitley 2000, p. 17.
^ Stevens, David. "The R.A.N. – A Brief History". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 10 August 2013. 
^ Dennis et al 1995, p. 517.
^ Gillett & Graham 1977, p. 193.
^ a b Gillett & Graham 1977, p. 61.
^ a b c d Dennis et al 1995 p. 518.
^ Gillett & Graham 1977, pp. 69–76.
^ Gillett & Graham 1977, p. 93.
^ Gillett & Graham 1977, p. 94.
^ Dennis et al 1995, pp. 519–520.
^ "Database of Royal Australian Navy Operations, 1990–2005" (PDF). Working Paper No. 18. Sea Power Centre. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2012. Retrieved 24 August 2014. 
^ C L Cumberlege Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Top Stories". Archived from the original on 10 March 2007. 
^ Australian Maritime Doctrine. p. 124. 
^ "Current Ships". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 23 September 2017. 
^ Frame 2004, p. 96.
^ "Fleet Base East". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 31 August 2014. 
^ "Fleet Base West". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 31 August 2014. 
^ "HMAS Cairns". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 31 August 2014. 
^ "HMAS Coonawarra". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 31 August 2014. 
^ "HMAS Waterhen". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 31 August 2014. 
^ "Fleet Air Arm". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 10 August 2013. 
^ "Laser Airborne Depth Sounder". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 24 April 2014. 
^ Commonwealth of Australia (2009). Defence White Paper 2009 (PDF). Commonwealth of Australia. pp. 70–74. ISBN 978-0-642-29702-0. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 September 2013. Retrieved 1 September 2010. 
^ "Top 30 Projects". Defence Materiel Organisation. Archived from the original on 15 August 2013. Retrieved 10 August 2013. 
^ "HMAS Choules commissioned in honour of veteran". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 13 December 2011. Retrieved 13 December 2011. 
^ "Ocean Shield the Navy's newest humanitarian and disaster relief vessel" (Press release). Offices of the Minister for Defence and Minister for Defence Materiel. 3 June 2012. Archived from the original on 2 November 2015. Retrieved 3 June 2012. 
^ "Adelaide to host navy's $20 billion frigate construction project". Australian Financial Review. 3 August 2015. Retrieved 26 August 2015. 
^ Cameron Stewart (17 March 2016). "Navy frigates in a $30bn race to the future". The Australian. Retrieved 25 March 2016. 
^ "Operations". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 31 August 2014. 
^ a b Department of Defence (2011). Portfolio Budget Statements 2011–12: Defence Portfolio (PDF). Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-642-29739-6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 September 2011. 
^ a b "Defence Annual Report 2009-2010, Appendix 7, Table A7.3". 
^ a b Navy, corporateName=Royal Australian. "News". www.navy.gov.au. 
^ Defence White Paper 2009. p. 114. 
^ Stewart, Cameron (10 February 2012). "Laid-off British sailors to grab RAN positions". The Australian. Retrieved 1 August 2015. 
^ "Navy Training: Officer Training". Defence Jobs. Retrieved 31 August 2014. 
^ "Category Badges". Royal Australian Navy. Retrieved 1 August 2015. 
^ "Defence Leaders: Navy". www.defence.gov.au. Retrieved 10 August 2013. 
^ "Regimental Sergeant Major – Army". www.army.gov.au. 
^ "Warrant Officer of the Air Force". www.airforce.gov.au. 


Bibliography[edit]

Dennis, Peter; Grey, Jeffrey; Morris, Ewan; Prior, Robin (1995). The Oxford Companion to Australian Military History. Melbourne: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-553227-9. 
Frame, Tom (2004). No Pleasure Cruise: The Story of the Royal Australian Navy. Crows Nest, New South Wales: Allen & Unwin. ISBN 1-74114-233-4. 
Gillett, Ross; Graham, Colin (1977). Warships of Australia. Adelaide, South Australia: Rigby. ISBN 0-7270-0472-7. 
Whitley, M. J. (2000) [1988]. Destroyers of World War Two: An International Encyclopedia. London: Cassell. ISBN 1-85409-521-8. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Royal Australian Navy.



Royal Australian Navy home page

Historical listing of RAN ships


Maritimequest Royal Australian Navy photo gallery
Biographies of senior RAN officers
Royal and Dominion Navies in World War II, Campaigns, Battles, Warship losses







v
t
e


 Royal Australian Navy




Australian Defence Force



Command



Chief of Navy
Deputy Chief of Navy
Commander Australian Fleet
Director-General Maritime Operations
Commodore Warfare
Warrant Officer of the Navy
Admiral of the Fleet





Organisation



Royal Australian Naval Reserve
Australian Navy Cadets
Maritime Border Command
Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine
Units and Formations




Fleet Command



Surface Force
Fleet Air Arm (723 Squadron, 725 Squadron, 808 Squadron, 816 Squadron)
Submarine Service
Patrol Boat Group
Clearance Diving Branch
Australian Hydrographic Service (Laser Airborne Depth Sounder Flight)





Strategic Command



Navy Engineering, Regulation, Certification and Safety
Navy Capability
Navy People and Resources








Ships and
Equipment



Current Fleet (Anzac-class frigate, Adelaide-class frigate, Collins-class submarine, Canberra-class landing helicopter dock, Bay-class landing ship, Armidale class patrol boat, Huon-class minehunter, HMAS Sirius (O 266), Durance-class tanker, Leeuwin-class survey vessel, Paluma-class survey motor launch, STS Young Endeavour, Cape-class patrol boat)
All Ships
Aircraft
Naval Procurement Programme
Equipment
Craft of Opportunity Program





Installations



Fleet Base East
Fleet Base West (HMAS Stirling)
HMAS Albatross
HMAS Cairns
HMAS Cerberus
HMAS Coonawarra
HMAS Creswell
HMAS Harman
HMAS Kuttabul
HMAS Moreton
HMAS Penguin
HMAS Waterhen
HMAS Watson





Personnel



List of admirals
List of personnel
Badges
Ranks





Current
Operations



Operation Sovereign Borders
Operation Resolute
Operation Highroad
Operation Manitou





History



Australia Station
Colonial navies of Australia
Jervois-Scratchley reports
World War I
World War II
Malayan Emergency
Korean War
Vietnam War
Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation
Operation Navy Help Darwin
International Force for East Timor
Gulf War
Iraq War
Afghanistan War
Middle East deployments
Battle honours of the Royal Australian Navy





Other



Royal Australian Naval College
Royal Australian Navy Memorial
Minister for the Navy
Australian Naval Aviation
Royal Australian Navy Heritage Centre
Australian White Ensign
Navy News
Royal Australian Navy Helicopter Flight Vietnam
Naval Stores, Kangaroo Point
Esther Williams Trophy
Navy League of Australia
Admiral
Garden Island Naval Chapel
Royal Australian Navy Tridents Rugby League Team





Former
Entities



Department of the Navy
Women's Royal Australian Naval Service
Royal Australian Naval Nursing Service
Royal Australian Naval Volunteer Reserve
Royal Australian Navy Beach Commandos
Royal Australian Navy Bridging Train
Australian Commonwealth Naval Board






Category Portal










v
t
e


 Australian Defence Force




Australian Defence Organisation (Headquarters: Russell Offices)



Branches



 Royal Australian Navy
 Australian Army
 Royal Australian Air Force





Leadership



Governor-General
Prime Minister
Minister for Defence
Minister for Defence Personnel
Minister for Defence Industry
National Security Committee of Cabinet
Secretary of Defence
Chief of the Defence Force
Vice Chief of the Defence Force
Chief of Army
Chief of Navy
Chief of Air Force
Chief of Joint Operations
Senior Positions
Senior Personnel





Structure



Australian Defence Organisation
Australia's Federation Guard
Force Element Group
Special Forces
Vice Chief of the Defence Force Group
Joint Operations Command (Headquarters Joint Operations Command, Northern Command, Maritime Border Command)
Joint Capabilities Group (Joint Logistics Command, Joint Health Command, Australian Defence College)
Fleet Command
Forces Command
Air Command
Special Operations Command
1st Division (Deployable Joint Force Headquarters)
Navy Strategic Command





Personnel
& Training



Australian Defence Force ranks and insignia
Judge Advocate General
Australian Defence Force Investigative Service
Australian Defence College
Australian Defence Force Academy
Australian Defence Force Reserves (Australian Army Reserve, Royal Australian Naval Reserve, Royal Australian Air Force Reserve)
Australian Defence Force Cadets (Australian Air Force Cadets, Australian Navy Cadets, Australian Army Cadets, National Cadet Advisory Council)
Women in the Australian military
Sexual orientation and gender identity in the Australian military
Conscription
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Australian Defence Force Basic Flying Training School
Military Uniforms (Australian Multicam Camouflage Uniform)
Department of Veterans' Affairs
Veterans' Review Board





Intelligence



Defence Intelligence Organisation
Australian Signals Directorate
Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation
Joint Defence Facility Pine Gap
Defence Intelligence Group





Strategy



Australian-US Alliance
Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty
Five Power Defence Arrangements
Defence Strategic Policy Group
Defending Australia in the Asia Pacific Century White Paper
Defence of Australia Policy
Review of Australia's Defence Capabilities Report
Australian Strategic Policy Institute
Australian National University Strategic and Defence Studies Centre





Equipment



Capability Acquisition and Sustainment Group
Army Equipment
Army Artillery
Naval Ships
Air Force Weaponry
Air Force Aircraft





Installations



Military Installations
Naval Installations
Air Force Installations
Army Installations





Culture



Australian War Memorial
Anzac spirit
Weary Dunlop
Simpson and his Donkey
Anzac Day
Australian military slang
Beating Retreat military ceremony
Australian Defence Force Ensign
Australian Defence Force colours, standards and guidons





History



History of the Royal Australian Navy
History of the Australian Army
History of the Royal Australian Air Force
Frontier Wars
Boer War
World War I
Russian Civil War
World War II
Korean War
Malayan Emergency
Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation
Vietnam War
Rwandan Civil War
Somalian Civil War
Timor-Leste
Gulf War
Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War
Peace Operations
Military intervention against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
Official Histories (Official History of Australia in the War of 1914–1918, Australia in the War of 1939–1945, Australia in the Korean War 1950–53, The Official History of Australia's Involvement in Southeast Asian Conflicts 1948–1975, Official History of Australian Peacekeeping, Humanitarian and Post-Cold War Operations)
Australian military involvement in peacekeeping






Australian Defence Force Military of Australia








Commissioned and future warships of the Royal Australian Navy



Destroyers




Hobart class



HobartUC
BrisbaneUC
SydneyUC








Frigates




Adelaide class



Sydney
Darwin
Melbourne
Newcastle





Anzac class



Anzac
Arunta
Warramunga
Stuart
Parramatta
Ballarat
Toowoomba
Perth








Submarines




Collins class



Collins
Farncomb
Waller
Dechaineux
Sheean
Rankin








Amphibious
warfare ships




Canberra class LHD



Canberra
Adelaide





Round Table class LSH



Tobruk





Bay class LSD



Choules








Patrol vessels




Armidale class



Armidale
Larrakia
Bathurst
Albany
Pirie
Maitland
Ararat
Broome
Wollongong
Childers
Launceston
Maryborough
Glenelg








Mine countermeasures vessels




Huon class



Huon
Hawkesbury
Norman
Gascoyne
Diamantina
Yarra








Survey vessels




Leeuwin class



Leeuwin
Melville





Paluma class



Paluma
Mermaid
Shepparton
Benalla








Replenishment
vessels




Fleet Oiler



Sirius





Dual Stores
Replenishment



Success








Contracted
vessels




Lighters



Wallaby class









UC — Under construction
See also: List of current ships of the Royal Australian Navy and Procurement programme of the Royal Australian Navy









v
t
e


Commissioned officer ranks of the Australian Defence Force



Australia-United States Rank Code
Officer Cadet
O-1
O-2
O-3
O-4
O-5
O-6
O-7
*
O-8
**
O-9
***
O-10
****
O-11
*****


Royal Australian Navy
MIDN
ASLT
SBLT
LEUT
LCDR
CMDR
CAPT
CDRE
RADM
VADM
ADML
AF


Australian Army
OCDT
2LT
LT
CAPT
MAJ
LTCOL
COL
BRIG
MAJGEN
LTGEN
GEN
FM


Royal Australian Air Force
OFFCDT
PLTOFF
FLGOFF
FLTLT
SQNLDR
WGCDR
GPCAPT
AIRCDRE
AVM
AIRMSHL
ACM
MRAAF







v
t
e


Other ranks of the Australian Defence Force



Australia-United States Rank Code
E-1
E-2
E-3
E-4
E-5
E-6
E-7
E-8
E-9
Special


Royal Australian Navy
RCT
SMN
AB
-
LS
PO
-
CPO
WO
WO-N


Australian Army
REC
PTE
PTE(P)
LCPL
CPL
SGT
SSGT
WO2
WO1
RSM-A


Royal Australian Air Force
RCT
AC/ACW
LAC/LACW
-
CPL
SGT
-
FSGT
WOFF
WOFF-AF





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 136063145
LCCN: n82068134
ISNI: 0000 0001 1281 8369
GND: 5095620-6











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Royal_Australian_Navy&oldid=818016163"					Categories: Royal Australian Navy1901 establishments in AustraliaMilitary units and formations established in 1901Organisations based in Australia with royal patronageHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse Australian English from July 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Australian EnglishUse dmy dates from July 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2014Wikipedia articles in need of updating from February 2015All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingArticles with unsourced statements from June 2017All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from August 2015Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers