"RGO" redirects here. For other uses, see RGO (disambiguation).

Royal Observatory


Royal Observatory, Greenwich. A time ball sits atop the Octagon Room.



Alternative names
Royal Greenwich Observatory 


Observatory code
000 


Location
Greenwich, Royal Borough of Greenwich, United Kingdom 


Coordinates
51°28′40″N 0°00′05″W﻿ / ﻿51.4778°N 0.0014°W﻿ / 51.4778; -0.0014Coordinates: 51°28′40″N 0°00′05″W﻿ / ﻿51.4778°N 0.0014°W﻿ / 51.4778; -0.0014


Website
www.rmg.co.uk/royal-observatory/ 


Telescopes
Altazimuth Pavilion At The Royal Observatory 












Location of Royal Observatory, Greenwich







 Related media on Wikimedia Commons



[edit on Wikidata]







Flamsteed House in 1824






Royal Observatory, Greenwich c. 1902 as depicted on a postcard


The Royal Observatory, Greenwich (ROG;[1] known as the Old Royal Observatory from 1957 to 1998, when the working Royal Greenwich Observatory, RGO, moved from Greenwich to Herstmonceux) is an observatory situated on a hill in Greenwich Park, overlooking the River Thames. It played a major role in the history of astronomy and navigation, and is best known as the location of the prime meridian, and thereby gave its name to Greenwich Mean Time. The ROG has the IAU observatory code of 000, the first in the list.[2] ROG, the National Maritime Museum, the Queen's House and Cutty Sark are collectively designated Royal Museums Greenwich.[1]
The observatory was commissioned in 1675 by King Charles II, with the foundation stone being laid on 10 August. The site was chosen by Sir Christopher Wren.[3] At that time the king also created the position of Astronomer Royal, to serve as the director of the observatory and to "apply himself with the most exact care and diligence to the rectifying of the tables of the motions of the heavens, and the places of the fixed stars, so as to find out the so much desired longitude of places for the perfecting of the art of navigation." He appointed John Flamsteed as the first Astronomer Royal. The building was completed in the summer of 1676.[4] The building was often called "Flamsteed House", in reference to its first occupant.
The scientific work of the observatory was relocated elsewhere in stages in the first half of the 20th century, and the Greenwich site is now maintained as a museum.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Chronology
1.2 Site
1.3 Establishment
1.4 Greenwich Meridian
1.5 Greenwich Mean Time and the time ball
1.6 Bomb attack of 1894
1.7 Early 20th century
1.8 Herstmonceux Castle


2 Observatory museum
3 References
4 Further reading
5 External links



History[edit]
Chronology[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




1675 – 22 June, Royal Observatory founded.
1675 – 10 August, construction began.
1714 Longitude Act established the Board of Longitude and Longitude rewards. The Astronomer Royal was, until the Board was dissolved in 1828, always an ex officio Commissioner of Longitude.
1767 Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne began publication of the Nautical Almanac, based on observations made at the Observatory.
1818 Oversight of the Royal Observatory was transferred from the Board of Ordnance to the Board of Admiralty; at that time the observatory was charged with maintaining the Royal Navy's Marine chronometers.
1833 Daily time signals began, marked by dropping a Time ball.
1899 The New Physical Observatory (now known as the South Building) was completed.
1924 Hourly time signals (Greenwich Time Signal) from the Royal Observatory were first broadcast on 5 February.
1948 Office of the Astronomer Royal was moved to Herstmonceux.
1957 Royal Observatory completed its move to Herstmonceux, becoming the Royal Greenwich Observatory (RGO). The Greenwich site is renamed the Old Royal Observatory.
1990 RGO moved to Cambridge.
1998 RGO closed. Greenwich site is returned to its original name, the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, is made part of the National Maritime Museum.
2011 The Greenwich museums, including the ROG, become collectively the Royal Museums Greenwich.





Former Royal Greenwich Observatory, Herstmonceux, East Sussex


Site[edit]




Greenwich Observatory (Latinized as "Observatorium Anglicanum Hoc Grenovici prope Londinum"), as illustrated in Doppelmayr's map of the southern celestial hemisphere, ca. 1730


There had been significant buildings on this land since the reign of William I.[5] Greenwich Palace, on the site of the present-day Maritime Museum, was the birthplace of both Henry VIII and his daughters Mary I and Elizabeth I; the Tudors used Greenwich Castle, which stood on the hilltop that the Observatory presently occupies, as a hunting lodge. Greenwich Castle was reportedly a favourite place for Henry VIII to house his mistresses, so that he could easily travel from the Palace to see them.[6]
Establishment[edit]




Laser projected from the observatory marking the Prime Meridian line






Laser at night


The establishment of a Royal Observatory was proposed in 1674 by Sir Jonas Moore who, in his role as Surveyor General at the Ordnance Office, persuaded King Charles II to create the observatory, with John Flamsteed installed as its director.[7] The Ordnance Office was given responsibility for building the Observatory, with Moore providing the key instruments and equipment for the observatory at his own personal cost. Flamsteed House, the original part of the Observatory, was designed by Sir Christopher Wren, probably assisted by Robert Hooke, and was the first purpose-built scientific research facility in Britain. It was built for a cost of £520 (£20 over budget) out of largely recycled materials on the foundations of Duke Humphrey's Tower, the forerunner of Greenwich Castle, which resulted in the alignment being 13 degrees away from true North, somewhat to Flamsteed's chagrin.
The original observatory at first housed the scientific instruments to be used by Flamsteed in his work on stellar tables, and over time also incorporated additional responsibilities such as marking the official time of day, and housing Her Majesty's Nautical Almanac Office.
Moore donated two clocks, built by Thomas Tompion, which were installed in the 20 foot high Octagon Room, the principal room of the building. They were of unusual design, each with a pendulum 13 feet (3.96 metres) in length mounted above the clock face, giving a period of four seconds and an accuracy, then unparalleled, of seven seconds per day.
Greenwich Meridian[edit]
Main article: Greenwich Meridian




The 24-hour Shepherd Gate Clock






Telescope and tree






Royal Observatory, Greenwich






One of the hyper-accurate timekeepers at the observatory


British astronomers have long used the Royal Observatory as a basis for measurement. Four separate meridians have passed through the buildings, defined by successive instruments.[8] The basis of longitude, the meridian that passes through the Airy transit circle, first used in 1851, was adopted as the world's Prime Meridian at the International Meridian Conference on 22 October 1884 (voting took place on 13 October).[9] Subsequently, nations across the world used it as their standard for mapping and timekeeping. The Prime Meridian was marked by a brass (later replaced by stainless steel) strip in the Observatory's courtyard once the buildings became a museum in 1960, and, since 16 December 1999, has been marked by a powerful green laser shining north across the London night sky.
Since the first triangulation of Great Britain in the period 1783–1853, Ordnance Survey maps have been based on an earlier version of the Greenwich meridian, defined by the transit instrument of James Bradley. When the Airy circle (5.79 m to the east) became the reference for the meridian, the difference resulting from the change was considered small enough to be neglected. When a new triangulation was done between 1936 and 1962, scientists determined that in the Ordnance Survey system the longitude of the international Greenwich meridian was not 0° but 0°00'00.417" (about 8 m) East.[10] Besides the change of the reference line, imperfections of the surveying system added another discrepancy to the definition of the origin, so that the Bradley line itself is now 0°00'00.12" East of the Ordnance Survey Zero Meridian (about 2.3m).[11]
This old astronomical prime meridian has been replaced by a more precise prime meridian. When Greenwich was an active observatory, geographical coordinates were referred to a local oblate spheroid called a datum known as a geoid, whose surface closely matched local mean sea level. Several datums were in use around the world, all using different spheroids, because mean sea level undulates by as much as 100 metres worldwide. Modern geodetic reference systems, such as the World Geodetic System and the International Terrestrial Reference Frame, use a single oblate spheroid, fixed to the Earth's gravitational centre. The shift from several local spheroids to one worldwide spheroid caused all geographical coordinates to shift by many metres, sometimes as much as several hundred metres. The Prime Meridian of these modern reference systems is 102.5 metres east of the Greenwich astronomical meridian represented by the stainless steel strip, which is now 5.31 arcseconds West. The modern location of the Airy Transit is 51°28′40.1″N 0°0′5.3″W﻿ / ﻿51.477806°N 0.001472°W﻿ / 51.477806; -0.001472﻿ (Airy Transit)[12]
International time from the end of the 19th century until UT1 was based on Simon Newcomb's equations, giving a mean sun about 0.18 seconds behind UT1 (the equivalent of 2.7 arcseconds) as of 2013; it coincided in 2013 with a meridian halfway between Airy's circle and the IERS origin: 51°28′40.1247″N 0°0′2.61″W﻿ / ﻿51.477812417°N 0.0007250°W﻿ / 51.477812417; -0.0007250.[13]
Greenwich Mean Time and the time ball[edit]
Main article: Greenwich Mean Time
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) was until 1954 based on celestial observations made at Greenwich, and later on observations made at other observatories. GMT was formally renamed as Universal Time in 1935, but is still commonly referred to as GMT. It is now calculated from observations of extra-galactic radio sources.
To help mariners at the port and others in line of sight of the observatory to synchronise their clocks to GMT, Astronomer Royal John Pond installed a very visible time ball that drops precisely at 1 p.m. (13:00) every day atop the observatory in 1833. Initially it was dropped by an operator; from 1852 it was released automatically via an electric impulse from the Shepherd Master Clock.[14] The ball is still dropped daily at 13:00 (GMT in winter, BST in summer).[15]
The ball has several dents sustained during renovations; the builders assumed the historic ball was to be discarded and played football with it.[14]
Bomb attack of 1894[edit]
The Observatory underwent an attempted bombing on 15 February 1894. This was possibly the first "international terrorist" incident in Britain.[citation needed] The bomb was accidentally detonated while being held by 26-year-old French anarchist Martial Bourdin in Greenwich Park, near the Observatory building. Bourdin died about 30 minutes later. It is not known why he chose the observatory, or whether the detonation was intended to occur elsewhere. Novelist Joseph Conrad used the incident in his novel The Secret Agent.[16]
Early 20th century[edit]




Standard lengths on the wall of the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, London – 1 yard (3 feet), 2 feet, 1 foot, 6 inches (1/2 foot), and 3 inches. The separation of the inside faces of the marks is exact at an ambient temperature of 60 °F (16 °C) and a rod of the correct measure, resting on the pins, will fit snugly between them.[17][18]


During most of the twentieth century, the Royal Greenwich Observatory was not at Greenwich. The last time that all departments were there was 1924: in that year electrification of the railways affected the readings of the Magnetic and Meteorological Departments, and the Magnetic Observatory moved to Abinger. Prior to this, the observatory had had to insist that the electric trams in the vicinity could not use an earth return for the traction current.[19]
After the onset of World War II in 1939, many departments were temporarily evacuated out of range of German bombers, to Abinger, Bradford on Avon, Bristol,[20] and Bath,[21] and activities in Greenwich were reduced to the bare minimum.
On 15 October 1940, during the Blitz, the Courtyard gates were destroyed by a direct bomb hit. The wall above the Gate Clock collapsed, and the clock's dial was damaged. The damage was repaired after the war.[22]
Herstmonceux Castle[edit]
After the Second World War, in 1947, the decision was made to move to Herstmonceux Castle[23] and 320 adjacent acres (1.3 km²), 70 km south-southeast of Greenwich near Hailsham in East Sussex, due to light pollution in London. The Observatory was officially known as The Royal Greenwich Observatory, Herstmonceux. Although the Astronomer Royal Harold Spencer Jones moved to the castle in 1948, the scientific staff did not move until the observatory buildings were completed, in 1957. Shortly thereafter, other previously dispersed departments were reintegrated at Herstmonceux.
The Isaac Newton Telescope was built at Herstmonceux in 1967, but was moved to Roque de los Muchachos Observatory in Spain's Canary Islands in 1979. In 1990 the RGO moved again, to Cambridge.[24] Following a decision of the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council, it closed in 1998. Her Majesty's Nautical Almanac Office was transferred to the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, on the Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Chilton, Oxfordshire after the closure. Other work went to the UK Astronomy Technology Centre in Edinburgh. The castle grounds became the home of the International Study Centre of Queen's University, Kingston, Canada and The Observatory Science Centre,[25] which is operated by an educational charity Science Project.




The Queen's House at Greenwich, showing the Royal Observatory in the far distance, 2017.


Observatory museum[edit]
The observatory buildings at Greenwich became a museum of astronomical and navigational tools, which is part of the Royal Museums Greenwich.[26] Notable exhibits include John Harrison's sea watch, the H4, which received a large reward from the Board of Longitude, and his three earlier marine timekeepers; all four are the property of the Ministry of Defence. Many additional horological artefacts are displayed, documenting the history of precision timekeeping for navigational and astronomical purposes, including the mid-20th-century Russian-made F.M. Fedchenko clock (the most accurate pendulum clock ever built in multiple copies). It also houses the astronomical instruments used to make meridian observations and the 28-inch equatorial Grubb refracting telescope of 1893, the largest of its kind in the UK. The Shepherd Clock outside the observatory gate is an early example of an electric slave clock.
In February 2005 a £16 million redevelopment comprising a new planetarium and additional display galleries and educational facilities was started; the ROG reopened on 25 May 2007 with the new 120-seat Peter Harrison Planetarium.[27]
References[edit]



^ a b Rebekah Higgitt (6 September 2012). "Royal Observatory Greenwich, London". BSHS Travel Guide - A Travel Guide to Scientific Sites. Retrieved 28 April 2017. 
^ "List of Observatory Codes". Minor Planet Center. Retrieved 28 April 2017. 
^ "Greenwich and the Millennium". 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2015. 
^ Robert Chambers, Book of Days
^ John Timbs' Abbeys, Castles and Ancient Halls of England and Wales
^ Hart, Kelly (2010), The Mistresses of Henry VIII, The History Press, p. 73, ISBN 978-0-7524-5496-2 
^ Willmoth, Frances (2004). "Moore, Sir Jonas (1617–1679)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/19137.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ Dolan, Graham. "The Greenwich Meridian before the Airy Transit Circle". The Greenwich Meridian. Retrieved 2 May 2015. 
^ Howse, Derek (1997). Greenwich time and the longitude. London: Phillip Wilson. pp. 12, 137. ISBN 0-85667-468-0. 
^ Howse, Derek (1980). "Greenwich time and the discovery of the longitude". p. 171. 
^ Adams, Brian (1994). "Charles Close Society" (PDF). pp. 14–15. 
^ Malys, Stephen; Seago, John H.; Palvis, Nikolaos K.; Seidelmann, P. Kenneth; Kaplan, George H. (1 August 2015). "Why the Greenwich meridian moved". Journal of Geodesy. doi:10.1007/s00190-015-0844-6. 
^ Seago, John H.; Seidelmann, P. Kenneth. "The mean-solar-time origin of Universal Time and UTC" (PDF). Paper presented at the AAS/AIAA Spaceflight Mechanics Meeting, Kauai, HI, USA, March 2013. Reprinted from Advances in the Astronomical Sciences v. 148. pp. 1789, 1801, 1805. 
^ a b "From The Royal Observatory: The Greenwich Time Ball". Londonist.com. Retrieved 3 May 2017. 
^ "Greenwich Time Ball". 
^ "Propaganda by Deed – the Greenwich Observatory Bomb of 1894". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. 
^ Bennett, Keith (2004), Bucher, Jay L., ed., The Metrology Handbook, Milwaukee, WI: American Society for Quality Measurement, p. 8, ISBN 978-0-87389-620-7 .
^ Walford, Edward (1878), Old and New London, VI .
^ "Abinger Magnetic Observatory (1923-1957)". The Royal Observatory Greenwich. Retrieved 3 May 2017. 
^ "Bristol & Bradford on Avon (1939-1948)". The Royal Observatory Greenwich. Retrieved 3 May 2017. 
^ "Bath (1939-1949)". The Royal Observatory Greenwich. Retrieved 3 May 2017. 
^ "The Royal Observatory Greenwich - The Shepherd Gate Clock". Royal Observatory Greenwich. Retrieved 3 May 2017.  A very detailed history of the Shepherd Gate Clock.
^ "The Herstmonceux years... 1948-1990". The Royal Observatory Greenwich. Retrieved 3 May 2017. 
^ "A Personal History Of The Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux Castle, 1948-1990 by G.A. Wilkins". 
^ the-observatory.org
^ "Royal Museums Greenwich : Sea, Ships, Time and the Stars : RMG". 
^ "Press Release: Reopening of the new Royal Observatory, Greenwich". Royal Museums Greenwich. 27 June 2007. Retrieved 3 May 2017. 



Further reading[edit]

Greenwich Observatory: ... the Royal Observatory at Greenwich and Herstmonceux, 1675–1975. London: Taylor & Francis, 1975 3v. (Vol. 1. Origins and early history (1675–1835), by Eric G. Forbes. ISBN 0-85066-093-9; Vol. 2. Recent history (1836–1975), by A.J. Meadows. ISBN 0-85066-094-7; Vol. 3. The buildings and instruments by Derek Howse. ISBN 0-85066-095-5)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Royal Observatory, Greenwich.





Wikisource has the text of The New Student's Reference Work article Greenwich Observatory.



Royal Museums Greenwich (RMG) Web site - includes section on Royal Observatory Greenwich (ROG)

ROG on RMG Web site


Online catalogue of the Royal Greenwich Observatory Archives (held at Cambridge University Library)
"Where the Earth's surface begins—and ends", Popular Mechanics, December 1930
HM Nautical Almanac Office
Aerial View of The Royal Observatory, Greenwich at Google Maps
Castle in the sky – The story of the Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux
A Personal History of the Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux Castle, 1948–1990 by George Wilkins, a former staff member
The Observatory Science Centre
Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes
A pictorial catalogue of meridian markers







v
t
e


Museums and galleries in London




List of museums in London



National museums



British Library
British Museum
Geffrye Museum
Horniman Museum
National Army Museum
National Gallery
National Portrait Gallery
Natural History Museum
Royal Air Force Museum
Sir John Soane's Museum
Wallace Collection




Imperial War Museums



Churchill War Rooms
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum London





Royal Museums Greenwich



Cutty Sark
National Maritime Museum
Queen's House
Royal Observatory





Science Museum Group



Science Museum





Tate



Tate Britain
Tate Modern





Victoria and Albert Museum



V&A Museum of Childhood








Designated collections



Courtauld Gallery
Dulwich Picture Gallery
Firepower – The Royal Artillery Museum
Hunterian Museum
Jewish Museum
Library and Museum of Freemasonry
London Transport Museum
Museum of Domestic Design and Architecture
Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology
Royal Academy of Arts




Museum of London



Museum of London Docklands








Royal Collection Trust



Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews





Historic Royal Palaces



Banqueting House, Whitehall
Hampton Court Palace
Kensington Palace
Kew Palace
Tower of London





National Trust



2 Willow Road
575 Wandsworth Road
Blewcoat School
Carlyle's House
Eastbury Manor House
Fenton House
George Inn
Lindsey House

restricted


Morden Hall Park
Osterley Park
Rainham Hall
Red House
Roman Baths
Sutton House





English Heritage



Apsley House
Chiswick House
Down House
Eltham Palace
Jewel Tower
Kenwood House (Iveagh Bequest)
London Wall
Marble Hill House
Ranger's House (Wernher Collection)
Winchester Palace





The London Museums of
Health & Medicine (selected)



Florence Nightingale Museum
Foundling Museum
Freud Museum
Museum of the Order of St John
Old Operating Theatre Museum and Herb Garret
Wellcome Collection





Other



Arsenal Football Club Museum
Bank of England Museum
Barbican Art Gallery
Benjamin Franklin House
Bruce Castle
Charles Dickens Museum
Dennis Severs' House
Design Museum
Dr Johnson's House
Estorick Collection of Modern Italian Art
Fashion and Textile Museum
Garden Museum
Guildhall Art Gallery
Handel House Museum
Hayward Gallery
Hogarth's House
Institute of Contemporary Arts
Leighton House Museum
London Museum of Water & Steam
Museum of Brands, Packaging and Advertising
Museum of Croydon
Museum of Immigration and Diversity
Museum of Richmond
Orleans House Gallery
Royal Academy of Music Museum
Saatchi Gallery
Serpentine Galleries
Sherlock Holmes Museum
Two Temple Place
Twickenham Museum
Whitechapel Gallery
William Morris Gallery








 Category












v
t
e


London landmarks



Buildings and
structures




Bridges



Albert Bridge
Blackfriars Bridge
Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges
Lambeth Bridge
London Bridge
Millennium Footbridge
Southwark Bridge
Tower Bridge
Vauxhall Bridge
Waterloo Bridge
Westminster Bridge





Entertainment
venues




Cinemas



Empire, Leicester Square
BFI IMAX
Odeon Leicester Square





Football stadia



Wembley Stadium (national stadium)
Craven Cottage (Fulham)
The Den (Millwall)
Emirates Stadium (Arsenal)
Loftus Road (Queens Park Rangers)
Olympic Stadium (West Ham United)
Selhurst Park (Crystal Palace)
Stamford Bridge (Chelsea)
The Valley (Charlton Athletic)
White Hart Lane (Tottenham Hotspur)





Other major
sports venues



All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
The Championship Course (rowing)
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
Lord's (cricket)
Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park
The Oval (cricket)
Twickenham Stadium (rugby)





Theatres



London Coliseum
London Palladium
The Old Vic
Royal National Theatre
Royal Opera House
Shakespeare's Globe
Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
Theatre Royal Haymarket





Other



Alexandra Palace
Brixton Academy
ExCeL
Hammersmith Apollo
O2 Arena
Royal Albert Hall
Royal Festival Hall
Wembley Arena








Government



10 Downing Street
Admiralty Arch
Bank of England
City Hall
County Hall
Guildhall
Horse Guards
Mansion House
National Archives
Old Bailey
Palace of Westminster
Royal Courts of Justice
Scotland Yard
SIS Building





Museums and
galleries



British Museum
Cutty Sark
Golden Hinde
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum
Madame Tussauds
Museum of London
National Gallery
National Maritime Museum
Natural History Museum
Royal Academy of Arts
Royal Observatory
Science Museum
Tate Britain
Tate Modern
Tower of London
Victoria and Albert Museum





Places of worship



All Hallows-by-the-Tower
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir
Bevis Marks Synagogue
Methodist Central Hall
Regent's Park Mosque
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Mary-le-Bow
St Paul's Cathedral
Southwark Cathedral
Westminster Abbey
Westminster Cathedral





Retailing




Shops



Fortnum & Mason
Hamleys
Harrods
Liberty
Peter Jones
Selfridges





Shopping centres
and markets



Borough Market
Brent Cross
Burlington Arcade
Kensington Arcade
Leadenhall Market
The Mall Wood Green
One New Change
Petticoat Lane Market
Royal Exchange
Westfield London
Westfield Stratford City








Royal buildings




Partly occupied by
the Royal Family



Buckingham Palace
Clarence House
Kensington Palace
St James's Palace





Unoccupied



Banqueting House
Hampton Court Palace
Kew Palace
The Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace








Skyscrapers



1 Canada Square
8 Canada Square
20 Fenchurch Street
30 St Mary Axe
125 London Wall
Broadgate Tower
BT Tower
Centre Point
Citigroup Centre
Heron Tower
Leadenhall Building
Lloyd's building
Millbank Tower
Senate House
The Shard
Shell Centre
St George Wharf Tower
Strata SE1
Tower 42





Structures



Albert Memorial
ArcelorMittal Orbit
Cleopatra's Needle
Crystal Palace transmitting station
London Eye
London Wall
Marble Arch
Monument to the Great Fire
Nelson's Column
Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain ("Eros")
Thames Barrier
Wellington Arch





Transport



City Airport
Heathrow Airport
Charing Cross station
Clapham Junction station
Euston station
King's Cross station
Liverpool Street station
London Bridge station
Paddington station
St Pancras station
Victoria station
Waterloo station
Emirates Air Line
Victoria Coach Station





Other



Barbican Estate
Battersea Power Station
British Library
Kew Gardens
Lambeth Palace
London Zoo
Oxo Tower
St Bartholomew's Hospital
Smithfield Market
Somerset House








Parks




Royal Parks



Bushy Park
Green Park
Greenwich Park
Hampton Court Park
Hyde Park
Kensington Gardens
Regent's Park
Richmond Park
St. James's Park





Other



Battersea Park
Burgess Park
Clapham Common
College Green
Epping Forest
Finsbury Park
Gunnersbury Park
Hampstead Heath
Holland Park
Mitcham Common
Osterley Park
Trent Park
Victoria Park
Wandsworth Common
Wimbledon Common








Squares and
public spaces



Covent Garden
Horse Guards Parade
Leicester Square
Oxford Circus
Parliament Square
Piccadilly Circus
Sloane Square
Trafalgar Square





Streets



Aldwych
Baker Street
Bishopsgate
Bond Street
Cannon Street
Carnaby Street
Chancery Lane
Charing Cross Road
Cheapside
Cornhill
Denmark Street
Fenchurch Street
Fleet Street
Haymarket
Jermyn Street
Kensington High Street
King's Road
Lombard Street
The Mall
Oxford Street
Park Lane
Piccadilly
Portobello Road
Regent Street
Shaftesbury Avenue
Sloane Street
Strand
Threadneedle Street
Tottenham Court Road
Victoria Embankment
Whitehall






Buildings and structures under construction shown in italics










v
t
e


 Admiralty Department



Direction and control
of Admiralty and Naval affairs



Office of First Lord of the Admiralty and President of the Board of Admiralty
Lord High Admirals Council










Boards and offices under
the First Lord



Board of Admiralty
Navy Board
Office of the Naval Secretary
Office of the First Naval Lord
Office of the First Sea Lord
Office of the Senior Naval Lord
Office of the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty
Office of the Permanent Secretary to the Admiralty
Office of the Private Secretary to the First Lord of the Admiralty





Direction of
Admirals
Naval/Sea Lords
War and Naval Staff



Office of the Senior Naval Lord
Office of the First Naval Lord
Office of the First Sea Lord





Secretariat and staff under
the First Sea Lord



Office of the Naval Assistant to the First Sea Lord
Office of the Additional Naval Assistant to the First Sea Lord
Office of the Hydrographer of the Navy
Offices of the Sea Lords
Admiralty Navy War Council
Admiralty War Staff
Admiralty Naval Staff





Operational planning, policy
strategy, tactical doctrine
requirements



Admiralty Navy War Council
Admiralty War Staff
Admiralty Naval Staff





Divisions and sections
under the War and
Naval Staff



Administrative Planning Division
Air Division
Anti-Submarine Division
Anti-Submarine and Warfare Division
Anti-U-boat Division
Air Warfare Division
Air Warfare and Fly Training Division
Air Warfare and Training Division
Communications Division
Convoy Section
Economic Warfare Division
Gunnery and Anti-Aircraft Warfare Division
Gunnery Division
Gunnery and Torpedo Division
Historical Section
Local Defence Division Division
Mercantile Movements Division
Naval Air Division
Naval Air Organisation and Training Division
Naval Artillery and Torpedo Division
Navigation Division
Navigation and Direction Division
Minesweeping Division
Mobilisation Division
Naval Intelligence Division
Operations Division
Operations Division (Home)
Operations Division (Foreign)
Operations Division (Mining)
Plans Division
Plans Division Q
Press Division
Requirements and Organisation (Combined Operations) Division
Service Conditions and Fleet Supply Duties Division
Signal Division
Signal Section
Standardisation Division
Tactical Division
Tactical and Weapons Policy Division
Torpedo Division
Torpedo, Anti-Submarine and Minewarfare Division
Trade Division
Trade and Operations Division
Training Division
Training and Staff Duties Division
Undersurface Warfare Division





Offices of the Sea Lords



Office of the Second Sea Lord
Office of the Third Sea Lord
Office of the Fourth Sea Lord
Office of the Fifth Sea Lord





Admiralty civil units
under the Sea Lords



Admiralty Area Cash Offices
Admiralty Central Dockyard Laboratory
Admiralty Central Metallurgical Laboratory
Admiralty Civilian Shore Wireless Service
Admiralty Compass Observatory
Admiralty Constabulary
Admiralty Experiment Works
Admiralty Gunnery Establishment
Admiralty Interview Board
Admiralty Labour Department
Admiralty Mine Design Department
Admiralty Mining Establishment
Admiralty Naval Aircraft Materials Laboratory
Admiralty Regional Offices
Admiralty Research Laboratory
Admiralty Signal Establishment
Admiralty Signals and Radar Establishment
Admiralty Surveying Service
Admiralty Torpedo Experimental Establishment
Admiralty Underwater Weapons Establishment
Architectural and Engineering Works Department
Air Equipment and Naval Photography Department
Air Department
Air Materiel Department
Air Personnel Department
Amphibious Warfare Headquarters
Armament Supply Department
Board of Invention and Research
Board of Longitude
Boom Defence Department
Boom Defence and Marine Salvage Department
Britannia Royal Naval College
Chemical Board
Chemical Department
Civil Catering Department
Civil Engineer in Chiefs Department
Coastguard and Reserves Branch
Combined Operations Headquarters
Commissioner for Property and Income-tax for the Naval Department
Compass Department
Contract and Purchase Department
Council of Naval Education
Dental Examining Board
Department of Radio Equipment
Department of the Accountant-General of the Navy
Department of Aeronautical and Engineering Research
Department of Miscellaneous Weapons Development
Department of Naval Assistant (Foreign) to Second Sea Lord
Department of Naval Education
Operational Research
Department of Personal Services and Officer Appointments
Department of Physical Research
Department of Physical Training & Sports
Department of Radio Equipment
Department of Research Programmes and Planning
Department of Superintendent of de-magnetisation
Department of the Admiral of the Training Service
Department of the Chief Inspector of Naval Ordnance
Department of the Chief of Naval Information
Department of the Chief Scientist
Department of the Civil Engineer-in-Chief
Department of the Comptroller of Steam Machinery
Department of the Comptroller for Victualling and Transport Services
Department of the Controller of the Navy
Department of the Controller-General of Merchant Shipbuilding
Department of the Controller for Navy Pay
Department of the Deputy Controller for Auxiliary Shipbuilding
Department of the Deputy Controller for Dockyards and Shipbuilding
Department of the Director Contract-Built Ships
Department of the Director-General Aircraft
Department of the Director-General of Manpower
Department of the Director-General, Supply and Secretariat Branch
Department of the Director of Aircraft Maintenance and Repair
Department of the Director of Contract Labour
Department of the Director of Dockyards
Department of the Director of Electrical Engineering
Department of the Director of Manning
Department of the Director of Merchant Shipbuilding
Department of the Director of Merchant Shipbuilding and Repairs
Department of the Director of Merchant Ship Repairs
Department of the Director of Naval Construction
Department of the Director of Naval Equipment
Department of the Director of Naval Recruiting
Department of the Director of Naval Weather Service
Department of the Director of Personal Services
Department of the Director of Physical Training and Sports
Department of the Director of Torpedoes and Mining
Department of the Director of Transports
Department of the Director of Underwater Weapons
Department of the Director of Unexploded Bombs
Department of the Director of Warship Production
Department of the Director of Welfare and Service Conditions
Department of the Director of Wreck Dispersal
Department of the Flag Officer Sea Training
Department of the Engineer in Chief
Department of the Paymaster Director-General
Department of the Inspector of Anti-Aircraft Weapons
Department of the Inspector of Dockyard Expense Accounts
Department of the Inspector-General of Naval Hospitals and Fleets
Department of the Medical Director-General of the Navy
Department of the Physician of the Navy
Department of the Physician General of the Navy
Department of the Storekeeper-General of the Navy
Department of the Surveyor of Buildings
Department of the Surveyor of Dockyards
Dockyards and Fleet Maintenance Department
Dockyards Branch
Dockyard Expense Accounts Department
Dockyard Schools
Electrical Engineering Department
Engineer Branch
Engineering Department
Experimental Department
Fire Control Group
Greenwich Hospital Department
Medical Consultative Board
Medical Examining Board
Historical Section
Hydrographic Department
Marine Pay Office
Materials and Priority Department
Medical Consultative Board
Medical Department
Medical Examining Board
Movements Department
Nautical Almanac Office
Naval Artillery and Torpedo Department
Naval Engineering College
Naval Equipment Department
Naval Historical Branch
Naval Construction Department
Naval Intelligence Department
Naval Medical Service
Naval Law Division
Naval Mobilisation Department
Naval Ordnance Department
Naval Ordnance Inspection Department
Naval Ordnance Stores Department
Naval Publicity Department
Naval Reserve Department
Naval Security Department
Naval Stores Department
Naval Training Department
Naval Works Department
Navy, Army and Air Force Institute
Navy and Army Canteen Board
Navy Works Department
Navigation Department
Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope
Office of the Admiral Commanding Coast Guard and Reserves
Office of the Admiral Commanding Reserves
Office of the Admiral Superintendent, Chatham
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Devonport
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Malta
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent of Naval Reserves
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Pembroke
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Plymouth
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Portsmouth
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Rosyth
Office of the Admiralty Chemist
Office of the Adviser on the Naval Construction to the Board of Admiralty
Office of the Assistant Controller
Office of the Assistant Controller Research and Development
Office of the Deputy Controller of Navy
Office of the Deputy Controller Production
Office of the Director Woman’s Royal Naval Nursing Service
Office of Extra Naval Assistant to Second Sea Lord
Office of the Inspector Gun Mountings
Office of the Senior Psychologist of the Navy
Office of the Vice Controller Air
Office of the Vice Controller of the Navy
Organisation and Methods Department
Packet Service
Regional Organisation for Merchant Shipbuilding and Repairs
Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Royal Flying Corps
Royal Marines Office
Royal Marines Pay Office
Office of the Chaplain of the Fleet
Royal Naval Academy
Royal Naval Aircraft Workshops
Royal Naval Air Service
Royal Naval Air Stations
Royal Naval Armaments Depot
Royal Naval Cordite Factories
Royal Naval Propellant Factory
Royal Naval College, Dartmouth
Royal Naval College, Greenwich
Royal Naval College, Keyham
Royal Naval College, Osborne
Royal Naval Engineering College
Royal Naval Film Corporation
Royal Naval Hospital
Royal Naval Medical Depot
Royal Naval Minewatching Service
Royal Naval Mine Depot
Royal Naval Patrol Service
Royal Naval Scientific Service
Royal Naval Sick Quarters
Royal Naval Torpedo Depot
Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Royal Naval War College
Royal Naval War College, Portsmouth
Royal Navy Dockyard
Royal Navy Medical Service
Royal Navy Shore Signal Service
Royal Observatory, Greenwich
Royal School of Naval Architecture
Salvage Department
School of Mathematics and Naval Construction
Scientific Research and Experiment Department
Sea Transport Department
Ship Department
Ship Design Department
Signal Department
Signal School
Statistics Department
Steam Department
Superintendent of De-magnetisation
Torpedoes and Mining Department
Transport Department
Undersurface Warfare Department
Victualling Department
Volunteer Boys and Cadet Corps
Weapons Department
Wireless Telegraphy Board





Distribution of the Fleet



Office of the Permanent Secretary to the Admiralty
Office of the First Naval Lord
Office of the First Sea Lord
Admiralty Naval Staff





Military units
distributed under
the Admiralty



1st Fleet
2nd Fleet
3rd Fleet
Admiral Commanding, Orkneys and Shetlands
Admiral of Patrols
Africa Station
Atlantic Fleet
Australia Station
Cape of Good Hope Station
Cape and West Africa Station
Caspian Flotilla
Channel Fleet
Coastal Forces
Coast of Ireland Station
Cork Station
Coast of Scotland
China Command
Dover Command
Downs Station
East Indies Fleet
East Indies Station
East Indies and China Station
Eastern Fleet
Far Eastern Fleet
Grand Fleet
Harwich Force
Home Fleet
Jamaica Station
Leeward Islands Station
Lisbon Station
Mediterranean Fleet
Newfoundland Station
New Zealand Division
New Zealand Naval Forces
Nore Command
North America and West Indies Station
North Atlantic Command
North Sea Fleet
Pacific Fleet
Pacific Station
Plymouth Command
Portsmouth Command
Queenstown
Royal East African Navy
Royal Indian Navy
Rosyth
Reserve Fleet
Scotland and Northern Ireland
South Atlantic Command
South Atlantic and Pacific Station
South America Station
South East Coast of America Station
West Africa
Western Approaches Command
Western Squadron





Direction of Naval Finance



Department of the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty





Departments under
Secretary



Department of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty
Accountant-General's Department
Comptroller of the Navy
Department of the Surveyor of the Navy





Direction of Naval Administration
and the Admiralty Secretariat



Department of the Permanent Secretary





Branches and offices under
Permanent Secretary



Admiralty Central Copying Branch
Admiralty Central Registry Branch
Admiralty Record Office
Admiralty Library
Admiralty Secretariat
Air Branch
Civil Branch
Legal Branch
Military Branch
Naval Branch
Ship Branch





Civil Administration



Department of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty, Department of the Additional Civil Lord of the Admiralty





Departments under
Civil Administration



Accountant-General's Department
Contract and Purchase Department
Department of the Director of Contract Labour
Department of the Surveyor of Buildings
Director of Works' Department
Greenwich Hospital Department
Works Loan Department





Legal



Judicial Department





Legal under
Judicial Department



Admiralty court
High Court of Admiralty
High Court of Justice
Office of the Judge Advocate of the Fleet
Office of the Chief Naval Judge Advocate
Office of the Admiralty Advocate
Office of the Solicitor for the Affairs of the Admiralty
Office of the Solicitor to the Admiralty and Navy
Court of Admiralty for the Cinque Ports
King's Bench Division (Admiralty)
Queens's Bench Division (Admiralty)
Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division
Vice Admiralty courts
Colonial Courts of Admiralty











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Royal_Observatory,_Greenwich&oldid=809325993"					Categories: Buildings and structures completed in 1676Christopher Wren buildings in LondonAstronomical observatories in EnglandCultural and educational buildings in LondonBuildings and structures in the Royal Borough of GreenwichEducation in the Royal Borough of GreenwichHistory of the Royal Borough of GreenwichGrade I listed buildings in the Royal Borough of GreenwichTourist attractions in LondonHorological museums in the United KingdomMuseums in the Royal Borough of GreenwichScience and technology in London1676 establishments in EnglandGreenwich ParkBuildings containing meridian linesTime ballsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNBUse British English from October 2011Use dmy dates from October 2011Coordinates on WikidataArticles with infoboxes completely from WikidataArticles needing additional references from August 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2016