This article is about the sport derived from rugby union. For the rugby league variant, see Rugby league sevens.

Rugby sevens


Kenya scores a try against Tonga during the 2006 Commonwealth Games



Highest governing body
World Rugby


Nicknames
Sevens, 7s, VIIs,
Seven-a-side[1]


First played
1883


Characteristics


Contact
Full Contact


Team members
7


Mixed gender
Separate competitions


Type
Outdoor team sport, variant of rugby union


Equipment
Rugby ball


Presence


Olympic
2016 onwards


Rugby sevens (commonly known simply as sevens) is a variant of rugby union in which teams are made up of seven players playing seven minute halves, instead of the usual 15 players playing 40 minute halves. Rugby sevens is administered by World Rugby, the body responsible for Rugby Union worldwide. The game is popular at all levels, with amateur and club tournaments generally held in the summer months. Sevens is one of the most well distributed forms of rugby, and is popular in parts of Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Americas, and especially in the South Pacific.[2]
Rugby sevens originated in Melrose, Scotland in the 1880s; the Melrose Sevens tournament is still played annually. The popularity of rugby sevens increased further with the development of the Hong Kong Sevens in the 1970s, and the World Rugby Sevens Series in 1999—a series of seven to twelve tournaments played each year from approximately November to May. Since 2016, rugby sevens has been contested in the Summer Olympics, and it has also been played in regional events such as the Commonwealth Games and Pan American Games.




March Past of Hong Kong Sevens 2008





Contents


1 Overview
2 Sevens rules

2.1 Playing area
2.2 Teams and positions
2.3 Variations to the Laws of the Game


3 History

3.1 Hong Kong Sevens
3.2 International development


4 Major tournaments

4.1 World Rugby Sevens Series
4.2 World Games
4.3 Summer Olympics
4.4 Rugby World Cup Sevens


5 Regional tournaments

5.1 Commonwealth Games
5.2 Pan American Games
5.3 European Sevens Championship


6 Women's rugby sevens
7 Sevens vs Fifteens
8 See also
9 References

9.1 Works cited
9.2 Footnotes


10 External links

10.1 Tournament sites





Overview[edit]
Rugby sevens is sanctioned by World Rugby, and is played under similar laws (with exceptions noted below) and on a field of the same dimensions as the 15 player game. While a regular rugby union match lasts at least 80 minutes, a normal sevens match consists of two halves of seven minutes with a two-minute half-time break. The final of a competition can be played over two halves of ten minutes each.[3] (In the World Rugby Sevens Series, only the Cup final, which determines the overall winner of an event, is played with 10 minute halves; all finals for lower-level trophies are played with 7 minute halves). Sevens scores are generally comparable to regular rugby scores, but scoring occurs much more frequently in sevens, since the defenders are more spaced out. The scoring system is the same as regular rugby union, namely five points for a try, three points for a drop goal (whether from penalty or open play) and two points for a post-try conversion.[4]
The shorter match length allows rugby sevens tournaments to be completed in a day or a weekend. Many sevens tournaments have a competition for a cup, a plate, a bowl, and a shield, allowing many teams of different standards to avoid leaving empty-handed.
Sevens tournaments are traditionally known for having more of a relaxed atmosphere than fifteen-a-side games, and are often known as "festivals". Sevens tournaments gained their "popularity as an end of season diversion from the dourer and sterner stuff that provides the bulk of a normal season's watching."[5] Fans frequently attend in fancy dress, and entertainment is put on for them.
The Hong Kong Sevens tournament has been especially important in popularising the game in Asia, and rugby sevens has been important as a form of international rugby "evangelism", hence is perhaps the most widely played form of the game, with tournaments in places as far apart as Bogota and Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur and Kenya, Singapore and Scandinavia, as well as the countries in which rugby union is well known.[6]
Sevens rules[edit]
Playing area[edit]
Sevens is played on a standard rugby union playing field as defined in the World Rugby handbook. The field measures up to 100 metres (330 ft) long and 70 metres (230 ft) wide.[7][8] On each goal line are H-shaped goal posts. The goal post are on the goal line. This is unlike American Football where their posts are behind the back of the goal line.
Teams and positions[edit]
Teams are composed of three forwards and four backs. Scrums are composed of three players from each team. Because of the speedy nature of the game, sevens players are often backs or loose forwards in fifteens rugby.






Rugby sevens positions






1 Prop
2 Hooker
3 Prop


 



4 Scrum-half


 




5 Fly-half


 





6 Centre


 






7 Wing









Blue: Forwards

1 - Prop
2 - Hooker
3 - Prop





Red: Backs

4 - Scrum-half
5 - Fly-half
6 - Centre
7 - Wing








Substitutes are like the 15-player game, but with only 5 subs on the bench.
Variations to the Laws of the Game[edit]




A sevens scrum


There are several variations in laws which apply to Rugby sevens,[9][10] primarily to speed up the game and to account for the reduced number of players. The main changes can be summarised as follows:

7 players per team on field (instead of 15).
Five substitutes, with five interchanges (instead of 7 and 7).
Seven minute halves (instead of 40-minute halves, in fifteen-a-side).
Maximum of two minutes half-time (instead of ten minutes).
Matches drawn after regulation are continued into sudden-death extra time, in multiple 5-minute periods.
All conversion attempts must be drop-kicked (instead of having the option to place-kick).
Conversions must be taken within 30 seconds of scoring a try (instead of 90 seconds). Prior to 2016, the limit had been 40 seconds.
Three player scrums (instead of eight players).
Kick-offs: in sevens, the team which has just scored kicks off, rather than the conceding team, as in fifteen-a-side.
Yellow cards net a 2-minute suspension (instead of 10 minutes) to the offender.
Referees decide on advantage quickly (where one play usually ends advantage, unlike in fifteens).
In major competitions, there are additional officials present (in-goal touch judges) to judge success of kicks at goals, which means the game is not delayed waiting for touch judges to move into position to judge conversion attempts.

History[edit]
See also: Rugby union in the Scottish Borders, Melrose Sevens, and Border Sevens Circuit




The Greenyards at Melrose in Scotland, beneath the Eildon Hills, is the original home of rugby sevens.


Rugby sevens was initially conceived in 1883 by Ned Haig and David Sanderson, who were butchers from Melrose, Scotland as a fund-raising event for their local club, Melrose RFC. The first-ever sevens match was played at The Greenyards, the Melrose ground, where it was well received. Two years later, Tynedale was the first non-Scottish club to win one of the Borders Sevens titles at Gala in 1885.[11]
Despite sevens' popularity in the Borders, it did not catch on elsewhere until the 1920s and '30s.[12] The first sevens tournaments outside Scotland were held in 1921. In north east England, the Percy Park Sevens was held at North Shields.[11] Because it was near to the Scottish Borders, it attracted interest from the code's birthplace, and the final was contested between Selkirk (who won) and Melrose (who were runners up).[11] The same year, the Buenos Aires Football Club hosted a rugby sevens tournament in Argentina.[13]
In 1926, England's major tournament, the Middlesex Sevens was set up by Dr J.A. Russell-Cargill, a London-based Scot.[11] One of the key events in the spread of sevens to England was the Middlesex Sevens, which had some formidable figures on its sub-committee such as Wavell Wakefield and Bill Ramsay.[12] The Middlesex Sevens were also a great fundraiser for charity, and in 1926, they raised £1,600 for King Edward VII Hospital, at a time when standard admission was a shilling, and stand seats cost five shillings.[12]
A 1927 description of the game at the Middlesex Sevens (also for King Edward Hospital) gives an idea of the novelty of the game to English people:

"You see the field is so open that if a man gets away with the ball a full sized gallop is required to catch him and very often it... wasn't there."[14]

Whereas the Scottish Borders were a rural area, the Middlesex Sevens were near the suburbs of London, which was home to millions. 10,000 spectators attended the second Middlesex tournament.[14] And while the Border Sevens had honed the skills of players in the Scottish rugby heartland, the Middlesex Sevens did likewise for London rugby, with locally based players such as the aforementioned Wavell Wakefield, Carl Aarvold (later Recorder of the City of London) of Blackheath FC, Wick Powell of London Welsh RFC, and John Tallent, who would later become chairman of the Four Home Unions Tours Committee.[12] They rubbed shoulders with various invitation sides such as Sale RFC in 1936, which included such players as Wilf Wooller and Claude Davey of Wales and Ken Fyfe of Scotland amongst their backs; and in 1939, Cardiff RFC, which included players such as Wilf Wooller again, and Les Spence and Wendy Davis.[12]
The first-ever officially sanctioned tournament for national teams was the 1973 International Seven-A-Side Tournament held at Murrayfield as part of the "Scottish Rugby Union's Celebration of Rugby" centenary celebrations.
Hong Kong Sevens[edit]
Main article: Hong Kong Sevens
Due to the success of the format, the ongoing Hong Kong Sevens was launched three years later, in 1976.
The Scottish connection continued in the establishment of the Hong Kong Sevens in the 1970s, founded largely by expats such as "Tokkie" Smith, and in England, London Scottish RFC was strongly involved in the Middlesex Sevens from the start. The Hong Kong Sevens were ahead of their time and an influential force in the modernisation of rugby union. For example, the Hong Kong Sevens were one of the first rugby union tournaments to attract major sponsorship when the airline Cathay Pacific sponsored the 1976 tournament.[15] They also provided a level of cosmopolitan international competition, which tended not to exist in rugby before the first Rugby World Cup in 1987,[16] especially since Hong Kong was not seen as one of the "Big Eight", and other than some involvement with France, the British Commonwealth teams tended to be notoriously clannish. By 1986, the Hong Kong Sevens were held up as a positive example to others:

"This Seven-a-Side international tournament is without a doubt the most spectacular, exotic, best organised Rugby competition of its kind in the world, and it has consistently produced the highest standard of Sevens Rugby seen anywhere.


"I was not surprised on my first visit to see quality play from the Australian, New Zealand, Fijian, and British players, but I was staggered at the amazingly high quality play produced by countries I never even knew played Rugby. South Korea and Western Samoa were every bit as good as Japan and Tonga . . .


"The week of the Hong Kong tournament allows 24 Rugby-playing nations to intermingle for several days, and the huge cross-fertilisation of ideas can only be beneficial in the long term for the emerging nations . . . The strength of this great tournament is that on the opening day the most famous players in the world share a pitch with unknown opponents from countries where Rugby is a minority sport... While tournaments like the Hong Kong Sevens continue to be played, Rugby administrators can be confident that the game will continue to thrive in over 100 countries worldwide."[16]

However, despite this apparent diversity, some of the same old problems which had dogged international rugby were still manifest in the Hong Kong Sevens in the 1980s – for example, in a photograph of the Hong Kong vs. Bahrain game at the tournament in 1984, the teams do not appear to include anyone who is ethnically Arab or Chinese; instead both teams are quite clearly of northern European ethnic origin.[17]
International development[edit]
The Rugby World Cup Sevens, in which the Melrose Cup is contested, was launched in 1993.
Three of the best-known sevens competitions are the Hong Kong Sevens, Wellington Sevens, and the Dubai Sevens, which now make up part of the World Rugby Sevens Series.
Rugby sevens continues to be popular in the Scottish Borders, where the ten most prestigious of these tournaments make up a league competition known as the "Radio Borders Kings of the Sevens".[18] In honour of the role of Melrose RFC in the creation of rugby sevens, the club was inducted along with Haig to the IRB Hall of Fame, now folded into the World Rugby Hall of Fame, in 2008.[19]
Sevens has also taken strong root in the South Sea island nations of Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa, as well as the African nation of Kenya. In many minor rugby nations, such as the case of rugby union in Poland, development has tended to concentrate on rugby sevens as a means of introducing the sport to people.[20] Rugby sevens has become popular in places such as Hong Kong, Singapore and Dubai, which are not so successful in the full fifteen-a-side code. In addition, seven of the 15 current "core teams" that compete in all legs of the World Series represent nations that are not within the recognised top tier of the 15-man game — Fiji, Samoa, Kenya, the United States, Canada, Portugal, and Japan. Recently there has been the introduction of many new teams to the sevens circuit such as Ireland, Russia, Germany and countries where rugby sevens wouldn't be considered a main sport.
Major tournaments[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Argentina at the 2008 USA Sevens in San Diego






Sailosi Tagicakibau with the winners cup at the Bournemouth Sevens


World Rugby Sevens Series[edit]
Main article: World Rugby Sevens Series
The World Series has been held every season since the 1999–2000 inaugural season. Each season the Sevens Series holds from seven to eleven tournaments, usually starting around November and concluding around May. Most tournaments see 16 teams competing — mostly "core teams" that participate in each event, but also some teams that win the right to participate in select events.
New Zealand has been the dominant force in the Sevens Series, winning 12 out of the 18 seasons, including the first six seasons from 1999–2000 to 2004–05. In recent years, however, several other teams have challenged New Zealand's dominance. Fiji won the Series in 2005–06 and again in 2014–15 and 2015–16; South Africa won in 2008–09 and 2016-17; and Samoa claimed the 2009–10 crown. Other strong contenders include England and Australia, each of whom have had several top four finishes in recent seasons.[21] The 2015 London Sevens, saw the United States win their first-ever tournament in the World Series.[22]
Notable World Series players include England's Dan Norton, who has scored more tries (>230) than any other player; and England's Ben Gollings, who has scored more points (2,652) than any other player.
World Games[edit]
Main article: Rugby sevens at the World Games
Prior to inclusion in Olympics rugby sevens was part of World Games four times from 2001 until 2013.
Summer Olympics[edit]
Main article: Rugby sevens at the Summer Olympics
The International Olympic Committee voted in 2009 to include rugby sevens on the program for the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.[23] There were two open spots for sports and initially seven sports began the bidding for inclusion in the 2016 program. The event debuted in an Olympic program at the 2014 Summer Youth Olympics.
Two issues related to differences between the structures of rugby union and the Olympics were sorted out before the 2016 Olympic Games. The issue of a combined British team has proven less of a problem in rugby union. WR chief executive Mike Miller endorsed the concept of a combined British sevens team in 2011 for the 2016 Olympics and beyond.[24] Another issue is the status of Northern Ireland. World Rugby recognises the Irish Rugby Football Union as the sport's governing body for the entire island of Ireland. By contrast, the International Olympic Committee recognises the British Olympic Association as the governing body of the UK Olympic team, while the Olympic Council of Ireland usually fields teams representing all of Ireland in case of sports organised on an all-Ireland basis. Northern Irish sevens players play for the Irish team.[25][26]
In the men's competition Fiji took the gold medal in the sport's Olympic debut, with Great Britain taking the silver and South Africa the bronze. The Women's gold medal was taken by Australia, with New Zealand taking silver and Canada bronze [27]
Rugby World Cup Sevens[edit]
Main article: Rugby World Cup Sevens
The Rugby World Cup Sevens is held every four years. It had been the highest prize in the sevens version of rugby union until the introduction of rugby at the 2016 Summer Olympics. Fiji and New Zealand are the most successful, having each won two out of the six World Cups. However, due to the introduction of sevens to the Olympics in 2016, the Olympics is now viewed as the most high-profile rugby sevens tournament. Beginning with the 2018 edition, the World Cup Sevens will be held in the middle of the Summer Olympic cycle (i.e., in the same year as the Winter Olympics).
Regional tournaments[edit]




A line-out during the Kinsale Sevens








This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Rugby sevens is played at various regional multi-sport competitions, including the Asian Games and the Pacific Games. Rugby union was formerly played at the World Games, but this has ceased as rugby is now an Olympic sport.
Commonwealth Games[edit]
Main article: Rugby sevens at the Commonwealth Games
Rugby sevens has been played at each of the Commonwealth Games every four years since its first appearance at the 1998 Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Rugby sevens is now considered a "Core" sport by the Commonwealth Games Federation, necessitating its appearance at all future games. The New Zealand team has won the gold medal four times with South Africa winning the tournament at Glasgow 2014 beating the defending champions in the final. Through the 2014 Games in Glasgow, it was the last remaining male-only sport at the Commonwealth Games, after women's boxing was added for those Games. Women's sevens will make its Commonwealth Games debut in the 2018 Games.
Pan American Games[edit]
Main article: Rugby sevens at the Pan American Games
Men's rugby sevens at the Pan American Games has been held every four years since the 2011 Pan American Games, with Canada, Argentina, and the United States placing for medals each time.[28] Women's rugby sevens was later added to the program for the 2015 Pan American Games.[29]




Portugal playing Romania in 2008


European Sevens Championship[edit]
See also: Sevens Grand Prix Series
The Rugby Europe Sevens Grand Prix Series serves as a regional qualifier for two types of tournaments. The top two finishing teams each year who are not core members of the World Rugby Sevens Series advance to the Hong Kong Sevens, the qualifying tournament for teams vying to achieve core team status in the World Rugby Sevens Series. The Europe Grand Prix also serves as a regional qualifier for major quadrennial tournaments, such as the summer Olympics and the Rugby World Cup Sevens.
In Europe, Portugal has been dominating in sevens during the Championship era (2002-10); only twice the team did not win the trophy, in 2007 and 2009, when both times the championships were won by Russia.
In the Grand Prix Series era from 2011 on the champions became England and France; both teams won the trophy twice in a row. Portugal won the first edition, while Russia is the current champion.
Women's rugby sevens[edit]
See also: List of women's rugby sevens competitions and World Rugby Women's Sevens Series
Women's rugby sevens has been dominated by New Zealand, with either the New Zealand team (1999–2001) or Aotearoa Maori Women's Rugby sevens team (playing as New Zealand) [3] winning the annual Hong Kong Sevens tournament from 1997 until 2007. The United States won the Hong Kong Sevens in 2008 by defeating Canada in the final (New Zealand failed to send a team).




A women's rugby sevens game in the USA


The inaugural Women's Rugby World Cup Sevens tournament took place in Dubai together with the men's tournament during the first weekend of March 2009. England defeated Canada 12–0 in the Bowl final while Australia edged New Zealand 15–10 in extra-time to become the first to win the Women's Rugby World Cup.
WR, then known as the International Rugby Board (IRB), organised its first official women's sevens tournament outside of the World Cup as part of the 2011 Dubai Sevens. This was part of a plan to launch a full IRB International Women's Sevens Series for 2012–13.[30] The international series was officially christened as the IRB Women's Sevens World Series in an IRB announcement on 4 October 2012. The series, as planned, launched for the 2012–13 season and initially featured events in Dubai, the USA, China and the Netherlands.[31] Two additional events were planned for the 2013–14 series, but in the end only one of these events, in Brazil, took place. For the 2014–15 series, China dropped from the schedule, while Canada and England hosted new events. The series was rechristened for 2014–15 as the World Rugby Women's Sevens Series, following the November 2014 renaming of the IRB as World Rugby. The 2015–16 series included only five events; the England and Netherlands events were dropped and an event in France was added. The 2016–17 series returned to six events with the launch of an event in Japan.
Women's rugby sevens was included in the 2016 Olympic Games due to the IRB's successful bid to reintroduce rugby to the Summer games. Australia claimed the gold medal for the event, beating New Zealand in the final with a score of 24-17. Canada claimed the bronze medal after beating Great Britain 33-10 in the third place play-off. WR also successfully pushed for the inclusion of women's sevens in the 2018 Commonwealth Games.
Sevens vs Fifteens[edit]
Although sevens has proven a commercial and competitive success, sevens is starting to become divorced from the 15-man game. Former Wales international and current pundit John Taylor wrote in 2010 that sevens


“
...is in danger of becoming a totally separate game. Ben Ryan, who coached both the England Sevens and the Fiji Sevens, dismisses the idea that it should be seen mainly as a development tool. A few years ago players would spend a year or two with the Sevens squad to improve their running and passing skills. Many international players refined their game on the Sevens circuit including all-time greats such as Jonah Lomu.
That is happening less and less. Players have to make a choice: Do they want to concentrate on Sevens or 15s? The techniques and training required are becoming very different. Modern professional players are already pretty lean but the forwards in 15-a-side do need bulk as well. In Sevens that is not required and new training regimes are making body fat levels even lower so they are not able to transfer from one game to the other.[32]

”


See also[edit]


Rugby union portal



Tag Rugby

Mini rugby
American Flag Rugby


Beach rugby
Touch rugby
Rugby union variants

Rugby tens
Collegiate Rugby Championship, aka CRC 7s


Rugby League variants

Rugby league sevens
Touch (sport)
League tag


Association Football

Seven-a-side football



References[edit]
Works cited[edit]

Bath, Richard (ed.) The Complete Book of Rugby (Seven Oaks Ltd, 1997 ISBN 1-86200-013-1)
Bath, Richard (ed.) The Scotland Rugby Miscellany (Vision Sports Publishing Ltd, 2007 ISBN 1-905326-24-6)
Jones, J.R. Encyclopedia of Rugby Union Football (Robert Hale, London, 1976 ISBN 0-7091-5394-5)
McLaren, Bill Talking of Rugby (1991, Stanley Paul, London ISBN 0-09-173875-X)
Massie, Allan A Portrait of Scottish Rugby (Polygon, Edinburgh; ISBN 0-904919-84-6)
Richards, Huw (2007). A Game for Hooligans: The History of Rugby Union. Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84596-255-5. 
Starmer-Smith, Nigel (ed) Rugby – A Way of Life, An Illustrated History of Rugby (Lennard Books, 1986 ISBN 0-7126-2662-X)
Stubbs, Ray (2009). The Sports Book. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-1-4053-3697-0. 

Footnotes[edit]


^ Bath, The Complete Book of Rugby, p29
^ The Spread of the Sevens Archived 14 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine., Melrose Sevens official site, retrieved 25 February 2010
^ "2006–07 IRB Sevens World Series Media Guide" (PDF). International Rugby Board. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2007. Retrieved 10 February 2007. 
^ https://www.usasevens.com/las-vegas/rugby-101/
^ Jones, The Encyclopedia of Rugby Union Football (1976), p. 122.
^ Bath (1997), p29.
^ "Intro EN" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2009. Retrieved 6 February 2010. 
^ "Intro EN" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 December 2011. Retrieved 6 February 2010. 
^ "Seven-a-side Variations: Standard Set of Variations Appropriate to the Seven-a-side Game" (PDF). International Rugby Board. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2007. Retrieved 10 February 2007. 
^ "Laws of the Game: Seven-a-side Variations:". World Rugby. Retrieved 4 June 2016. 
^ a b c d Bath, Scotland Rugby Miscellany, p82
^ a b c d e Starmer-Smith, p60
^ Rugby sevens is a great show - Frankie Deges, Buenos Aires Herald, 8 January 2013
^ a b Grave, Charles. "Grave is Gay: At the Seven-a-Side Rugby Matches" in Illustrated Sport and Dramatic News, 1927
^ Starmer-Smith, p144
^ a b Starmer-Smith, p142
^ Starmer-Smith, p146
^ [1]
^ "IRB Hall of Fame Welcomes Five Inductees" (Press release). International Rugby Board. 23 November 2008. Retrieved 8 October 2015. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2014.  retrieved, 7 November 2009
^ "Dates set for 2010/11 IRB Sevens World Series" (Press release). International Rugby Board. 1 June 2010. Retrieved 2 June 2010. 
^ Hamilton, Tom (17 May 2015). "USA make history at Twickenham with first World Rugby Series tournament win". ESPN (US). Retrieved 17 May 2015. 
^ [2]
^ "International Board backs British Olympic sevens team". BBC Sport. 6 April 2011. Retrieved 7 April 2011. 
^ Gavin, Mairs (30 September 2009). "Great Britain will enter team if Rugby Sevens gets 2016 Olympic green light". Daily Telegraph. 
^ Staff (22 October 2010). "Ireland finally look to take Sevens seriously ahead of Rio 2016". Sportsbeat. Archived from the original on 27 July 2011.  External link in |publisher= (help)
^ "Rio 2016 : 7 Rugby Men". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 12 March 2017. 
^ Rugby, racquetball will be played at 2011 Pan Am Games
^ "Pan Am Games Tickets: Be Here for Gold-Medal History". TO2015. 18 August 2014. Archived from the original on 29 October 2014. Retrieved 28 October 2014. 
^ "First IRB Women's Sevens event announced" (Press release). International Rugby Board. 14 September 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2011. 
^ "IRB announces Women's Sevens World Series" (Press release). International Rugby Board. 4 October 2012. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ Taylor, John (29 September 2010). "Fears for sevens specialists". ESPN Scrum. Retrieved 2010-10-11. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rugby sevens.



World Rugby Sevens Series official website
World Rugby Women's Sevens Series official website
The RugbyRugby Guide- Coaching 7s
Ultimate Rugby Sevens
Rugby Sevens – History & Tournaments
Guide to playing training and coaching sevens rugby
2011 Refereeing Sevens Handbook
A Brief History of Seven a Side Rugby
Dubai Rugby Sevens – Dubai Calendar – Dubai Events Official Listings
The Road to Rio

Tournament sites[edit]




World Rugby Sevens Series

Singapore Sevens
Hong Kong Sevens
NZ Sevens
Dubai Sevens
USA Sevens
Edinburgh Sevens



Other Sevens tournaments

Melrose Sevens
(in Spanish) Punta del Este Sevens
Istanbul Rugby Sevens
Rhino Mendip Sevens
Braidholm 7s (Glasgow, Scotland)
[4] (Noosa, Queensland, Australia)











v
t
e


Sports of the World Games program




Italics indicate Invitational Sports at the World Games 2013



Artistic and dance sports



Acrobatic gymnastics
Aerobic gymnastics
Artistic roller skating
Dancesport
Rhythmic gymnastics
Trampoline





Ball sports



Beach handball
Canoe polo
Fistball
Korfball
Matkot
Padel
Racquetball
Rugby sevens
Softball
Squash





Martial arts



Jujutsu
Karate
Sumo
Wushu





Precision sports



Billiards
Boules
Bowling
Field archery





Strength sports



Bodybuilding
Powerlifting
Tug of war





Trend sports



Canoe marathon
Duathlon
Finswimming
Flying disc
Lifesaving
Orienteering
Parachuting
Paragliding
Roller in-line hockey
Speed roller skating
Sport climbing
Water skiing





Past sports



Bodybuilding
Casting
Indoor field hockey
Netball
Roller hockey
Surfing
Tchoukball
Tumbling
Wakeboarding








Sports at the World Games
International World Games Association












v
t
e


National rugby sevens teams



World Rugby Sevens Series
core teams



Argentina
Australia
Canada
England
Fiji
France
Kenya
New Zealand
Russia
Samoa
Scotland
South Africa
Spain
United States
Wales





Teams with
Rugby World Cup Sevens
experience



Chile
Chinese Taipei
Cook Islands
Georgia
Hong Kong
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Morocco
Namibia
Netherlands
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
South Korea
Tonga
Tunisia
Uruguay
Zimbabwe





Other teams



American Samoa
Andorra
Bahamas
Bahrain
Barbados
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Brunei
Cayman Islands
China
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Germany
Great Britain
Guam
Guyana
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran
Israel
Jamaica
Kazakhstan
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malaysia
Mexico
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Nauru
New Caledonia
Niue
Norway
Paraguay
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Peru
Poland
Qatar
Serbia
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Tahiti
Thailand
Tokelau
Trinidad & Tobago
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Wallis and Futuna
West Indies





Defunct



Arabian Gulf
Czechoslovakia
East Germany
West Germany
USSR
Yugoslavia












v
t
e


Women's national rugby sevens teams



WR Women's Sevens core teams



Australia
Canada
England
Fiji
France
Ireland
Japan
New Zealand
Russia
Spain
United States





Teams with World Cup Sevens
experience



Brazil
China
Italy
Netherlands
South Africa
Thailand
Tunisia
Uganda





Other teams



Argentina
Austria
Barbados
Belgium
Botswana
Bulgaria
Burundi
Chile
Colombia
Cook Islands
Croatia
Finland
Germany
Ghana
Great Britain
Guam
Guyana
Hong Kong
India
Iran
Israel
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malaysia
Malta
Mexico
Moldova
Morocco
New Caledonia
Nigeria
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Rwanda
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent
Samoa
Scotland
Senegal
Serbia
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Korea
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Ukraine
Uruguay
Venezuela
Wales
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Competitions



Rugby World Cup Sevens
World Rugby Women's Sevens Series
IRB Women's Sevens Challenge Cup












v
t
e


World Rugby Sevens Series



Seasons



1999–2000
2000–01
2001–02
2002–03
2003–04
2004–05
2005–06
2006–07
2007–08
2008–09
2009–10
2010–11
2011–12
2012–13
2013–14
2014–15
2015–16
2016–17
2017–18





2017–18 events



Dubai
South Africa
Australia
New Zealand
USA
Canada
Hong Kong
Singapore
France
London





Former events



Argentina
China
Fiji
Japan
Malaysia
Scotland
Uruguay
Wales





Current stadiums



The Sevens
Cape Town Stadium
Allianz Stadium
Waikato Stadium
Sam Boyd Stadium
BC Place
Hong Kong Stadium
Singapore National Stadium
Stade Jean-Bouin
Twickenham












v
t
e


World Rugby Women's Sevens Series



Seasons



2012–13
2013–14
2014–15
2015–16
2016–17
2017–18





Current events



Dubai
Australia
Japan
Canada
France





Former events



China
London
Netherlands
São Paulo
United States
IRB Women's Challenge





Current stadiums



The Sevens
Sydney Football Stadium
Mikuni World Stadium
Westhills Stadium
Stade Jean-Bouin












v
t
e


Team sports






Sport
Governing bodies
Sportspeople
National sport





Basket sports



Basketball

beach
deaf
3x3
water
wheelchair


Cestoball
Korfball
Netball

Fast5
indoor
wheelchair


Rezball
Ringball
Slamball





Football codes







Association football

amputee
beach
freestyle
Futsal
indoor
Jorkyball
paralympic
powerchair
roller
street
walking


Australian rules football

AFLX
Lightning football
Metro footy
Nine-a-side
Rec footy


Gaelic football

Ladies'


Circle rules football





Gridiron codes



American football

eight-man
flag
nine-man
six-man
sprint
touch
wheelchair


Canadian football
Indoor American football

Arena football







Hybrid codes



Austus
Eton wall game
International rules football
Samoa rules
Speedball
Swedish football
Universal football
Volata





Medieval football codes



Ba game
Caid
Calcio fiorentino
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cuju
Harpastum
Kemari
Ki-o-rahi
Jegichagi
La soule
Lelo burti
Marn grook
Pasuckuakohowog
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and downies
Yubi lakpi





Rugby codes



Beach
Rugby league

masters
mod
nines
sevens
tag
wheelchair


Rugby union

American flag
mini
sevens
snow
tag
touch
tens


Touch
Wheelchair








Bat-and-ball games



Baseball
Brännboll
British baseball
Corkball
Cricket

One Day
Test
Twenty20


Danish longball
Indoor cricket
Kickball
Lapta
Matball
Oină
Over-the-line
Pesäpallo
Rounders
Softball

Fastpitch


Stickball
Stoolball
Town ball
Vigoro
Vitilla
Wiffle ball
Wireball





Stick and ball sports







Bando
Cammag
Hurling

Camogie
Super11s
Shinty–Hurling


Indigenous North American stickball
Iomain
Knattleikr
Knotty
Lacrosse

box/indoor
field
intercrosse
women's


Ritinis
Shinty

Shinty–Hurling







Hockey sports



Ball hockey
Bandy

rink


Broomball

Moscow


Field hockey

indoor


Floor hockey
Floorball
Ice hockey

pond
power
ice sledge
underwater


Ringette
Rinkball
Roller hockey

in-line
quad


Rossall hockey
Shinny
Street hockey
Underwater hockey
Unicycle hockey





Polo sports



Auto polo
Cowboy polo
Cycle polo
Elephant polo
Horseball
Motoball
Pato
Polo

Arena polo
chovgan
snow polo


Polocrosse
Segway polo
Yak polo








Net sports



Ball badminton
Beach tennis
Biribol
Bossaball
Fistball
Footbag net
Football tennis
Footvolley
Jianzi
Jokgu
Newcomb ball
Peteca
Sepak takraw
Throwball
Volleyball

beach
paralympic







Other sports



Airsoft
Angleball
Balle à la main
Ballon au poing
Basque pelota

frontenis
jai alai
xare


Bo-taoshi
Boules

Bocce
Bocce volo
Boccia
Bowls
Jeu provençal
Pétanque
Raffa


Buzkashi
Combat (juggling)
Curling

wheelchair


Cycle ball
Digor
Dodgeball
Flickerball
Gateball
Goalball
Guts
Handball

beach
Czech
field


Hornussen
Ice stock sport
Jereed
Kabaddi

indoor
beach


Kho kho
Kin-Ball
Lagori
Longue paume
Mesoamerican ballgame
Paintball
Pelota mixteca
Prisonball
Pushball
Quidditch
Rollball
Roller derby
Slahal
Snow snake
Synchronized skating
Synchronized swimming
Tamburello
Tchoukball

beach


Tejo
Tug of war
Ulama
Ultimate
Underwater football
Underwater rugby
Valencian pilota

Llargues


Water polo

canoe
inner tube
beach


Waboba
Whirlyball
Woodball
Yukigassen












v
t
e


Summer Olympic sports



2016 program



Archery
Athletics
Badminton
Basketball
Boxing
Canoeing

Canoe slalom
Canoe sprint


Cycling

BMX
Mountain bike
Road cycling
Track cycling


Diving
Equestrian

Dressage
Eventing
Show jumping


Fencing
Field hockey
Football
Golf
Gymnastics

Artistic gymnastics
Rhythmic gymnastics
Trampolining


Handball
Judo
Modern pentathlon
Rowing
Rugby sevens
Sailing
Shooting
Swimming
Synchronised swimming
Table tennis
Taekwondo
Tennis
Triathlon
Volleyball

Beach volleyball


Water polo
Weightlifting
Wrestling

Freestyle wrestling
Greco-Roman wrestling







2020 addition



Baseball

Softball


Karate
Skateboarding
Sport climbing
Surfing








See also: Paralympic sports and Winter Olympic sports











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rugby_sevens&oldid=816851979"					Categories: Rugby sevensHistory of rugby union in ScotlandSports originating in ScotlandSummer Olympic sportsVariations of rugby unionHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 errors: external linksEngvarB from May 2013Use dmy dates from May 2013Articles needing additional references from April 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from July 2016Articles with Spanish-language external links