"Runs scored" redirects here. For the cricket topic, see Scoring runs in cricket.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Bengie Molina of the Anaheim Angels (in gray and red) scores a run by touching home plate after rounding all the bases.


In baseball, a run is scored when a player advances around first, second and third base and returns safely to home plate, touching the bases in that order, before three outs are recorded and all obligations to reach base safely on batted balls are met or assured. A player may score by hitting a home run or by any combination of plays that puts him safely "on base" (that is, on first, second, or third) as a runner and subsequently brings him home. The object of the game is for a team to score more runs than its opponent.
The Official Baseball Rules hold that if the third out of an inning is a force out of a runner advancing to any base then, even if another baserunner crosses home plate before that force out is made, his run does not count. However, if the third out is not a force out, but a tag out, then if that other baserunner crosses home plate before that tag out is made, his run will count. In baseball statistics, a player who advances around all the bases to score is credited with a run (R), sometimes referred to as a "run scored". While runs scored is considered an important individual batting statistic, it is regarded as less significant than runs batted in (RBIs). Both individual runs scored and runs batted in are heavily context-dependent; for a more sophisticated assessment of a player's contribution toward producing runs for his team (see runs created).
A pitcher is likewise assessed runs surrendered in his statistics, which differentiate between standard earned runs (for which the pitcher is statistically assigned full responsibility) and unearned runs scored due to fielding errors, which do not count in his personal statistics. Specifically, if a fielding error occurs which affects the number of runs scored in an inning, the Official Scorer – the official in-game statistician – in order to determine how many of the runs should be classified as earned, will reconstruct the inning as if the error had not occurred. For example, with two outs, suppose a runner reaches base because of a fielding error, and then the next batter hits a two-run home run, and then the following batter then makes the third out, ending the inning. If the inning is reconstructed without the error, and if that third batter, instead of reaching on an error, registered an out, the inning would have ended there without any runs scoring. Thus, the two runs that did score will be classified as unearned, and will not count in the pitcher's personal statistics.[1]
If a pitching substitution occurs while a runner is on base, and that runner eventually scores a run, the pitcher who allowed the player to get on base is charged with the run even though he was no longer pitching when the run scored.



Contents


1 Examples
2 Significant run scoring records

2.1 Player
2.2 Team
2.3 World Series


3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Examples[edit]
Below are some examples of runs scored.

With a runner on third and two outs, batter hits a ground ball to the second baseman. The runner on third races home. The second baseman fields the ball and throws on to the first baseman in time to get the batter on the force out at first for the third out of the inning. Even if the runner on third had touched home plate before that force out was made at first, his run would not count.
With a runner on third and two outs, batter hits a fly ball over centerfielder's head. It bounces several times as it rolls to the wall. The runner on third runs safely home and easily scores a run. Meanwhile, the batter safely reaches first, then tries to advance to second. The centerfielder, having retrieved the ball, throws the ball to the second baseman and the runner is tagged out as he slides into second. Since the runner stepped on home plate before the batter was tagged out at second for the third out of the inning, his run will count.[1]

Significant run scoring records[edit]
Player[edit]
The career record for most runs scored by a major-league player is 2,295, held by Rickey Henderson (1979–2003). The season record for most runs scored is 198, set by Billy Hamilton of the Philadelphia Phillies in 1894. The so-called modern-day record (1900 and after) is 177, achieved by Babe Ruth of the New York Yankees in 1921. The record for most seasons leading one of the major leagues in runs scored is 8, held by Babe Ruth (American League: 1919–21, 1923, 1924, 1926–28).
The record for most consecutive games with at least one run scored is 18, shared by the Yankees' Red Rolfe (August 9–August 25, 1939) and the Cleveland Indians' Kenny Lofton (August 15–September 3, 2000). The record for most runs scored by a player in a single game is 7, set by Guy Hecker of the American Association's Louisville Colonels on August 15, 1886. The modern-day record of 6 is shared by fourteen players (eight of whom attained it before 1900). Of the six modern-day players to score 6 runs in a game, the first to perform the feat was Mel Ott of the New York Giants on August 4, 1934 (he repeated the accomplishment ten years later, making him the only player ever to do it twice); the most recent was Shawn Green, then of the Los Angeles Dodgers, on May 23, 2002.
Team[edit]
The record for most runs scored by a major-league team during a single season is 1,212, set by the Boston Beaneaters (now the Atlanta Braves) in 1894. The modern-day record is 1,067, achieved by the New York Yankees in 1931. The team record for most consecutive games with at least one run scored (i.e., most consecutive games not being shut out) is 308, set by the Yankees between August 3, 1931, and August 2, 1933. The team record for most runs in its overall history (up until 2013) is the Chicago Cubs with 94,138.[2]
The record for most runs scored by a team in a single game is 36, set by the Chicago Colts (now the Chicago Cubs) against the Louisville Colonels (which joined the National League in 1892) on June 29, 1897. The modern-day record of 30 was set on August 22, 2007, by the Texas Rangers against the Baltimore Orioles in the first game of a doubleheader at Oriole Park. The Rangers scored 5 runs in the fourth inning, 9 in the sixth, 10 in the eighth, and 6 in the ninth. On August 25, 1922, the highest-scoring game in major-league history took place: the Chicago Cubs defeated the Philadelphia Phillies 26–23, a total of 49 runs.
The record for most runs scored by a team in a single inning is 18, set by the Chicago White Stockings (now the Cubs) against the Detroit Wolverines on September 6, 1883. The modern-day record is 17, achieved by the Boston Red Sox against the Detroit Tigers on June 18, 1953.
World Series[edit]
The Yankees' Mickey Mantle holds the record for most career World Series runs scored with 42 (1951–53, 1955–58, 1960–64). The record for most runs scored in a single World Series, shared by two players, is 10, achieved both times in a six-game Series: Reggie Jackson of the Yankees was the first to do it, in 1977; the Toronto Blue Jays' Paul Molitor equaled him in 1993. The most runs ever scored by a player in a World Series game is 4, a record shared by ten players. Babe Ruth set the mark on October 6, 1926, while with the Yankees; it was matched most recently by Albert Pujols of the St. Louis Cardinals in Game 3 of the 2011 World Series.
On October 2, 1936, playing the New York Giants, the Yankees set the team record for most runs scored in a single Series game with 18. Players crossed the plate a record 29 times in the highest-scoring World Series game in history on October 20, 1993, as the Blue Jays beat the Phillies 15–14 at Veterans Stadium in Game 4 of the 1993 World Series.
See also[edit]

List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders
Run differential

References[edit]



^ a b Baseball Explained, by Phillip Mahony. McFarland Books, 2014. See www.baseballexplained.com Archived 2014-08-13 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "MLB Teams and Baseball Encyclopedia – Baseball-Reference.com". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved 11 October 2015. 



External links[edit]

Yearly League Leaders & Records for Runs Scored. Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved 2009-10-08.







v
t
e


Baseball statistics



Batting



Batting average
On-base percentage
Slugging percentage
Hit

Single
Double
Triple
Home run
Extra-base hit


Grand slam
RBI
Game-winning RBI
Walk
Bunt
Sacrifice bunt
Sacrifice fly
On-base plus slugging





Base running



Run
Stolen base
Stolen base percentage
Caught stealing





Pitching



Win–loss record
Innings pitched
Pitchers of record
Save
Hold
Run

Earned


ERA
Strikeout
Walk
Perfect game
No-hitter
WHIP
BB/9
K/9
Quality start
Complete game
Shutout
Wild pitch





Fielding



Fielding percentage
Assist
Putout
Error
Fielder's choice
Defensive indifference
Passed ball





Sabermetrics



Adjusted ERA+
Base runs
Batting park factor
Catcher's ERA
Defensive Runs Saved
Extrapolated Runs
Game score
Isolated Power
Range factor
Runs created
Secondary average
NERD
Out of zone plays made
Ultimate zone rating
Weighted on-base average
Wins Above Replacement
Win probability added
Win Shares












v
t
e


Baseball concepts




Outline, Glossary



Rules



Rules of baseball
Ground rules
Infield fly rule
Interference





Field



Backstop
Baseball diamond
Batter's box
Batter's eye
Bullpen
Dugout
Foul pole
Foul territory
Infield
On-deck circle
Outfield
Warning track





Equipment



Ball
Bat
Batting cage
Batting glove
Batting helmet
Cap
Doughnut
Glove (defense)
Pitching machine
Protective cup
Shin guard
Stirrups
Uniform
Uniform number





Game process



Batting order
Extra innings
Innings
On-deck
Out
Positions
Run
Seventh-inning stretch





Batting



At bat
Baltimore chop
Bat flip
Chinese home run
Batting count
Bunt
Checked swing
Cleanup hitter
Designated hitter
Double
Double switch
Foul ball
Foul tip
Golden sombrero
Grand slam
Ground rule double
Hat trick
Hit
Hit and run
Hit by pitch
Hitting for the cycle
Home run
Infield hit
Inside-the-park home run
Leadoff hitter
Lefty-righty switch
Line drive
Moonshot
Plate appearance
Platoon system
Pull hitter
Sacrifice bunt
Sacrifice fly
Single
Slap bunt
Strikeout
Strike zone
Sweet spot
Switch hitter
Triple
Walk
Walk-off home run





Pitching



Balk
Beanball
Breaking ball
Brushback pitch
Changeup
Curveball
Eephus
Fastball
Full count
Inside pitching
Intentional walk
Knuckleball
No-hitter
Passed ball
Perfect game
Pitch count
Pitchout
Quick pitch
Screwball
Shutout
Slider
Spitball
Strikeout
Striking out the side
Time of pitch
Wild pitch





Base running



Balk
Bases loaded
Caught stealing
Contact play
Hit and run
Left on base
Obstruction
Safe
Scoring position
Slide
Small ball
Squeeze play
Stolen base
Tag up





Fielding
(positioning)



Appeal play
Assist
Blocking the plate
Catch
Defensive indifference
Double play
Error
Fielder's choice
Fifth infielder
Force play
Fourth out
Hidden ball trick
In-between hop
Infield fly rule
Infield shift
Interference
Pickoff
Putout
Rundown
Tag out
Triple play

unassisted


Uncaught third strike
Wall climb
Wheel play





Miscellaneous



Baseball statistics
Bench jockey
Bench-clearing brawl
Dead ball
Jargon
In flight
Pepper
Scorekeeping
Series
Shagging
Slump
Streak (losing)
Streak (winning)









 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Run_(baseball)&oldid=814618345"					Categories: Baseball rulesBaserunning statisticsBaseball terminologyScoring (sport)Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing additional references from July 2013All articles needing additional references