For other uses, see Running back (disambiguation).






This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (September 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The running back playing halfback in a typical I formation.


A running back (RB) is an American and Canadian football position, a member of the offensive backfield. The primary roles of a running back are to receive handoffs from the quarterback for a rushing play, to catch passes from out of the backfield, and to block.[1] There are usually one or two running backs on the field for a given play, depending on the offensive formation. A running back may be a halfback (in certain contexts also referred to as a tailback), a wingback or a fullback. A running back will sometimes be called a "feature back" if he is the team's starting running back.



Contents


1 Halfback/tailback
2 Fullback
3 Characteristics of a running back

3.1 Height and weight
3.2 Receiving ability
3.3 Blocking
3.4 Goal line backs
3.5 Kick and punt returners


4 References
5 External links



Halfback/tailback[edit]
Main article: Halfback (American football)




A running back turns up the field in an attempt to reach the end zone.


The halfback (HB) or tailback (TB) position is responsible for carrying the ball on the majority of running plays, and may frequently be used as a receiver on short passing plays.
In the modern game, an effective halfback must have a blend of both quickness and agility as a runner, as well as sure hands and good vision up-field as a receiver. Quarterbacks depend on halfbacks as a safety valve receiver when primary targets downfield are covered or when they are under pressure. Occasionally, halfbacks line up as additional wide receivers.
When not serving either of these functions, the primary responsibility of a halfback is to aid the offensive linemen in blocking, either to protect the quarterback or another player carrying the football. If a team uses a Wildcat formation, often the halfback is the one who receives the snap directly instead of the quarterback. As a trick play, running backs are occasionally used to pass the ball on a halfback option play or halfback pass.
The difference between halfback and tailback is the position of the player in the team's offensive formation. In historical formations, the halfback lined up approximately halfway between the line of scrimmage and the fullback (similarly, quarterbacks lined up a quarter of the distance between the line of scrimmage and the fullback). Because the halfback is usually the team's main ball carrier (while the fullback is primarily a blocker), modern offensive formations have positioned the halfback behind the fullback (at the "tail end" of the formation), to take advantage of the fullback's blocking abilities. As a result, some systems or playbooks will call for a tailback as opposed to a halfback.
In Canadian football, the term tailback is often used interchangeably with running back, while the use of the term halfback is often exclusively reserved for the defensive halfback, which refers to the defensive back halfway between the linebackers and the cornerbacks.
Fullback[edit]
Main article: Fullback (American football)




John Riggins


In most modern college and professional football schemes, fullbacks (FB) carry the ball infrequently, instead using their stronger physiques as primary "lead blockers." On most running plays, the fullback leads the halfback, attempting to block potential tacklers before they reach the ball carrier.
When fullbacks are called upon to carry the ball, the situation typically calls for gaining a short amount of yardage, as the fullback can use his bulkiness to avoid being tackled early. Fullbacks are sometimes receivers for passing plays, although most plays call for the fullback to block any defensive players that make it past the offensive line, a skill referred to as "blitz pickup". Fullbacks are technically running backs, but today the term "running back" is usually used in referring to the halfback or tailback. Although modern fullbacks are rarely used as ball carriers, in previous offensive schemes fullbacks would be the designated ball carriers.
In high school football, where player sizes vary greatly, fullbacks are still frequently used as ball carriers. In high school and college offenses, the triple option scheme uses the fullback as a primary ball carrier. The fullback plays a unique role by establishing an inside running threat on every play. College teams such as Georgia Tech and Air Force have employed the triple option scheme.
While in years past the fullback lined up on the field for almost every offensive play, teams often opt to replace the fullback with an additional wide receiver or a tight end in modern football. Fullbacks in the National Football League rarely carry or catch the ball since they are used almost exclusively as blockers. Fullbacks are also still used occasionally as rushers on plays when a short gain is needed for a first-down or touchdown. Pro Football Hall of Fame members Jim Brown, Marion Motley, Franco Harris, John Riggins, and Larry Csonka were fullbacks.
Characteristics of a running back[edit]
Height and weight[edit]




Darren Sproles, a "scat back"


There is a diversity in those who play at the running back position. At one extreme are smaller (5'4"–5'10"), shiftier players. These quick, agile, and elusive running backs are often called "scat backs" because their low center of gravity and maneuverability allow them to dodge tacklers. Running backs known for their elusiveness include Red Grange, Hugh McElhenny, Gale Sayers, and Barry Sanders.[2]
At the other extreme are "power backs:" bigger, stronger players who can break through tackles using brute strength and raw power. They are usually slower runners compared to other backs, and typically run straight ahead (or "North-and-South" in football terminology) rather than dodging to the outside edges of the playing field. Hall of Famers Earl Campbell, Bronko Nagurski, John Riggins, and Larry Csonka, as well as NFL all-time leading rusher Emmitt Smith, were considered power running backs.[3]
Receiving ability[edit]
Over the years, NFL running backs have been used as receivers out of the backfield. On passing plays, a running back will often run a "safe route," such as a hook or a flat route, that gives a quarterback a target when all other receivers are covered or when the quarterback feels pressured. Hall of Famer Lenny Moore was a halfback who played primarily as a pass receiver.[4]
Some teams have a specialist "third down back," who is skilled at catching passes or better at pass blocking and "picking up the blitz," and thus is often put in the game on third down and long. It can also be used to fool the defense by making them think it is being put into the game for a pass play, when the play is actually a run.
Blocking[edit]
Running backs are also required to help the offensive line in passing situations, and, in the case of the fullback, running plays. Running backs will often block blitzing linebackers or safeties on passing plays when the offensive line is occupied with the defensive linemen. On running plays, the fullback will often attempt to tear a hole in the offensive line for the running back to run through. Effective blocking backs are usually key components for a running back's success. On passing plays, a running back will stay back to help block and pick up the blitz.
Goal line backs[edit]
Many teams also have a running back designated as a "goal line back" or "short yardage specialist". This running back comes into the game in short yardage situations when the offense needs only a little bit of yardage to get a first down or a touchdown. They also come into the game when the offense nears the goal line. Normally when an offense gets inside the 5-yard line it sends in its goal line formation, which usually includes eight blockers, a quarterback, a running back, and a fullback. The closer it is to the goal line the more likely it is to use this formation. If a certain running back is used often near the goal line he may be called the "goal line back." Short yardage and goal line backs often are power backs who are not prone to fumbling. Their job is to get the first down or touchdown by muscling through or pushing a large mass of defenders to push their way to the designated area.
Kick and punt returners[edit]
Running backs are sometimes called upon to return punts and kickoffs, a role usually filled by wide receivers and defensive backs, such as cornerbacks, who are generally the fastest players on the team. A running back, Brian Mitchell, currently holds the NFL records for career kickoff return yards (14,014 yards) and career punt return yards (4,999 yards).
References[edit]


^ http://www.dummies.com/how-to/content/what-the-running-backs-do-in-a-football-game.html
^ "Top 10 most elusive runners in NFL history". NFL.com. National Football League. May 28, 2008. Retrieved October 14, 2016. 
^ Burke, Chris (March 5, 2013). "Top 25 Power Running Backs Of All Time". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved October 14, 2016. 
^ "Lenny Moore Bio". profootballhof.com. Pro Football Hall of Fame. Retrieved October 14, 2016. 


External links[edit]

Football 101: Basic Football positions



Positions in American football and Canadian football


Offense (Skill position)

Defense

Special teams


Linemen
Guard, Tackle, Center
Linemen
Tackle, End
Kicking players
Placekicker, Punter, Kickoff specialist


Quarterback (Dual-threat, Game manager, System)
Linebacker
Snapping
Long snapper, Holder


Backs
Halfback/Tailback, Fullback, H-back, Wingback, Triple-threat
Backs
Cornerback, Safety, Halfback
Returning
Punt returner, Kick returner, Jammer


Receivers
Wide receiver (Eligible), Tight end, Slotback, End
Nickelback, Dimeback
Tackling
Gunner, Upback, Utility


Formations (List) — Nomenclature — Strategy








v
t
e


Gridiron football concepts



Codes



American

Glossary
History

Early
Modern


Rules


Canadian

American–Canadian comparison
Burnside rules
Glossary


Arena
Indoor
9-man
8-man
6-man
Flag
Touch
Street/Backyard
Powderpuff
Wheelchair
Rules of gridiron football codes





Levels of play



Youth/midget

Pop Warner
AYF


High school

Varsity
Junior varsity


College

Club
Sprint


Semi-pro
Professional

Practice squad


Women's
International





Field




Lines



Yard lines

Hash marks
Goal line
Sidelines


Line of scrimmage
Field goal range





Spaces



End zone
Red zone
Neutral zone
Coffin corner
Flat
Gap
Hole
Pocket








Scoring



Touchdown
One-point conversion
Two-point conversion
Field goal
Safety
Single (rouge)





Turnovers



Fumble
Interception
Muffed punt
Turnover on downs





Downs



First down
Three-and-out
Fourth down conversion
Dead ball





Play clock



Timeout
Kneel
Spike
Time warnings

3 min.
2 min.
1 min.


Clock management
Running out the clock
Untimed play
Garbage time





Statistics



Carry
Completion
Rushing yards
Passing yards
Passer rating
Total quarterback rating
Reception
Receiving yards
Pass deflected
Sack
Return yards
Total offense
Yards after catch
Yards from scrimmage
All-purpose yardage
Touchdown pass





Practice



Two-a-days
Oklahoma drill
Three-cone drill
Film session





Officiating



Official (American, Canadian)
Chain crew
Penalty
Penalty flag
Instant replay





Miscellaneous



Ball
Coaching tree
Concussions
Equipment
12th man
Letterman
Overtime
Running up the score
Touchdown celebration
Gatorade shower
Tuck rule
Uniform number











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Running_back&oldid=818472358"					Categories: American football positionsAmerican football running backsHidden categories: Articles that may contain original research from September 2007All articles that may contain original research