This article is about the aircraft takeoff and landing area. For other uses, see Runway (disambiguation).
"Landing strip" and "RWY" redirect here. For the pubic hairstyle, see Bikini waxing. For the audio/video connectors, see RCA connector.
For other uses, see Roll way.




A runway at Palm Springs International Airport






A Phenom 300 from behind at one end of a runway


According to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), a runway is a "defined rectangular area on a land aerodrome prepared for the landing and takeoff of aircraft". Runways may be a man-made surface (often asphalt, concrete, or a mixture of both) or a natural surface (grass, dirt, gravel, ice, or salt).[citation needed]



Contents


1 Naming
2 Declared distances
3 Sections of a runway
4 Runway markings

4.1 National variants


5 Runway lighting

5.1 History
5.2 Technical specifications
5.3 Control of lighting system


6 Runway safety
7 Pavement

7.1 Pavement surface
7.2 Surface type codes


8 Runway length
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Naming[edit]




Font and size of numbers and letters






Runway 22






FAA airport diagram at O'Hare International Airport. From left to right, runways 14/32 slant down, runways 4/22 slant up, runways 9R/27L, 9L/27R and 10/28 are horizontal.


Runways are named by a number between 01 and 36, which is generally the magnetic azimuth of the runway's heading in decadegrees. This heading differs from true north by the local magnetic declination. A runway numbered 09 points east (90°), runway 18 is south (180°), runway 27 points west (270°) and runway 36 points to the north (360° rather than 0°).[1] When taking off from or landing on runway 09, a plane would be heading 90° (east).
A runway can normally be used in both directions, and is named for each direction separately: e.g., "runway 33" in one direction is "runway 15" when used in the other. The two numbers usually differ by 18 (= 180°).
If there is more than one runway pointing in the same direction (parallel runways), each runway is identified by appending Left (L), Center (C) and Right (R) to the number to identify its position (when facing its direction) — for example, Runways One Five Left (15L), One Five Center (15C), and One Five Right (15R). Runway Zero Three Left (03L) becomes Runway Two One Right (21R) when used in the opposite direction (derived from adding 18 to the original number for the 180 degrees when approaching from the opposite direction). In some countries, if parallel runways are too close to each other, regulations mandate that only one runway may be used at a time under certain conditions (usually adverse weather).
At large airports with four or more parallel runways (for example, at Los Angeles, Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta, Denver, Dallas-Fort Worth and Orlando) some runway identifiers are shifted by 10 degrees to avoid the ambiguity that would result with more than three parallel runways. For example, in Los Angeles, this system results in runways 6L, 6R, 7L, and 7R, even though all four runways are actually parallel (approximately 69 degrees). At Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, there are five parallel runways, named 17L, 17C, 17R, 18L, and 18R, all oriented at a heading of 175.4 degrees. Occasionally, an airport with only 3 parallel runways may use different runway identifiers, for example when a third parallel runway was opened at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport in 2000 to the south of existing 8R/26L, rather than confusingly becoming the "new" 8R/26L it was instead designated 7R/25L, with the former 8R/26L becoming 7L/25R and 8L/26R becoming 8/26.
For clarity in radio communications, each digit in the runway name is pronounced individually: runway three six, runway one four, etc. A leading zero, for example in "runway zero six" or "runway zero one left", is included for all ICAO and some U.S. military airports (such as Edwards Air Force Base). However, most U.S. civil aviation airports drop the leading zero as required by FAA regulation.[2] This also includes some military airfields such as Cairns Army Airfield. This American anomaly may lead to inconsistencies in conversations between American pilots and controllers in other countries. It is very common in a country such as Canada for a controller to clear an incoming American aircraft to, for example, runway 04, and the pilot read back the clearance as runway 4. In flight simulation programs those of American origin might apply U.S. usage to airports around the world. For example, runway 05 at Halifax will appear on the program as the single digit 5 rather than 05.




Runway sign at Madrid-Barajas Airport, Spain


Runway designations change over time because the magnetic poles slowly drift on the Earth's surface and the magnetic bearing will change. Depending on the airport location and how much drift takes place, it may be necessary over time to change the runway designation. As runways are designated with headings rounded to the nearest 10 degrees, this will affect some runways more than others. For example, if the magnetic heading of a runway is 233 degrees, it would be designated Runway 23. If the magnetic heading changed downwards by 5 degrees to 228, the Runway would still be Runway 23. If on the other hand the original magnetic heading was 226 (Runway 23), and the heading decreased by only 2 degrees to 224, the runway should become Runway 22. Because the drift itself is quite slow, runway designation changes are uncommon, and not welcomed, as they require an accompanying change in aeronautical charts and descriptive documents. When runway designations do change, especially at major airports, it is often changed at night as taxiway signs need to be changed and the huge numbers at each end of the runway need to be repainted to the new runway designators. In July 2009 for example, London Stansted Airport in the United Kingdom changed its runway designations from 05/23 to 04/22 during the night.
For fixed-wing aircraft it is advantageous to perform takeoffs and landings into the wind to reduce takeoff or landing roll and reduce the ground speed needed to attain flying speed. Larger airports usually have several runways in different directions, so that one can be selected that is most nearly aligned with the wind. Airports with one runway are often constructed to be aligned with the prevailing wind. Compiling a wind rose is in fact one of the preliminary steps taken in constructing airport runways.[3] Note that wind direction is given as the direction the wind is coming from: a plane taking off from runway 09 would be facing east, directly into an "east wind" blowing from 090 degrees.
Declared distances[edit]
Runway dimensions vary from as small as 245 m (804 ft) long and 8 m (26 ft) wide in smaller general aviation airports, to 5,500 m (18,045 ft) long and 80 m (262 ft) wide at large international airports built to accommodate the largest jets, to the huge 11,917 m × 274 m (39,098 ft × 899 ft) lake bed runway 17/35 at Edwards Air Force Base in California – a landing site for the retired Space Shuttle.[4]
Takeoff and landing distances available are given using one of the following terms:

TORA[5]
Takeoff Run Available – The length of runway declared available and suitable for the ground run of an airplane taking off.[6]



TODA[5]
Takeoff Distance Available – The length of the takeoff run available plus the length of the clearway, if clearway is provided.[6]
(The clearway length allowed must lie within the aerodrome or airport boundary. According to the Federal Aviation Regulations and Joint Aviation Requirements (JAR) TODA is the lesser of TORA plus clearway or 1.5 times TORA).



ASDA[5]
Accelerate-Stop Distance Available – The length of the takeoff run available plus the length of the stopway, if stopway is provided.[6]


LDA[5]
Landing Distance Available – The length of runway that is declared available and suitable for the ground run of an airplane landing.[7]


EMDA[8]
Emergency Distance Available – LDA (or TORA) plus a stopway.

Sections of a runway[edit]
 There are runway markings.[9]

The runway thresholds are markings across the runway that denote the beginning and end of the designated space for landing and takeoff under non-emergency conditions.[10]
The runway safety area is the cleared, smoothed and graded area around the paved runway. It is kept free from any obstacles that might impede flight or ground roll of aircraft.
The runway is the surface from threshold to threshold, which typically features threshold markings, numbers, and centerlines, but not overrun areas at both ends.
Blast pads, also known as overrun areas or stopways, are often constructed just before the start of a runway where jet blast produced by large planes during the takeoff roll could otherwise erode the ground and eventually damage the runway. Overrun areas are also constructed at the end of runways as emergency space to slowly stop planes that overrun the runway on a landing gone wrong, or to slowly stop a plane on a rejected takeoff or a takeoff gone wrong. Blast pads are often not as strong as the main paved surface of the runway and are marked with yellow chevrons. Planes are not allowed to taxi, take off or land on blast pads, except in an emergency.



Displaced thresholds may be used for taxiing, takeoff, and landing rollout, but not for touchdown. A displaced threshold often exists because obstacles just before the runway, runway strength, or noise restrictions may make the beginning section of runway unsuitable for landings.[11] It is marked with white paint arrows that lead up to the beginning of the landing portion of the runway.


Runway markings[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



There are runway markings and signs on most large runways. Larger runways have a distance remaining sign (black box with white numbers). This sign uses a single number to indicate the remaining distance of the runway in thousands of feet. For example, a 7 will indicate 7,000 ft (2,134 m) remaining. The runway threshold is marked by a line of green lights.

There are three types of runways:

Visual runways are used at small airstrips and are usually just a strip of grass, gravel, ice, asphalt, or concrete. Although there are usually no markings on a visual runway, they may have threshold markings, designators, and centerlines. Additionally, they do not provide an instrument-based landing procedure; pilots must be able to see the runway to use it. Also, radio communication may not be available and pilots must be self-reliant.
Non-precision instrument runways are often used at small- to medium-size airports. These runways, depending on the surface, may be marked with threshold markings, designators, centerlines, and sometimes a 1,000 ft (305 m) mark (known as an aiming point, sometimes installed at 1,500 ft (457 m)). They provide horizontal position guidance to planes on instrument approach via Non-directional beacon, VHF omnidirectional range, Global Positioning System, etc.
Precision instrument runways, which are found at medium- and large-size airports, consist of a blast pad/stopway (optional, for airports handling jets), threshold, designator, centerline, aiming point, and 500 ft (152 m), 1,000 ft (305 m)/1,500 ft (457 m), 2,000 ft (610 m), 2,500 ft (762 m), and 3,000 ft (914 m) touchdown zone marks. Precision runways provide both horizontal and vertical guidance for instrument approaches.

National variants[edit]

In Australia, Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom,[12] as well as some other countries or territories (Hong Kong and Macau) all 3-stripe and 2-stripe touchdown zones for precision runways are replaced with one-stripe touchdown zones.
In some South American countries like Colombia, Ecuador and Peru one 3-stripe is added and a 2-stripe is replaced with the aiming point.
Some European countries replace the aiming point with a 3-stripe touchdown zone.
Runways in Norway have yellow markings instead of the usual white ones. This also occurs in some airports in Japan, Sweden, and Finland. The yellow markings are used to ensure better contrast against snow.
Runways may have different types on each end. To cut costs, many airports do not install precision guidance equipment on both ends. Runways with one precision end and any other type of end can install the full set of touchdown zones, even if some are past the midpoint. Runways with precision markings on both ends omit touchdown zones within 900 ft (274 m) of the midpoint, to avoid ambiguity over with which end the zone is associated.

Runway lighting[edit]
History[edit]




A runway landing light from 1945


The first runway lighting appeared in 1930 at Cleveland Municipal Airport (now known as Cleveland Hopkins International Airport) in Cleveland, Ohio.[citation needed] A line of lights on an airfield or elsewhere to guide aircraft in taking off or coming in to land or an illuminated runway is sometimes also known as a Flare Path.
Technical specifications[edit]




Night runway view from A320 cockpit






Ground light at Bremen Airport


Runway lighting is used at airports that allow night landings. Seen from the air, runway lights form an outline of the runway. A runway may have some or all of the following:[13]

Runway end identifier lights (REIL) – unidirectional (facing approach direction) or omnidirectional pair of synchronized flashing lights installed at the runway threshold, one on each side.
Runway end lights – a pair of four lights on each side of the runway on precision instrument runways, these lights extend along the full width of the runway. These lights show green when viewed by approaching aircraft and red when seen from the runway.
Runway edge lights – white elevated lights that run the length of the runway on either side. On precision instrument runways, the edge-lighting becomes amber in the last 2,000 ft (610 m) of the runway, or last third of the runway, whichever is less. Taxiways are differentiated by being bordered by blue lights, or by having green centre lights, depending on the width of the taxiway, and the complexity of the taxi pattern.
Runway centerline lighting system (RCLS) – lights embedded into the surface of the runway at 50 ft (15 m) intervals along the runway centerline on some precision instrument runways. White except the last 900 m (3,000 ft): alternate white and red for next 600 m (1,969 ft) and red for last 300 m (984 ft).[13]
Touchdown zone lights (TDZL[5]) – rows of white light bars (with three in each row) at 30 or 60 m (98 or 197 ft) intervals on either side of the centerline for 900 m (3,000 ft).[13]
Taxiway centerline lead-off lights – installed along lead-off markings, alternate green and yellow lights embedded into the runway pavement. It starts with green light at about the runway centerline to the position of first centerline light beyond the Hold-Short markings on the taxiway.
Taxiway centerline lead-on lights – installed the same way as taxiway centerline lead-off Lights, but directing airplane traffic in the opposite direction.
Land and hold short lights – a row of white pulsating lights installed across the runway to indicate hold short position on some runways that are facilitating land and hold short operations (LAHSO).[13]
Approach lighting system (ALS) – a lighting system installed on the approach end of an airport runway and consists of a series of lightbars, strobe lights, or a combination of the two that extends outward from the runway end.

According to Transport Canada's regulations,[14] the runway-edge lighting must be visible for at least 2 mi (3 km). Additionally, a new system of advisory lighting, runway status lights, is currently being tested in the United States.[15]
The edge lights must be arranged such that:

the minimum distance between lines is 75 ft (23 m), and maximum is 200 ft (61 m);
the maximum distance between lights within each line is 200 ft (61 m);
the minimum length of parallel lines is 1,400 ft (427 m);
the minimum number of lights in the line is 8.[16]




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Runway lights.






Approach lighting system at Berlin Tegel Airport


Control of lighting system[edit]
Typically the lights are controlled by a control tower, a flight service station or another designated authority. Some airports/airfields (particularly uncontrolled ones) are equipped with pilot-controlled lighting, so that pilots can temporarily turn on the lights when the relevant authority is not available.[17] This avoids the need for automatic systems or staff to turn the lights on at night or in other low visibility situations. This also avoids the cost of having the lighting system on for extended periods. Smaller airports may not have lighted runways or runway markings. Particularly at private airfields for light planes, there may be nothing more than a windsock beside a landing strip.
Runway safety[edit]
Main article: Runway safety
Types of runway safety incidents include:

Runway excursion - an incident involving only a single aircraft, where it makes an inappropriate exit from the runway (e.g. Thai Airways Flight 679).
Runway overrun (also known as an overshoot) - a type of excursion where the aircraft is unable to stop before the end of the runway (e.g. Air France Flight 358).
Runway incursion - an incident involving incorrect presence of a vehicle, person or another aircraft on the runway (e.g. Tenerife airport disaster (Pan American World Airways Flight 1736 and KLM Flight 4805)).
Runway confusion - an aircraft makes use of the wrong runway for landing or takeoff (e.g. Singapore Airlines Flight 006, Western Airlines Flight 2605).
Runway undershoot - an aircraft that lands short of the runway (e.g. British Airways Flight 38, Asiana Airlines Flight 214).

Pavement[edit]







This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Runway surface at Congonhas Airport in São Paulo, Brazil. The grooves increase friction and reduce the risk of hydroplaning.


The choice of material used to construct the runway depends on the use and the local ground conditions. For a major airport, where the ground conditions permit, the most satisfactory type of pavement for long-term minimum maintenance is concrete.[clarification needed] Although certain airports have used reinforcement [clarification needed] in concrete pavements, this is generally found to be unnecessary, with the exception of expansion joints across the runway where a dowel assembly, which permits relative movement of the concrete slabs, is placed in the concrete. Where it can be anticipated that major settlements of the runway will occur over the years because of unstable ground conditions, it is preferable to install asphaltic concrete surface, as it is easier to patch on a periodic basis. For fields with very low traffic of light planes, it is possible to use a sod surface. Some runways also make use of salt flat runways.
For pavement designs, borings are taken to determine the subgrade condition, and based on the relative bearing capacity of the subgrade, the specifications are established. For heavy-duty commercial aircraft, the pavement thickness, no matter what the top surface, varies from 10 in (250 mm) to 4 ft (1 m), including subgrade.
Airport pavements have been designed by two methods. The first, Westergaard, is based on the assumption that the pavement is an elastic plate supported on a heavy fluid base with a uniform reaction coefficient known as the K value. Experience has shown that the K values on which the formula was developed are not applicable for newer aircraft with very large footprint pressures.
The second method is called the California bearing ratio and was developed in the late 1940s. It is an extrapolation of the original test results, which are not applicable to modern aircraft pavements or to modern aircraft landing gear. Some designs were made by a mixture of these two design theories. A more recent method is an analytical system based on the introduction of vehicle response as an important design parameter. Essentially it takes into account all factors, including the traffic conditions, service life, materials used in the construction, and, especially important, the dynamic response of the vehicles using the landing area.
Because airport pavement construction is so expensive, manufacturers aim to minimize aircraft stresses on the pavement. Manufacturers of the larger planes design landing gear so that the weight of the plane is supported on larger and more numerous tires. Attention is also paid to the characteristics of the landing gear itself, so that adverse effects on the pavement are minimized. Sometimes it is possible to reinforce a pavement for higher loading by applying an overlay of asphaltic concrete or portland cement concrete that is bonded to the original slab. Post-tensioning concrete has been developed for the runway surface. This permits the use of thinner pavements and should result in longer concrete pavement life. Because of the susceptibility of thinner pavements to frost heave, this process is generally applicable only where there is no appreciable frost action.
Pavement surface[edit]




A Mahan Air Airbus A310 using reverse thrust in rainy weather at Düsseldorf Airport


Runway pavement surface is prepared and maintained to maximize friction for wheel braking. To minimize hydroplaning following heavy rain, the pavement surface is usually grooved so that the surface water film flows into the grooves and the peaks between grooves will still be in contact with the aircraft tires. To maintain the macrotexturing built into the runway by the grooves, maintenance crews engage in airfield rubber removal or hydrocleaning in order to meet required FAA friction levels.
 Surface type codes[edit]




The grass airstrip on the Badminton estate, Badminton, South Gloucestershire, England. The strip is very simple—no lighting, no centreline and no approach aids. The edge is marked by simple posts.


In aviation charts, the surface type is usually abbreviated to a three-letter code.
The most common hard surface types are asphalt and concrete. The most common soft surface types are grass and gravel.


* ASP
Asphalt


* BIT
Bitumenous asphalt or tarmac


* BRI
Bricks (no longer in use, covered with asphalt or concrete now)


* CLA
Clay


* COM
Composite


* CON
Concrete


* COP
Composite


* COR
Coral (fine crushed coral reef structures)


* GRE
Graded or rolled earth, grass on graded earth


* GRS
Grass or earth not graded or rolled


* GVL
Gravel


* ICE
Ice


* LAT
Laterite


* MAC
Macadam


* PEM
Partially concrete, asphalt or bitumen-bound macadam


* PER
Permanent surface, details unknown


* PSP
Marston Matting (derived from pierced/perforated steel planking)


* SAN
Sand


* SMT
Sommerfeld Tracking


* SNO
Snow


* U
Unknown surface


Water runways do not have a type code as they do not have physical markings, and are thus not registered as specific runways.
Runway length[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: List of longest runways
A runway of at least 6,000 ft (1,829 m) in length is usually adequate for aircraft weights below approximately 200,000 lb (90,718 kg). Larger aircraft including widebodies will usually require at least 8,000 ft (2,438 m) at sea level and somewhat more at higher altitude airports. International widebody flights, which carry substantial amounts of fuel and are therefore heavier, may also have landing requirements of 10,000 ft (3,048 m) or more and takeoff requirements of 13,000 ft (3,962 m).
At sea level, 10,000 ft (3,048 m) can be considered an adequate length to land virtually any aircraft. For example, at O'Hare International Airport, when landing simultaneously on 4L/22R and 10/28 or parallel 9R/27L, it is routine for arrivals from East Asia, which would normally be vectored for 4L/22R (7,500 ft (2,286 m)) or 9R/27L (7,967 ft (2,428 m)) to request 28R (13,001 ft (3,963 m)). It is always accommodated, although occasionally with a delay. Another example is that the Luleå Airport in Sweden was extended to 10,990 ft (3,350 m) to allow any fully loaded freight aircraft to take off.
An aircraft taking off at a higher altitude must do so at reduced weight due to decreased density of air at higher altitudes, which reduces engine power. An aircraft must also take off at a reduced weight in hotter or more humid conditions (see density altitude). Most commercial aircraft carry manufacturer's tables showing the adjustments required for a given temperature.




A parachute is used to slow down craft, in this case the Space Shuttle


The world's longest paved runway, at Qamdo Bamda Airport in Tibet (China), has a total length of 5,500 m (18,045 ft).







In the 1980s, Leeds Bradford International Airport extended its runway to take wide bodied planes by building an overpass over the A658 road.







Play media



Road crossing of (Shetland) A970 with Sumburgh airport's runway. The movable barrier closes when aircraft land or take off.




See also[edit]


Engineered materials arrestor system
Instrument landing system (ILS)
List of airports
Pavement classification number (PCN)
Precision approach path indicator
Runway visual range
Tabletop runway
Visual approach slope indicator


References[edit]


^ Federal Aviation Administration Aeronautical Information Manual, Chapter 2, Section 3 Airport Marking Aids and Signs part 3b Archived 2012-01-18 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "FAA Advisory Circular AC 150/5340-1L - Standards for Airport Markings; Chaper 2.3.e.(2) [page 17] states "A single-digit runway landing designation number is never preceded by a zero."". 
^ [1] Retrieved on 2012-02-24.
^ Edwards AFB Rogers Lakebed Airport Diagram (PDF), effective 7 Dec 2017. Federal Aviation Administration.
^ a b c d e "Order JO 7340.1Z: Contractions" (PDF). Federal Aviation Administration. March 15, 2007. 
^ a b c Airplanes: Turbine engine powered: Takeoff limitations, retrieved 2009-10-04 
^ Airplanes: Turbine engine powered: Landing limitations: Destination airports, retrieved 2009-10-04 
^ Swatton, Peter J. (2000). Aircraft Performance Theory for Pilots (illustrated, reprint ed.). Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell Science Ltd. p. vii. ISBN 0632055693. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ FAA AC 150/5340-1L – Standards for Airport Markings pages 13 and following
^ [2][dead link]
^ Pilot's Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge FAA-H-8083-25A, p. 306
^ CAP637, Visual aids handbook, chapter 2, page 3, Issue 2, May 2007, Civil Aviation Authority
^ a b c d "Aerodrome Design and Operations" (PDF) (3 ed.). July 1999. 
^ "§7.8 Runway Lighting". TP 14371: Transport Canada Aeronautical Information Manual. 
^ FAA Installs Runway Safety Warning System at LAX, retrieved 2010-05-14 
^ Transport Canada Aeronautical Information Manual Archived 2008-06-17 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "§7.18 Aircraft Radio Control of Aerodrome Lighting". TP 14371: Transport Canada Aeronautical Information Manual. 


External links[edit]



Look up runway in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Runway.



United States Aeronautical Information Manual – Federal Aviation Administration (published yearly)
United States Airport/Facility Directory (d-AFD) – Federal Aviation Administration (published every 56 days)
United States Terminal Procedures Publication/Airport Diagrams (d-TPP) – Federal Aviation Administration (published every 28 days)
North American Powered Parachute Federation
Visual Aids Handbook – Civil Aviation Authority







v
t
e


Commercial air travel



Airlines



Airline codes
Airline holding companies
Charter airlines
Low-cost airlines
Passenger airlines
Regional airlines





Alliances



Oneworld
SkyTeam
Star Alliance
Value Alliance
Vanilla Alliance
U-FLY Alliance





Trade groups



International (ACO
ATAG
IATA
IATAN
ISTAT)
United States (A4A
RAA)
Europe (AEA
EBAA
ELFAA
ERA)
Other regions (AACO
AAPA
AFRAA
RAAA)





Aircrew



Captain
First Officer
Second Officer
Third Officer
Flight attendant
Flight engineer
Loadmaster
Pilot
Purser
Deadheading





Airliner



Travel class

First class (aviation)
First class travel
Business
Premium economy
Economy


Aircraft cabin
Aircraft lavatory
Aircraft seat map
Airline meal
Airline seat
Buy on board
Crew rest compartment
In-flight entertainment
Inflight smoking
Galley
Sickness bag





Airport



Aerodrome
Airline hub
Airport check-in
Airport lounge
Airport rail link
Airport terminal
Airstair
Boarding
Domestic airport
Gate
International airport
Jet bridge
Low cost carrier terminal
Runway
Transit hotel





Customs / Immigration



Arrival card (Landing card)
Border control
Departure card
Passport
Timatic
Travel document
Visa





Environmental impact



Hypermobility
Impact on environment





Law



Air transport agreement

Bermuda Agreement (UK-US, 1946-78)
Bermuda II Agreement (UK-US, 1978-2008)
China-US
Cross-Strait charter (China-Taiwan)


Beijing Convention
Cape Town Treaty
Chicago Convention
Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives
European Common Aviation Area
Flight permit
Freedoms of the air
Hague Hijacking Convention
Hague Protocol
ICAO
Montreal Convention
Open skies (EU–US Open Skies Agreement)
Paris Convention of 1919
Rome Convention
Sabotage Convention
Tokyo Convention
Warsaw Convention





Luggage



Bag tag
Baggage allowance
Baggage carousel
Baggage cart
Baggage reclaim
Baggage handler
Baggage handling system
Checked baggage
Hand luggage
Lost luggage
Luggage lock





Safety



Air Navigation and Transport Act
Air rage
Air traffic control (ATC)
Aircraft safety card
Airport authority
Airport crash tender
Airport police
Airport security
Brace position
Evacuation slide
Flight recorder
National aviation authority
Overwing exits
Pre-flight safety demonstration
Sky marshal
Unruly aircraft passenger





Ticketing



Airline booking ploys
Airline reservations system
Airline ticket
Airline timetable
Bereavement flight
Boarding pass
Codeshare agreement
Continent pass
Electronic ticket
Fare basis code
Flight cancellation and delay
Frequent-flyer program
Government contract flight
One-way travel
Open-jaw ticket
Passenger name record
Red-eye flight
Round-the-world ticket
Standby
Tracking
Travel agency
Travel website





Groundcrew



Aircraft maintenance technician
Aircraft ground handler
Baggage handler
Flight dispatcher





Miscellaneous



Mile high club











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Runway&oldid=817364199"					Categories: Airport engineeringAirport infrastructureHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2017Articles needing additional references from February 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from July 2009Commons category with local link different than on WikidataArticles needing additional references from July 2009Articles with limited geographic scope from November 2009Articles with multiple maintenance issuesWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2009Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2010