




Russian Civil War



Clockwise from top: Soldiers of the Don Army in 1919; a White infantry division in March 1920; soldiers of the 1st Cavalry Army; Leon Trotsky in 1918; hanging of workers in Yekaterinoslav by the Austro-Hungarian Army, April 1918.





Date
7 November (25 October) 1917 – 25 October (12 October) 1922[1]


Location
Former Russian Empire, Mongolia, Tuva, Persia


Result

Victory for the Red Army in Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, South Caucasus, Central Asia, Tuva, and Mongolia;
Victory for pro-independence movements in Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland


Territorial
changes
Establishment of the Soviet Union; Independence of Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland[2]





Belligerents



 Soviet Russia and other Soviet republics

 Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine (1919–20)
 Left SR (until March 1918)
 Green armies (until 1919)

 White Movement

Including

 Provisional All-Russian Government
 Armed Forces of South Russia
 Siberian Army
 Komuch
 Don Army
 Kuban cossacks
 Alash Autonomy



Other new republics

Including

 Poland
 Finland
 Estonia
 Latvia
 Lithuania
 Ukraine
 Georgia
 Armenia
 Azerbaijan
 Mountain Republic
 Don Republic
 Kuban People's Republic
and other pro-independence movements



Allied Intervention

Including

 United Kingdom

 Canada
 Australia


 Japan
 Czechoslovakia
 Greece
 United States
 France
 Serbia
 Romania
 Italy
 China



Pro-German armies

Including

 Germany
 Landeswehr
 Freikorps
 West Russian Volunteer Army




Other factions

 Green armies (from 1919)
 Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine (1920–21)
 Kronstadt rebels
 Left SR (from March 1918)

 Basmachi
 Bukhara
 Khiva

 Ottoman Empire

 Mongolia





Commanders and leaders



 Vladimir Lenin
 Joseph Stalin
 Leon Trotsky
 Jukums Vācietis
 Sergey Kamenev

 Nestor Makhno
 Alexander Kolchak †
 Lavr Kornilov †
 Anton Denikin
 Pyotr Wrangel
 Nikolai Yudenich


Strength



5,427,273 (peak)[3]

103,000 Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine[citation needed]
2,400,000 White Russians


Casualties and losses


1,212,824 casualties (records incomplete)[4]
At least 1,500,000[citation needed]












v
t
e


Theaters of the Russian Civil War






October Revolution
Left-wing uprisings
Allied Intervention (Siberia, North Russia)


Northern


Vaga River
Bolshie Ozerki


Western


Finland
Heimosodat
Estonia
Latvia
Lithuania


Southern


Ukraine
West Ukraine
Poland
Ossetia
Georgia
Armenia and Azerbaijan

Soviet invasion of Azerbaijan


Tambov


Eastern


Yakutia


Central Asian


Basmachi









The Russian Civil War (Russian: Гражда́нская война́ в Росси́и, tr. Grazhdanskaya voyna v Rossiyi; November 1917 – October 1922)[1] was a multi-party war in the former Russian Empire immediately after the Russian Revolutions of 1917, as many factions vied to determine Russia's political future. The two largest combatant groups were the Red Army, fighting for the Bolshevik form of socialism led by Vladimir Lenin, and the loosely allied forces known as the White Army, which included diverse interests favoring monarchism, capitalism and alternative forms of socialism, each with democratic and antidemocratic variants. In addition, rival militant socialists and nonideological Green armies fought against both the Bolsheviks and the Whites. Eight foreign nations intervened against the Red Army, notably the Allied Forces and the pro-German armies.[5] The Red Army defeated the White Armed Forces of South Russia in Ukraine and the army led by Admiral Aleksandr Kolchak in Siberia in 1919. The remains of the White forces commanded by Pyotr Nikolayevich Wrangel were beaten in Crimea and evacuated in late 1920. Lesser battles of the war continued on the periphery for two more years, and minor skirmishes with the remnants of the White forces in the Far East continued well into 1923. The war ended in 1923 in the sense that Red control of the newly formed Soviet Union was now assured, although armed national resistance in Central Asia was not completely crushed until 1934. There were an estimated 7,000,000–12,000,000 casualties during the war, mostly civilians. The Russian Civil War has been described by some as the greatest national catastrophe that Europe had yet seen.[6]
Many pro-independence movements emerged after the break-up of the Russian Empire and fought in the war.[2] Several parts of the former Russian Empire—Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland—were established as sovereign states, with their own civil wars and wars of independence. The rest of the former Russian Empire was consolidated into the Soviet Union shortly afterwards.



Contents


1 Background

1.1 February Revolution
1.2 Formation of the Red Army
1.3 Anti-Bolshevik movement


2 Geography and chronology
3 Warfare

3.1 October Revolution
3.2 Initial anti-Bolshevik uprisings
3.3 Peace with the Central Powers
3.4 Ukraine, South Russia, and Caucasus 1918
3.5 Eastern Russia, Siberia and Far East of Russia, 1918
3.6 Central Asia 1918
3.7 Left SR uprising
3.8 Estonia, Latvia and Petrograd
3.9 Northern Russia 1919
3.10 Siberia 1919
3.11 South Russia 1919
3.12 Central Asia 1919
3.13 South Russia, Ukraine and Kronstadt 1920–21
3.14 Siberia and the Far East 1920–22


4 Aftermath

4.1 Ensuing rebellion
4.2 Casualties
4.3 Brief Timeline


5 In fiction

5.1 Literature
5.2 Film


6 See also
7 References

7.1 Citations
7.2 Bibliography


8 Further reading
9 External links



Background[edit]
February Revolution[edit]
Main article: February Revolution
After the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, the Russian Provisional Government was established during the February Revolution of 1917.
Formation of the Red Army[edit]
Main article: Red Army
From mid-1917 onwards, the Russian Army, the successor-organisation of the old Russian Imperial Army, started to disintegrate;[7] the Bolsheviks used the volunteer-based Red Guards as their main military force, augmented by an armed military component of the Cheka (the Bolshevik state-security apparatus). In January 1918, after significant Bolshevik reverses in combat, the future People's Commissar for Military and Naval Affairs Leon Trotsky headed the reorganization of the Red Guards into a Workers' and Peasants' Red Army in order to create a more effective fighting force. The Bolsheviks appointed political commissars to each unit of the Red Army to maintain morale and to ensure loyalty.
In June 1918, when it had become apparent that a revolutionary army composed solely of workers would not suffice, Trotsky instituted mandatory conscription of the rural peasantry into the Red Army.[8] The Bolsheviks overcame opposition of rural Russians to Red-Army conscription units by taking hostages and shooting them when necessary in order to force compliance,[9] exactly the same practices used by the White Army officers.[10] The Red Army utilized former Tsarist officers as "military specialists" (voenspetsy),[11] sometimes their families were taken hostage in order to ensure their loyalty.[12] At the start of the civil war, former Tsarist officers comprised three-quarters of the Red Army officer-corps.[12] By its end, 83% of all Red Army divisional and corps commanders were ex-Tsarist soldiers.[11]
Anti-Bolshevik movement[edit]
Main articles: White movement, Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine, Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War, Pro-independence movements in Russian Civil War, and Left-wing uprisings against the Bolsheviks
While resistance to the Red Guard began on the very day after the Bolshevik uprising, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk and the political ban [clarification needed] became a catalyst[13] for the formation of anti-Bolshevik groups both inside and outside Russia, pushing them into action against the new regime.
A loose confederation of anti-Bolshevik forces aligned against the Communist government, including landowners, republicans, conservatives, middle-class citizens, reactionaries, pro-monarchists, liberals, army generals, non-Bolshevik socialists who still had grievances and democratic reformists voluntarily united only in their opposition to Bolshevik rule. Their military forces, bolstered by forced conscriptions and terror[10] and by foreign influence and led by Gen. Yudenich, Adm. Kolchak and Gen. Denikin, became known as the White movement (sometimes referred to as the "White Army") and controlled significant parts of the former Russian Empire for most of the war.
A Ukrainian nationalist movement was active in Ukraine during the war. More significant was the emergence of an anarchist political and military movement known as the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine or the Anarchist Black Army led by Nestor Makhno. The Black Army, which counted numerous Jews and Ukrainian peasants in its ranks, played a key part in halting Gen. Denikin's White Army offensive towards Moscow during 1919, later ejecting White forces from Crimea.
The remoteness of the Volga Region, the Ural Region, Siberia and the Far East was favorable for the anti-Bolshevik forces, and the Whites set up a number of organizations in the cities of these regions. Some of the military forces were set up on the basis of clandestine officers' organizations in the cities.
The Czechoslovak Legions had been part of the Russian army and numbered around 30,000 troops by October 1917. They had an agreement with the new Bolshevik government to be evacuated from the Eastern Front via the port of Vladivostok to France. The transport from the Eastern Front to Vladivostok slowed down in the chaos, and the troops became dispersed all along the Trans-Siberian Railway. Under pressure from the Central Powers, Trotsky ordered the disarming and arrest of the legionaries, which created tensions with the Bolsheviks.
The Western Allies armed and supported opponents of the Bolsheviks. They were worried about (1) a possible Russo-German alliance, (2) the prospect of the Bolsheviks making good on their threats to default on Imperial Russia's massive foreign loans and (3) the possibility that the Communist revolutionary ideas would spread (a concern shared by many Central Powers). Hence, many of these countries expressed their support for the Whites, including the provision of troops and supplies. Winston Churchill declared that Bolshevism must be "strangled in its cradle".[14] The British and French had supported Russia during World War I on a massive scale with war materials. After the treaty, it looked like much of that material would fall into the hands of the Germans. Under this pretext began allied intervention in the Russian Civil War with the United Kingdom and France sending troops into Russian ports. There were violent clashes with troops loyal to the Bolsheviks.
The German Empire created several short-lived satellite buffer states within its sphere of influence after the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk: the "United Baltic Duchy", "Duchy of Courland and Semigallia", "Kingdom of Lithuania", "Kingdom of Poland", the "Belarusian People’s Republic", and the "Ukrainian State". Following the defeat of Germany in World War I in November 1918, these states were abolished.
Finland was the first republic that declared its independence from Russia in December 1917 and established itself in the ensuing Finnish Civil War from January–May 1918. The Second Polish Republic, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia formed their own armies immediately after the abolition of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty and the start of the Soviet westward offensive in November 1918.
Geography and chronology[edit]
Main articles: Southern Front of the Russian Civil War, North Russia Campaign, Eastern Front of the Russian Civil War, Yakut Revolt, and Finnish civil war
In the European part of Russia the war was fought across three main fronts: the eastern, the southern and the northwestern. It can also be roughly split into the following periods.




Anti-Bolshevik Volunteer Army in South Russia, January 1918


The first period lasted from the Revolution until the Armistice. Already on the date of the Revolution, Cossack Gen. Kaledin refused to recognize it and assumed full governmental authority in the Don region,[15] where the Volunteer Army began amassing support. The signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk also resulted in direct Allied intervention in Russia and the arming of military forces opposed to the Bolshevik government. There were also many German commanders who offered support against the Bolsheviks, fearing a confrontation with them was impending as well.
During this first period the Bolsheviks took control of Central Asia out of the hands of the Provisional Government and White Army, setting up a base for the Communist Party in the Steppe and Turkestan, where nearly two million Russian settlers were located.[16]




Russian soldiers of the anti-Bolshevik Siberian Army in 1919


Most of the fighting in this first period was sporadic, involving only small groups amid a fluid and rapidly shifting strategic scene. Among the antagonists were the Czechs, known as the Czechoslovak Legion or "White Czechs",[17] the Poles of the Polish 5th Rifle Division and the pro-Bolshevik Red Latvian riflemen.
The second period of the war lasted from January to November 1919. At first the White armies' advances from the south (under Gen. Denikin), the east (under Adm. Kolchak) and the northwest (under Gen. Yudenich) were successful, forcing the Red Army and its allies back on all three fronts. In July 1919 the Red Army suffered another reverse after a mass defection of units in the Crimea to the anarchist Black Army under Nestor Makhno, enabling anarchist forces to consolidate power in Ukraine. Leon Trotsky soon reformed the Red Army, concluding the first of two military alliances with the anarchists. In June the Red Army first checked Kolchak's advance. After a series of engagements, assisted by a Black Army offensive against White supply lines, the Red Army defeated Denikin's and Yudenich's armies in October and November.
The third period of the war was the extended siege of the last White forces in the Crimea. Gen. Wrangel had gathered the remnants of Denikin's armies, occupying much of the Crimea. An attempted invasion of southern Ukraine was rebuffed by the anarchist Black Army under the command of Nestor Makhno. Pursued into the Crimea by Makhno's troops, Wrangel went over to the defensive in the Crimea. After an abortive move north against the Red Army, Wrangel's troops were forced south by Red Army and Black Army forces; Wrangel and the remains of his army were evacuated to Constantinople in November 1920.
Warfare[edit]
October Revolution[edit]




European theatre of the Russian Civil War


Main article: October Revolution
In the October Revolution the Bolshevik Party directed the Red Guard (armed groups of workers and Imperial army deserters) to seize control of Petrograd (Saint Petersburg) and immediately began the armed takeover of cities and villages throughout the former Russian Empire. In January 1918 the Bolsheviks dissolved the Russian Constituent Assembly and proclaimed the Soviets (workers’ councils) as the new government of Russia.
Initial anti-Bolshevik uprisings[edit]
Main articles: Kerensky-Krasnov uprising, Junker mutiny, and Volunteer Army
The first attempt to regain power from the Bolsheviks was made by the Kerensky-Krasnov uprising in October 1917. It was supported by the Junker Mutiny in Petrograd but was quickly put down by the Red Guard, notably the Latvian Rifle Division.
The initial groups that fought against the Communists were local Cossack armies that had declared their loyalty to the Provisional Government. Gen. Kaledin of the Don Cossacks and Gen. Semenov of the Siberian Cossacks were prominent among them. The leading Tsarist officers of the old regime also started to resist. In November, Gen. Alekseev, the Tsar's Chief of Staff during the First World War, began to organize the Volunteer Army in Novocherkassk. Volunteers of this small army were mostly officers of the old Russian army, military cadets and students. In December 1917 Alekseev was joined by Gen. Kornilov, Denikin and other Tsarist officers who had escaped from the jail, where they had been imprisoned following the abortive Kornilov affair just before the Revolution.[18] At the beginning of December 1917 groups of volunteers and Cossacks captured Rostov.
Having stated in the November 1917 “Declaration of Rights of Nations of Russia” that any nation under imperial Russian rule should be immediately given the power of self-determination, the Bolsheviks had begun to usurp the power of the Provisional Government in the territories of Central Asia soon after the establishment of the Turkestan Committee in Tashkent.[19] In April 1917 the Provisional Government set up this committee, which was mostly made up of former Tsarist officials.[20] The Bolsheviks attempted to take control of the Committee in Tashkent on 12 September 1917 but it was unsuccessful, and many leaders were arrested. However, because the Committee lacked representation of the native population and poor Russian settlers, they had to release the Bolshevik prisoners almost immediately due to public outcry, and a successful takeover of this government body took place two months later in November.[21] The triumph of the Bolshevik party over the Provisional Government during 1917 was mostly due to the support they received from the working class of Central Asia. The Leagues of Mohammedam Working People, which Russian settlers and natives who had been sent to work behind the lines for the Tsarist government in 1916 formed in March 1917, had led numerous strikes in the industrial centers throughout September 1917.[22] However, after the Bolshevik destruction of the Provisional Government in Tashkent, Muslim elites formed an autonomous government in Turkestan, commonly called the "Kokand autonomy" (or simply Kokand).[23] The White Russians supported this government body, which lasted several months because of Bolshevik troop isolation from Moscow.[24] In January 1918 the Soviet forces under Lt. Col. Muravyov invaded Ukraine and invested Kiev, where the Central Council of the Ukrainian People's Republic held power. With the help of the Kiev Arsenal Uprising, the Bolsheviks captured the city on 26 January.[25]
Peace with the Central Powers[edit]
Main article: Treaty of Brest-Litovsk




Soviet delegation with Trotsky greeted by German officers at Brest-Litovsk, 8 January 1918


The Bolsheviks decided to immediately make peace with the German Empire and the Central Powers, as they had promised the Russian people before the Revolution.[26] Vladimir Lenin's political enemies attributed that decision to his sponsorship by the Foreign Office of Wilhelm II, German Emperor, offered to Lenin in hope that, with a revolution, Russia would withdraw from World War I. That suspicion was bolstered by the German Foreign Ministry's sponsorship of Lenin's return to Petrograd.[27] However, after the military fiasco of the summer offensive (June 1917) by the Russian Provisional Government, and in particular after the failed summer offensive of the Provisional Government had devastated the structure of the Russian army, it became crucial that Lenin realize the promised peace.[28][29] Even before the failed summer offensive the Russian population was very skeptical about the continuation of the war. Western socialists had promptly arrived from France and from the UK to convince the Russians to continue the fight, but could not change the new pacifist mood of Russia.[30]
On 16 December 1917 an armistice was signed between Russia and the Central Powers in Brest-Litovsk and peace talks began.[31] As a condition for peace, the proposed treaty by the Central Powers conceded huge portions of the former Russian Empire to the German Empire and the Ottoman Empire, greatly upsetting nationalists and conservatives. Leon Trotsky, representing the Bolsheviks, refused at first to sign the treaty while continuing to observe a unilateral cease-fire, following the policy of "No war, no peace".[32]
In view of this, on 18 February 1918 the Germans began Operation Faustschlag on the Eastern Front, encountering virtually no resistance in a campaign that lasted 11 days.[32] Signing a formal peace treaty was the only option in the eyes of the Bolsheviks because the Russian army was demobilized, and the newly formed Red Guard was incapable of stopping the advance. They also understood that the impending counterrevolutionary resistance was more dangerous than the concessions of the treaty, which Lenin viewed as temporary in the light of aspirations for a world revolution. The Soviets acceded to a peace treaty, and the formal agreement, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, was ratified on 6 March. The Soviets viewed the treaty as merely a necessary and expedient means to end the war. Therefore, they ceded large amounts of territory to the German Empire.
Ukraine, South Russia, and Caucasus 1918[edit]
Main articles: Ukrainian People's Republic, Kiev Arsenal January Uprising, Ice March, 26 Baku Commissars, German Caucasus Expedition, Battle of Baku, and Central Caspian Dictatorship




February 1918 article from The New York Times showing a map of the Russian Imperial territories claimed by Ukrainian People's Republic at the time, before the annexation of the Austro-Hungarian lands of the West Ukrainian People's Republic.


Under Soviet pressure, the Volunteer Army embarked on the epic Ice March from Yekaterinodar to Kuban on 22 February 1918, where they joined with the Kuban Cossacks to mount an abortive assault on Yekaterinodar.[33] The Soviets recaptured Rostov on the next day.[34] Gen. Kornilov was killed in the fighting on 13 April, and Gen. Denikin took over command. Fighting off its pursuers without respite, the army succeeded in breaking its way through back towards the Don, where the Cossack uprising against Bolsheviks had started.
The Baku Soviet Commune was established on 13 April. Germany landed its Caucasus Expedition troops in Poti on 8 June. The Ottoman Army of Islam (in coalition with Azerbaijan) drove them out of Baku on 26 July 1918. Subsequently, the Dashanaks, Right SRs and Mensheviks started negotiations with Gen. Dunsterville, the commander of the British troops in Persia. The Bolsheviks and their Left SR allies were opposed to it, but on 25 July the majority of the Soviet voted to call in the British and the Bolsheviks resigned. The Baku Soviet Commune ended its existence and was replaced by the Central Caspian Dictatorship.
In June 1918 the Volunteer Army, numbering some 9,000 men, started its second Kuban campaign. Yekaterinodar was encircled on 1 August and fell on the 3rd. In September–October, heavy fighting took place at Armavir and Stavropol. On 13 October Gen. Kazanovich's division took Armavir, and on 1 November Gen. Pyotr Wrangel secured Stavropol. This time Red forces had no escape, and by the beginning of 1919 the whole Northern Caucasus was controlled by the Volunteer Army.
In October Gen. Alekseev, the leader of the White armies in southern Russia, died of a heart attack. An agreement was reached between Denikin, head of the Volunteer Army, and Pyotr Krasnov, Ataman of the Don Cossacks, which united their forces under the sole command of Denikin. The Armed Forces of South Russia were thus created.
Eastern Russia, Siberia and Far East of Russia, 1918[edit]
Main article: Revolt of the Czechoslovak Legion
The revolt of the Czechoslovak Legion broke out in May 1918,[35] and the legionaries took control of Chelyabinsk in June. Simultaneously Russian officers' organizations overthrew the Bolsheviks in Petropavlovsk (in present-day Kazakhstan) and in Omsk. Within a month the Whites controlled most of the Trans-Siberian Railroad between Lake Baikal and the Ural regions. During the summer Bolshevik power in Siberia was eliminated. The Provisional Government of Autonomous Siberia formed in Omsk. By the end of July the Whites had extended their gains westwards, capturing Ekaterinburg on 26 July 1918. Shortly before the fall of Yekaterinburg on 17 July 1918, the former Tsar and his family were executed by the Ural Soviet to prevent them falling into the hands of the Whites.
Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries supported peasants fighting against Soviet control of food supplies.[citation needed] In May 1918, with the support of the Czechoslovak Legion, they took Samara and Saratov, establishing the Committee of Members of the Constituent Assembly—known as the "Komuch". By July the authority of the Komuch extended over much of the area controlled by the Czechoslovak Legion. The Komuch pursued an ambivalent social policy, combining democratic and socialist measures, such as the institution of an eight-hour working day, with "restorative" actions, such as returning both factories and land to their former owners. After the fall of Kazan, Vladimir Lenin called for the dispatch of Petrograd workers to the Kazan Front: "We must send down the maximum number of Petrograd workers: (1) a few dozen 'leaders' like Kayurov; (2) a few thousand militants 'from the ranks'".[36]
After a series of reverses at the front, the Bolsheviks' War Commissar, Trotsky, instituted increasingly harsh measures in order to prevent unauthorized withdrawals, desertions and mutinies in the Red Army. In the field the Cheka special investigations forces, termed the Special Punitive Department of the All-Russian Extraordinary Commission for Combat of Counter-Revolution and Sabotage or Special Punitive Brigades, followed the Red Army, conducting field tribunals and summary executions of soldiers and officers who deserted, retreated from their positions or failed to display sufficient offensive zeal.[37][38] Trotsky extended the use of the death penalty to the occasional political commissar whose detachment retreated or broke in the face of the enemy.[citation needed] In August, frustrated at continued reports of Red Army troops breaking under fire, Trotsky authorized the formation of barrier troops - stationed behind unreliable Red Army units and given with orders to shoot anyone withdrawing from the battle line without authorization.[39]




Bolsheviks killed by Czechoslovak legionaries of the 8th Regiment at Nikolsk-Ussuriysky, 1918.


In September 1918 Komuch, the Siberian Provisional Government and other local anti-Soviet governments met in Ufa and agreed to form a new Provisional All-Russian Government in Omsk, headed by a Directory of five: two Socialist-Revolutionaries (Nikolai Avksentiev and Vladimir Zenzinov), two Kadets (V. A. Vinogradov (ru) and PV Vologodskii) and General Vasily Boldyrev.
By the fall of 1918 anti-Bolshevik White forces in the east included the People's Army (Komuch), the Siberian Army (of the Siberian Provisional Government) and insurgent Cossack units of Orenburg, Ural, Siberia, Semirechye, Baikal, Amur and Ussuri Cossacks, nominally under the orders of Gen. V.G. Boldyrev, Commander-in-Chief, appointed by the Ufa Directorate.
On the Volga, Col. Kappel's White detachment captured Kazan on 7 August, but the Reds re-captured the city on 8 September 1918 following a counteroffensive. On the 11th Simbirsk fell, and on 8 October Samara. The Whites fell back eastwards to Ufa and Orenburg.
In Omsk the Russian Provisional Government quickly came under the influence - then the dominance - of its new War Minister, Rear-Admiral Kolchak. On 18 November a coup d'état established Kolchak as dictator. The members of the Directory were arrested and Kolchak proclaimed the "Supreme Ruler of Russia". By mid-December 1918 White armies had to leave Ufa, but they balanced this failure with a successful drive towards Perm, which they took on 24 December.
Central Asia 1918[edit]
In February 1918 the Red Army overthrew the White Russian-supported Kokand autonomy of Turkestan.[40] Although this move seemed to solidify Bolshevik power in Central Asia, more troubles soon arose for the Red Army as the Allied Forces began to intervene. British support of the White Army provided the greatest threat to the Red Army in Central Asia during 1918. Great Britain sent three prominent military leaders to the area. One was Lt. Col. Bailey, who recorded a mission to Tashkent, from where the Bolsheviks forced him to flee. Another was Gen. Malleson, leading the Malleson Mission, who assisted the Mensheviks in Ashkhabad (now the capital of Turkmenistan) with a small Anglo-Indian force. However, he failed to gain control of Tashkent, Bukhara and Khiva. The third was Maj. Gen. Dunsterville, who the Bolsheviks drove out of Central Asia only a month after his arrival in August 1918.[41] Despite setbacks due to British invasions during 1918, the Bolsheviks continued to make progress in bringing the Central Asian population under their influence. The first regional congress of the Russian Communist Party convened in the city of Tashkent in June 1918 in order to build support for a local Bolshevik Party.[42]




London Geographical Institute’s 1919 map of Europe after the treaties of Brest-Litovsk and Batum and before the treaties of Tartu, Kars, and Riga


Left SR uprising[edit]
Main article: Left SR uprising
In July two Left SR and Cheka employees, Blyumkin and Andreyev, assassinated the German ambassador, Count Mirbach. In Moscow a Left SR uprising was put down by the Bolsheviks, using Cheka military detachments. Lenin personally apologized to the Germans for the assassination. Mass arrests of Socialist-Revolutionaries followed.
Estonia, Latvia and Petrograd[edit]
Estonia cleared its territory of the Red Army by January 1919.[43] Baltic German volunteers captured Riga from the Red Latvian Riflemen on 22 May, but the Estonian 3rd Division defeated the Baltic Germans a month later, aiding the establishment of the Republic of Latvia.[44]
This rendered possible another threat to the Red Army—one from Gen. Yudenich, who had spent the summer organizing the Northwestern Army in Estonia with local and British support. In October 1919 he tried to capture Petrograd in a sudden assault with a force of around 20,000 men. The attack was well-executed, using night attacks and lightning cavalry maneuvers to turn the flanks of the defending Red Army. Yudenich also had six British tanks, which caused panic whenever they appeared. The Allies gave large quantities of aid to Yudenich, who, however, complained that he was receiving insufficient support.




Gen. Nikolai Yudenich.


By 19 October Yudenich's troops had reached the outskirts of the city. Some members of the Bolshevik central committee in Moscow were willing to give up Petrograd, but Trotsky refused to accept the loss of the city and personally organized its defenses. Trotsky himself declared, "It is impossible for a little army of 15,000 ex-officers to master a working-class capital of 700,000 inhabitants." He settled on a strategy of urban defense, proclaiming that the city would "defend itself on its own ground" and that the White Army would be lost in a labyrinth of fortified streets and there "meet its grave".[45]
Trotsky armed all available workers, men and women, ordering the transfer of military forces from Moscow. Within a few weeks the Red Army defending Petrograd had tripled in size and outnumbered Yudenich three to one. At this point Yudenich, short of supplies, decided to call off the siege of the city and withdrew, repeatedly asking permission to withdraw his army across the border to Estonia. However, units retreating across the border were disarmed and interned by order of the Estonian government, which had entered into peace negotiations with the Soviet Government on 16 September and had been informed by the Soviet authorities of their 6 November decision that, should the White Army be allowed to retreat into Estonia, it would be pursued across the border by the Reds.[46] In fact, the Reds attacked Estonian army positions and fighting continued until a cease-fire went into effect on 3 January 1920. Following the Treaty of Tartu most of Yudenich's soldiers went into exile. Finnish Gen. Mannerheim planned an intervention to help the Whites in Russia capture Petrograd. He did not, however, gain the necessary support for the endeavor. Lenin considered it "completely certain, that the slightest aid from Finland would have determined the fate of Petrograd".
Northern Russia 1919[edit]
Main article: North Russia Intervention
The British occupied Murmansk and, alongside the Americans, seized Arkhangelsk. With the retreat of Kolchak in Siberia, they pulled their troops out of the cities before the winter trapped them in the port. The remaining White forces under Yevgenii Miller evacuated the region in February 1920.
Siberia 1919[edit]




Admiral Kolchak reviewing the troops, 1919.


At the beginning of March 1919 the general offensive of the Whites on the eastern front began. Ufa was retaken on 13 March; by mid-April, the White Army stopped at the Glazov–Chistopol–Bugulma–Buguruslan–Sharlyk line. Reds started their counteroffensive against Kolchak's forces at the end of April. The Red 5th Army, led by the capable commander Tukhachevsky, captured Elabuga on 26 May, Sarapul on 2 June and Izevsk on the 7th and continued to push forward. Both sides had victories and losses, but by the middle of summer the Red Army was larger than the White Army and had managed to recapture territory previously lost.
Following the abortive offensive at Chelyabinsk, the White armies withdrew beyond the Tobol. In September 1919 a White offensive was launched against the Tobol front, the last attempt to change the course of events. However, on 14 October the Reds counterattacked, and thus began the uninterrupted retreat of the Whites to the east.
On 14 November 1919 the Red Army captured Omsk.[47] Adm. Kolchak lost control of his government shortly after this defeat; White Army forces in Siberia essentially ceased to exist by December. Retreat of the eastern front by White armies lasted three months, until mid-February 1920, when the survivors, after crossing Lake Baikal, reached Chita area and joined Ataman Semenov's forces.
South Russia 1919[edit]
The Cossacks had been unable to organize and capitalize on their successes at the end of 1918. By 1919 they had begun to run short of supplies. Consequently, when the Soviet counteroffensive began in January 1919 under the Bolshevik leader Antonov-Ovseenko, the Cossack forces rapidly fell apart. The Red Army captured Kiev on 3 February 1919.




White propaganda poster "For united Russia" representing the Bolsheviks as a fallen communist dragon and the White Cause as a crusading knight.


Gen. Denikin's military strength continued to grow in the spring of 1919. During several months in winter and spring of 1919, hard fighting with doubtful outcomes took place in the Donbass, where the attacking Bolsheviks met White forces. At the same time Denikin's Armed Forces of South Russia (AFSR) completed the elimination of Red forces in the northern Caucasus and advanced towards Tsaritsyn. At the end of April and beginning of May the AFSR attacked on all fronts from the Dnepr to the Volga, and by the beginning of the summer they had won numerous battles. French forces landed in Odessa but, after having done almost no fighting, withdrew on 8 April 1919. By mid-June the Reds were chased from the Crimea and the Odessa area. Denikin's troops took the cities of Kharkov and Belgorod. At the same time White troops under Wrangel's command took Tsaritsyn on 17 June 1919. On 20 June Denikin issued his Moscow directive, ordering all AFSR units to prepare for a decisive offensive to take Moscow.
Although Great Britain had withdrawn its own troops from the theater, it continued to give significant military aid (money, weapons, food, ammunition and some military advisors) to the White Armies during 1919. Major Ewen Cameron Bruce of the British Army had volunteered to command a British tank mission assisting the White Army. He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order[48] for his bravery during the June 1919 battle of Tsaritsyn for single-handedly storming and capturing the fortified city of Tsaritsyn, under heavy shell fire in a single tank; this led to the capture of over 40,000 prisoners.[49] The fall of Tsaritsyn is viewed "as one of the key battles of the Russian Civil War" which greatly helped the White Russian cause.[49] Notable historian Sir Basil Henry Liddell Hart comments that Bruce's tank action during this battle is to be seen as "one of the most remarkable feats in the whole history of the Tank Corps".[50]
After the capture of Tsaritsyn, Wrangel pushed towards Saratov but Trotsky, seeing the danger of the union with Kolchak, against whom the Red command was concentrating large masses of troops, repulsed his attempts with heavy losses. When Kolchak's army in the east began to retreat in June and July, the bulk of the Red Army, free now from any serious danger from Siberia, was directed against Denikin.
Denikin's forces constituted a real threat and for a time threatened to reach Moscow. The Red Army, stretched thin by fighting on all fronts, was forced out of Kiev on 30 August. Kursk and Orel were taken, on 20 September and 14 October, respectively. The latter, only 205 miles (330 km) from Moscow, was the closest the AFSR would come to its target.[51] The Cossack Don Army under the command of Gen. Vladimir Sidorin continued north towards Voronezh, but there Semyon Budyonny's cavalrymen defeated them on 24 October. This allowed the Red Army to cross the Don River, threatening to split the Don and Volunteer Armies. Fierce fighting took place at the key rail junction of Kastornoye, which was taken on 15 November; Kursk was retaken two days later.[52]




American troops in Vladivostok during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War (August 1918)


The high tide of the White movement against the Soviets had been reached in September 1919. By this time Denikin's forces were dangerously overextended. The White front had no depth or stability—it had become a series of patrols with occasional columns of slowly advancing troops without reserves. Lacking ammunition, artillery and fresh reinforcements, Denikin's army was decisively defeated in a series of battles in October and November 1919. The Red Army recaptured Kiev on 17 December and the defeated Cossacks fled back towards the Black Sea.
While the White armies were being routed in the center and the east, they had succeeded in driving Nestor Makhno's anarchist Black Army (formally known as the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine) out of part of southern Ukraine and the Crimea. Despite this setback, Moscow was loath to aid Makhno and the Black Army and refused to provide arms to anarchist forces in Ukraine. The main body of White forces, the Volunteers and the Don Army, pulled back towards the Don, to Rostov. The smaller body (Kiev and Odessa troops) withdrew to Odessa and the Crimea, which it had managed to protect from the Bolsheviks during the winter of 1919–1920.
Central Asia 1919[edit]
By February 1919 the British government had pulled its military forces out of Central Asia.[53] Despite this success for the Red Army, the White Army’s assaults in European Russia and other areas broke communication between Moscow and Tashkent. For a time Central Asia was completely cut off from Red Army forces in Siberia.[54] Although this communication failure weakened the Red Army, the Bolsheviks continued their efforts to gain support for the Bolshevik Party in Central Asia by holding a second regional conference in March. During this conference a regional bureau of Muslim organizations of the Russian Bolshevik Party was formed. The Bolshevik Party continued to try to gain support among the native population by giving them the impression of better representation for the Central Asian population and throughout the end of the year were able to maintain harmony with the Central Asian people.[55]
Communication difficulties with Red Army forces in Siberia and European Russia ceased to be a problem by mid-November 1919. Due to Red Army successes north of Central Asia, communication with Moscow was re-established and the Bolsheviks were able to claim victory over the White Army in Turkestan.[54]
South Russia, Ukraine and Kronstadt 1920–21[edit]




Victims of the Russian famine of 1921


By the beginning of 1920 the main body of the Armed Forces of South Russia was rapidly retreating towards the Don, to Rostov. Denikin hoped to hold the crossings of the Don, then rest and reform his troops, but the White Army was not able to hold the Don area and at the end of February 1920, started a retreat across Kuban towards Novorossiysk. Slipshod evacuation of Novorossiysk proved to be a dark event for the White Army. About 40,000 men were evacuated by Russian and Allied ships from Novorossiysk to the Crimea, without horses or any heavy equipment, while about 20,000 men were left behind and either dispersed or captured by the Red Army. Following the disastrous Novorossiysk evacuation, Denikin stepped down and the military council elected Wrangel as the new Commander-in-Chief of the White Army. He was able to restore order to the dispirited troops and reshape an army that could fight as a regular force again. This remained an organized force in the Crimea throughout 1920.
After Moscow's Bolshevik government signed a military and political alliance with Nestor Makhno and the Ukrainian anarchists, the Black Army attacked and defeated several regiments of Wrangel's troops in southern Ukraine, forcing him to retreat before he could capture that year's grain harvest.[56] Stymied in his efforts to consolidate his hold, Wrangel then attacked north in an attempt to take advantage of recent Red Army defeats at the close of the Polish–Soviet War of 1919–1920. This offensive was eventually halted by the Red Army, and Wrangel's troops were forced to retreat to the Crimea in November 1920 pursued by both the Red and Black cavalry and infantry. Wrangel and the remains of his army were evacuated from the Crimea to Constantinople on 14 November 1920. Thus ended the struggle of Reds and Whites in Southern Russia.




Red Army troops attack Kronstadt sailors in March 1921


After the defeat of Wrangel, the Red Army immediately repudiated its 1920 treaty of alliance with Nestor Makhno and attacked the anarchist Black Army; the campaign to liquidate Makhno and the Ukrainian anarchists began with an attempted assassination of Makhno by Cheka agents. Angered by continued repression by the Bolshevik Communist government and its liberal use of the Cheka to put down anarchist elements, a naval mutiny erupted at Kronstadt, followed by peasant revolts. Red Army attacks on the anarchist forces and their sympathizers increased in ferocity throughout 1921.
Siberia and the Far East 1920–22[edit]
Main article: Far Eastern Front in the Russian Civil War
In Siberia, Adm. Kolchak's army had disintegrated. He himself gave up command after the loss of Omsk and designated Gen. Grigory Semyonov as the new leader of the White Army in Siberia. Not long after this Kolchak was arrested by the disaffected Czechoslovak Corps as he traveled towards Irkutsk without the protection of the army, and turned over to the socialist Political Centre in Irkutsk. Six days later this regime was replaced by a Bolshevik-dominated Military-Revolutionary Committee. On 6–7 February Kolchak and his prime minister Victor Pepelyaev were shot and their bodies thrown through the ice of the frozen Angara River, just before the arrival of the White Army in the area.[57]
Remnants of Kolchak's army reached Transbaikalia and joined Semyonov's troops, forming the Far Eastern army. With the support of the Japanese army it was able to hold Chita, but after withdrawal of Japanese soldiers from Transbaikalia, Semenov's position became untenable, and in November 1920 he was driven by the Red Army from Transbaikalia and took refuge in China. The Japanese, who had plans to annex the Amur Krai, finally pulled their troops out as Bolshevik forces gradually asserted control over the Russian Far East. On 25 October 1922 Vladivostok fell to the Red Army, and the Provisional Priamur Government was extinguished.
Aftermath[edit]
Ensuing rebellion[edit]
In central Asia Red Army troops continued to face resistance into 1923, where basmachi (armed bands of Islamic guerrillas) had formed to fight the Bolshevik takeover. The Soviets engaged non-Russian peoples in Central Asia, like Magaza Masanchi, commander of the Dungan Cavalry Regiment, to fight against the Basmachis. The Communist Party did not completely dismantle this group until 1934.[58]
Gen. Anatoly Pepelyayev continued armed resistance in the Ayano-Maysky District until June 1923. The regions of Kamchatka and Northern Sakhalin remained under Japanese occupation until their treaty with the Soviet Union in 1925, when their forces were finally withdrawn.
Casualties[edit]




Victims of the Red Terror in Crimea, 1918






Street children during the Russian Civil War


The results of the civil war were momentous. Soviet demographer Boris Urlanis estimated the total number of men killed in action in the Civil War and Polish–Soviet War as 300,000 (125,000 in the Red Army, 175,500 White armies and Poles) and the total number of military personnel dead from disease (on both sides) as 450,000.[59]
During the Red Terror, estimates of Cheka executions range from 12,733 to 1.7 million. William Henry Chamberlin suspected that there were about 50,000.[60] Evan Mawdsley suspected that there were more than 12,733, and less than 200,000.[61] Some sources claimed at least 250,000 summary executions of "enemies of the people" with estimates reaching above a million.[62][63][64][65] More modest estimates put the numbers executed by the Bolsheviks between December 1917 and February 1922 at around 28,000 per year, with roughly 10,000 executions during the Red Terror.[66]
Some 300,000–500,000 Cossacks were killed or deported during decossackization, out of a population of around three million.[67] An estimated 100,000 Jews were killed in Ukraine, mostly by the White Army.[68] Punitive organs of the All Great Don Cossack Host sentenced 25,000 people to death between May 1918 and January 1919.[69] Kolchak's government shot 25,000 people in Ekaterinburg province alone.[70] "White terror" has killed about 300,000 people in total.[71]
At the end of the Civil War the Russian SFSR was exhausted and near ruin. The droughts of 1920 and 1921, as well as the 1921 famine, worsened the disaster still further. Disease had reached pandemic proportions, with 3,000,000 dying of typhus alone in 1920. Millions more also died of widespread starvation, wholesale massacres by both sides and pogroms against Jews in Ukraine and southern Russia. By 1922 there were at least 7,000,000 street children in Russia as a result of nearly ten years of devastation from the Great War and the civil war.[72]




Refugees on flatcars.


Another one to two million people, known as the White émigrés, fled Russia, many with Gen. Wrangel—some through the Far East, others west into the newly independent Baltic countries. These émigrés included a large percentage of the educated and skilled population of Russia.
The Russian economy was devastated by the war, with factories and bridges destroyed, cattle and raw materials pillaged, mines flooded and machines damaged. The industrial production value descended to one-seventh of the value of 1913 and agriculture to one-third. According to Pravda, "The workers of the towns and some of the villages choke in the throes of hunger. The railways barely crawl. The houses are crumbling. The towns are full of refuse. Epidemics spread and death strikes—industry is ruined."[citation needed] It is estimated that the total output of mines and factories in 1921 had fallen to 20% of the pre-World War level, and many crucial items experienced an even more drastic decline. For example, cotton production fell to 5%, and iron to 2%, of pre-war levels.
War Communism saved the Soviet government during the Civil War, but much of the Russian economy had ground to a standstill. The peasants responded to requisitions by refusing to till the land. By 1921 cultivated land had shrunk to 62% of the pre-war area, and the harvest yield was only about 37% of normal. The number of horses declined from 35 million in 1916 to 24 million in 1920 and cattle from 58 to 37 million. The exchange rate with the US dollar declined from two rubles in 1914 to 1,200 in 1920.
With the end of the war the Communist Party no longer faced an acute military threat to its existence and power. However, the perceived threat of another intervention, combined with the failure of socialist revolutions in other countries—most notably the German Revolution—contributed to the continued militarization of Soviet society. Although Russia experienced extremely rapid[citation needed] economic growth in the 1930s, the combined effect of World War I and the Civil War left a lasting scar on Russian society and had permanent effects on the development of the Soviet Union.
British historian Orlando Figes has contended that the root of the Whites' defeat was their inability to dispel the popular image that they were dually associated with Tsarist Russia and supportive of a Tsarist restoration.[73]
Brief Timeline[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







1920 Nikolayevsk Incident: anarchist Yakov Triapitsyn massacred most of the inhabitants of the town of Nikolayevsk-on-Amur in the Russian Far East.



25 October 1917—Alexander Kerensky and his supporters flee Petrograd.
5 January 1918—The Red Guard breaks up a meeting of the Constituent Assembly on Lenin's orders.
28 January 1918—Trotsky sets up the Red army.
March 1918—Bolsheviks move the Russian capital to Moscow from Petrograd for protection and better communications, as it is in the center of their territory.
14 October 1919—Gen. Denikin's army reaches Orel 300 km from Moscow.
22 October 1919—White forces reach the outskirts of Petrograd. Trotsky organizes a counterattack.
Early November 1919—Western allies pull the plug on support for the Whites. Troops begin to desert.
7 February 1920—Kolchak is executed by the Bolsheviks after being handed over by the Czech Legion.
April 1920—Poles are driven back into Poland by the Bolsheviks
1921—Kronstadt uprising crushed
1922-Provisional Priamur Republic dissolved.
1923-Yakut Revolt put down, ending the last White resistance in Russia.
1934- Basmachi Revolt finally put down.

In fiction[edit]
Literature[edit]

The Road to Calvary (1922–41) by Aleksey Nikolayevich Tolstoy
Chapaev (1923) by Dmitri Furmanov
The Iron Flood (1924) by Alexander Serafimovich
Red Cavalry (1926) by Isaac Babel
The Rout (1927) by Alexander Fadeyev
How the Steel Was Tempered (1934) by Nikolai Ostrovsky
Optimistic Tragedy (1934) by Vsevolod Vishnevsky
And Quiet Flows the Don (1928–1940) by Mikhail Sholokhov
The Don Flows Home to the Sea (1940) by Mikhail Sholokhov
Doctor Zhivago (1957) by Boris Pasternak
The White Guard (1966) by Mikhail Bulgakov
Byzantium Endures (1981) by Michael Moorcock
Chevengur (novel) (ru) (written in 1927, first published in 1988 in the USSR) by Andrei Platonov.
Fall of Giants (2010) by Ken Follett
A Splendid Little War (2012) by Derek Robinson (novelist)

Film[edit]

Arsenal (1928)
Storm Over Asia (1928)
Chapaev (1934)
Thirteen (1936), directed by Mikhail Romm
We Are from Kronstadt (1936), directed by Yefim Dzigan
Knight Without Armour (1937)
The Year 1919 (1938), directed by Ilya Trauberg
The Baltic Marines (1939), directed by A. Faintsimmer
Shchors (1939), directed by Dovzhenko
Pavel Korchagin (1956), directed by A. Alov and V. Naumov
The Forty-First (1956), directed by Grigori Chukhrai
And Quiet Flows the Don (1958), directed by Sergei Gerasimov
The Wind (1958), directed by A. Alov and V. Naumov
Doctor Zhivago (1965), directed by David Lean
The Elusive Avengers (1966)
The Red and the White (1967)
The Flight (1970), directed by A. Alov and V. Naumov
Nicholas and Alexandra (1971) directed by Franklin Schaffner briefly mentioned
Reds (1981), directed by Warren Beatty
Corto Maltese in Siberia (2002)
Admiral (2008)
Sunstroke (2014), directed by Nikita Mikhalkov

See also[edit]


Soviet Union portal



Revolutionary Mass Festivals
Timeline of the Russian Civil War

References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ a b Mawdsley 2007, pp. 3, 230.
^ a b Bullock 2008, p. 7: "Peripheral regions of the former Russian Empire that had broken away to form new nations had to fight for independence: Finland, Poland, Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia, Belarus, Ukraine, Georgia and Azerbaijan."
^ Krivosheev 1997, p. 7.
^ Krivosheev 1997, p. 9–10.
^ Russian Civil War Encyclopædia Britannica Online 2012
^ Mawdsley 2007, p. 287.
^ Calder 1976, p. 166: "[...] the Russian army disintegrated after the failure of the Galician offensive in July 1917."
^ Read 1996, p. 237: By 1920 77% of the Red Army's enlisted ranks comprised peasant conscripts.
^ Williams, Beryl, The Russian Revolution 1917–1921, Blackwell Publishing Ltd. (1987), ISBN 978-0-631-15083-1, ISBN 0-631-15083-8: Typically, men of conscriptible age (17 to 40 years old) in a village would vanish when Red Army draft-units approached. The taking of hostages and a few summary executions usually brought the men back.
^ a b Orlando Figes, A people's tragedy – History of the Russian Revolution (Penguin Books 1996): To mobilize the peasants Kolchak's army resorted increasingly to terror. There was no effective local administration to enforce the conscription in any other way, and in any case the Whites' world-view ruled out the need to persuade the peasants.
^ a b Overy 2004, p. 446: By the end of the civil war, one-third of all Red Army officers were ex-Tsarist voenspetsy"
^ a b Williams, Beryl, The Russian Revolution 1917–1921, Blackwell Publishing Ltd. (1987), ISBN 978-0-631-15083-1, ISBN 0-631-15083-8
^ Thompson 1996, p. 159.
^ Cover Story: Churchill's Greatness. Archived 2006-10-04 at the Wayback Machine. Interview with Jeffrey Wallin. (The Churchill Centre)
^ Каледин, Алексей Максимович. A biography of Kaledin (in Russian)
^ Wheeler 1964, p. 103.
^ The Czech Legion
^ Mawdsley 2007, p. 27.
^ Coates & Coates 1951, p. 72.
^ Wheeler 1964, p. 104.
^ Coates & Coates 1951, p. 70.
^ Coates & Coates 1951, pp. 68–69.
^ Coates & Coates 1951, p. 74.
^ Allworth 1967, p. 226.
^ Mawdsley 2007, p. 35.
^ Orlando Figes, A People's Tragedy--History of the Russian Revolution, Penguin Books 1996) is quoting such comments from the peasant soldiers during the first weeks of the war: We have talked it over among ourselves; if the Germans want payment, it would be better to pay ten rubles a head than to kill people. Or: Is it not all the same what Tsar we live under? It cannot be worse under the German one. Or: Let them go and fight themselves. Wait a while, we will settle accounts with you. Or: 'What devil has brought this war on us? We are butting into other people's business.'
^ Lenin
^ Orlando Figes, A People's Tragedy--History of the Russian Revolution (Penguin Books 1996), wrote: As Brusilov saw it, the soldiers were so obsessed with the idea of peace that they would have been prepared to support the Tsar himself, so long as he promised to bring the war to an end.
^ Orlando Figes, A People's Tragedy--History of the Russian Revolution (Penguin Books 1996) wrote: It was partly a case of the usual military failings: units had been sent into battle without machine-guns; untrained soldiers had been ordered to engage in complex manoeuvres using hand grenades and ended up throwing them without first pulling the pins.
^ Orlando Figes, A People's Tragedy--History of the Russian Revolution (Penguin Books 1996): This new civic patriotism did not extend beyond the urban middle classes, although the leaders of the Provisional Government deluded themselves that it did.
^ Mawdsley 2007, p. 42.
^ a b Smith & Tucker 2014, pp. 554–555.
^ Mawdsley 2007, p. 29.
^ Mawdsley 2007, p. 28.
^ Mawdsley 2007, pp. 62–8.
^ Haupt & Marie 1974, p. 222.
^ Chamberlin 1987, p. 31: Frequently the deserters' families were taken hostage to force a surrender; a portion were customarily executed, as an example to the others.
^ Daniels 1993, p. 70: The Cheka special investigations forces were also charged with the detection of sabotage and counter-revolutionary activity by Red Army soldiers and commanders.
^ Volkogonov 1996, p. 180: By December 1918 Trotsky had ordered the formation of special detachments to serve as blocking units throughout the Red Army.
^ Rakowska-Harmstone 1970, p. 19.
^ Coates & Coates 1951, p. 75.
^ Allworth 1967, p. 232.
^ Baltic War of Liberation Encyclopædia Britannica
^ "Generalkommando VI Reservekorps". Axis History. 
^ Williams, Beryl, The Russian Revolution 1917–1921, Blackwell Publishing (1987), ISBN 978-0-631-15083-1, ISBN 0-631-15083-8
^ Rosenthal 2006, p. 516.
^ "Bolsheviki Grain Near Petrograd". New York Tribune. Washington, DC. Library of Congress. 15 November 1919. p. 4. Retrieved 10 September 2010. 
^ Distinguished Service Order citation for Bruce in the 1920 London Gazette[dead link]
^ a b Kinvig 2006, p. 225.
^ Liddell Hart, Basil. "The Tanks: The History Of The Royal Tank Regiment And Its Predecessors, Heavy Branch Machine-Gun Corps, Tank Corps And Royal Tank Corps, 1914–1945. Vol I". Cassell: 1959, p. 211.
^ Kenez 1977, p. 44.
^ Kenez 1977, p. 218.
^ Allworth 1967, p. 231.
^ a b Coates & Coates 1951, p. 76.
^ Allworth 1967, pp. 232–233.
^ Berland, Pierre, Mhakno, Le Temps, 28 August 1934: In addition to supplying White Army forces and their sympathizers with food, a successful seizure of the 1920 Ukrainian grain harvest would have had a devastating effect on food supplies to Bolshevik-held cities, while depriving both Red Army and Ukrainian Black Army troops of their usual bread rations.
^ Mawdsley 2007, pp. 319–21.
^ Wheeler 1964, p. 107.
^ Urlanis B. Wars and Population. Moscow, Progress publishers, 1971.
^ Chamberlin 1987, p. 75.
^ Mawdsley 2007, p. 286.
^ Stewart-Smith, D.G. "The Defeat of Communism". London: Ludgate Press Ltd., 1964.
^ Rummel, Rudolph, "Lethal Politics: Soviet Genocide and Mass Murder Since 1917" (1990).
^ Andrew & Mitrokhin 1999, p. 28.
^ Overy 2004, p. 180.
^ Ryan 2012, pp. 2, 114.
^ Gellately 2007, pp. 70–71.
^ Kenez, Peter; Pipe, Richard; Pipes, Richard (1991). "The Prosecution of Soviet History: A Critique of Richard Pipes' The Russian Revolution". Russian Review. 50 (3): 345–51. doi:10.2307/131078. JSTOR 131078. 
^ Holquist 2002, p. 164.
^ Колчаковщина (in Russian). RU: Cult Info. Archived from the original on 2005-05-10. 
^ Эрлихман, Вадим (2004). Потери народонаселения в XX веке. Издательский дом «Русская панорама». ISBN 5931651071. 
^ And Now My Soul Is Hardened: Abandoned Children in Soviet Russia, 1918–1930, Thomas J. Hegarty, Canadian Slavonic Papers
^ Orlando Figes, A People's Tragedy--History of the Russian Revolution (Penguin Books 1996): At the root of the Whites' defeat was a failure of politics. They proved to be both unable and unwilling to frame policies capable of getting the mass of the population on their side. Their movement was based, in Wrangel's phrase, on "the cruel sword of vengeance"; their only idea was to put the clock back to the "happy days" before 1917; and they failed to see the need to adapt themselves to the realities of the revolution.


Bibliography[edit]

Allworth, Edward (1967). Central Asia: A Century of Russian Rule. New York: Columbia University Press. OCLC 396652. 
Andrew, Christopher; Mitrokhin, Vasili (1999). The Sword and the Shield: The Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 9780465003129. 
Bullock, David (2008). The Russian Civil War 1918–22. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84603-271-4. 
Calder, Kenneth J. (1976). Britain and the Origins of the New Europe 1914-1918. International Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521208970. Retrieved 2017-10-06. 
Chamberlin, William Henry (1987). The Russian Revolution, Volume II: 1918-1921: From the Civil War to the Consolidation of Power. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 9781400858705 – via Project MUSE. (Subscription required (help)). 
Coates, W. P.; Coates, Zelda K. (1951). Soviets in Central Asia. New York: Philosophical Library. OCLC 1533874. 
Daniels, Robert V. (1993). A Documentary History of Communism in Russia: From Lenin to Gorbachev. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England. ISBN 978-0-87451-616-6. 
Gellately, Robert (2007). Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler: The Age of Social Catastrophe. New York: Knopf. ISBN 1-4000-4005-1. 
Haupt, Georges & Marie, Jean-Jacques (1974). Makers of the Russian revolution. London: George Allen & Unwin. ISBN 9780801408090. 
Holquist, Peter (2002). Making War, Forging Revolution: Russia's Continuum of Crisis, 1914–1921. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-00907-X. 
Kenez, Peter (1977). Civil War in South Russia, 1919–1920: The Defeat of the Whites. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 9780520033467. 
Kinvig, Clifford (2006). Churchill's Crusade: The British Invasion of Russia, 1918–1920. London: Hambledon Continuum. ISBN 9781847250216. 
Krivosheev, G. F. (1997). Soviet Casualties and Combat Losses in the Twentieth Century. London: Greenhill Books. ISBN 978-1-85367-280-4. 
Mawdsley, Evan (2007). The Russian Civil War. New York: Pegasus Books. ISBN 9781681770093. 
Overy, Richard (2004). The Dictators: Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Russia. New York: W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-02030-4. 
Rakowska-Harmstone, Teresa (1970). Russia and Nationalism in Central Asia: The Case of Tadzhikistan. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press. ISBN 9780801810213. 
Read, Christopher (1996). From Tsar to Soviets. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195212419. 
Rosenthal, Reigo (2006). Loodearmee [Northwestern Army] (in Estonian). Tallinn: Argo. ISBN 9949-415-45-4. 
Ryan, James (2012). Lenin's Terror: The Ideological Origins of Early Soviet State Violence. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-138-81568-1. 
Smith, David A.; Tucker, Spencer C. (2014). "Faustschlag, Operation". World War I: The Definitive Encyclopedia and Document Collection. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. pp. 554–555. ISBN 9781851099658. 
Thompson, John M. (1996). A Vision Unfulfilled. Russia and the Soviet Union in the Twentieth Century. Lexington, MA. ISBN 9780669282917. 
Volkogonov, Dmitri (1996). Trotsky: The Eternal Revolutionary. Translated and edited by Harold Shukman. London: HarperCollins Publishers. ISBN 9780002552721. 
Wheeler, Geoffrey (1964). The Modern History of Soviet Central Asia. New York: Frederick A. Praeger. OCLC 865924756. 

Further reading[edit]

Acton, Edward, V. et al. eds. Critical companion to the Russian Revolution, 1914-1921 (Indiana UP, 1997).
Brovkin, Vladimir N. . Behind the Front Lines of the Civil War: Political Parties and Social Movements in Russia, 1918–1922. (Princeton UP, 1994). ISBN 0-691-03278-5
Dupuy, T.N. The Encyclopedia of Military History (many editions) Harper & Row Publishers.
Ford, Chris. "Reconsidering the Ukrainian Revolution 1917–1921: The Dialectics of National Liberation and Social Emancipation." Debatte 15.3 (2007): 279-306.
Peter Kenez. Civil War in South Russia, 1918: The First Year of the Volunteer Army (U of California Press, 1971).
Lincoln, W. Bruce. Red victory: A history of the Russian Civil War (1989).
Marples, David R. Lenin's Revolution: Russia, 1917-1921 (Routledge, 2014).
Smele, Jonathan. The 'Russian' Civil Wars, 1916-1926: Ten Years That Shook the World (Oxford UP, 2016).
Smele, Jonathan D. Historical Dictionary of the Russian Civil Wars, 1916-1926 (2 Vol. Rowman & Littlefield, 2015).
Stewart, George. The White Armies of Russia: A Chronicle of Counter-Revolution and Allied Intervention.
Stone, David R. "The Russian Civil War, 1917–1921," in The Military History of the Soviet Union.
Swain, Geoffrey. The Origins of the Russian Civil War.
Bailey F. M. "Mission to Tashkent" Jonathan Cape 1946.
Teague-Jones Reginand "The Spy who disappeared" Gollance 1990 (UK)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Civil war of Russia.



Russian Revolution and Civil War archive at libcom.org/library
"BBC History of the Russian Revolution" (3 February 2007)
"Russian Civil War" (Spartacus History, downloaded 3 January 2006)
"Russian Civil War 1918–1920" (On War website, downloaded 4 January 2006)
"Civil War of 1917 – 1922 at Encyclopedia of Russian History (3 February 2007)
"Russian Civil War Polities" (World Statesmen.org, downloaded 16 February 2007)







v
t
e


World War I






Home fronts





Theatres




European



Balkans
Western Front
Eastern Front
Italian Front





Middle Eastern



Gallipoli
Sinai and Palestine
Caucasus
Persia
Mesopotamia
South Arabia





African



South West
East
Kamerun
Togoland
North





Asian and Pacific



Tsingtao
German New Guinea and Samoa





At sea



North Atlantic U-boat campaign
Mediterranean
North Sea
Baltic


Indian, Pacific and South Atlantic Oceans

Papeete
Madras
Penang
Cocos
Coronel
Falkland Islands
Más a Tierra











Principal
participants
(people)





Entente powers



Belgium
Brazil
China
France

French Empire


Greece
Italy
Japan
Montenegro
Portuguese Empire
Romania
Russia

Russian Empire
Russian Republic


Serbia
United Kingdom

British Empire


United States





Central Powers



Germany
Austria-Hungary
Ottoman Empire
Bulgaria








Timeline




Pre-War conflicts



Scramble for Africa (1880–1914)
Russo-Japanese War (1905)
First Moroccan (Tangier) Crisis (1905–06)
Agadir Crisis (1911)
Italo-Turkish War (1911–12)
French conquest of Morocco (1911–12)
First Balkan War (1912–13)
Second Balkan War (1913)





Prelude



Origins
Sarajevo assassination
Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo
July Crisis





Autumn 1914



Battle of the Frontiers
Battle of Cer
First Battle of the Marne
Siege of Tsingtao
Battle of Tannenberg
Battle of Galicia
Battle of the Masurian Lakes
Battle of Kolubara
Battle of Sarikamish
Race to the Sea
First Battle of Ypres





1915



Second Battle of the Masurian Lakes
Second Battle of Ypres
Battle of Gallipoli
Second Battle of Artois
Battles of the Isonzo
Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive
Great Retreat
Second Battle of Champagne
Kosovo Offensive
Siege of Kut
Battle of Loos





1916



Erzurum Offensive
Battle of Verdun
Lake Naroch Offensive
Battle of Asiago
Battle of Jutland
Battle of the Somme

first day


Brusilov Offensive
Baranovichi Offensive
Battle of Romani
Monastir Offensive
Battle of Transylvania





1917



Capture of Baghdad
First Battle of Gaza
Zimmermann Telegram
Second Battle of Arras
Second Battle of the Aisne
Kerensky Offensive
Third Battle of Ypres (Passchendaele)
Battle of Mărășești
Battle of Caporetto
Southern Palestine Offensive
Battle of Cambrai
Armistice of Erzincan





1918



Operation Faustschlag
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
Spring Offensive
Second Battle of the Marne
Battle of Baku
Hundred Days Offensive
Vardar Offensive
Battle of Megiddo
Third Transjordan attack
Meuse-Argonne Offensive
Battle of Vittorio Veneto
Battle of Aleppo
Armistice of Salonica
Armistice of Mudros
Armistice of Villa Giusti
Armistice with Germany





Other conflicts



Mexican Revolution (1910–20)
Somaliland Campaign (1910–20)
Libyan resistance movement (1911–43)
Maritz Rebellion (1914–15)
Zaian War (1914–21)
Indo-German Conspiracy (1914–19)
Senussi Campaign (1915–16)
Volta-Bani War (1915–17)
Easter Rising (1916)
Anglo-Egyptian Darfur Expedition (1916)
Kaocen Revolt (1916–17)
Central Asian Revolt (1916-17)
Russian Revolution (1917)
Finnish Civil War (1918)





Post-War conflicts



Russian Civil War (1917–21)
Ukrainian–Soviet War (1917–21)
Armenian–Azerbaijani War (1918–20)
Georgian–Armenian War (1918)
German Revolution (1918–19)
Revolutions and interventions in Hungary (1918–20)
Hungarian–Romanian War (1918–19)
Greater Poland Uprising (1918–19)
Estonian War of Independence (1918–20)
Latvian War of Independence (1918–20)
Lithuanian Wars of Independence (1918–20)
Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919)
Egyptian Revolution (1919)
Polish–Ukrainian War (1918–19)
Polish–Soviet War (1919–21)
Irish War of Independence (1919–21)
Turkish War of Independence

Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)
Turkish–Armenian War (1920)


Iraqi revolt (1920)
Polish–Lithuanian War (1920)
Vlora War (1920)
Franco-Syrian War (1920)
Soviet–Georgian War (1921)
Irish Civil War (1922–23)








Aspects




Opposition



Pacifism
Anti-war movement





Deployment



Schlieffen Plan (German)
Plan XVII (French)





Warfare



Military engagements
Naval warfare
Convoy system
Air warfare
Cryptography

Room 40


Horse use
Poison gas
Railways
Strategic bombing
Technology
Trench warfare
Total war
Christmas truce
Last surviving veterans






Civilian impact
Atrocities
Prisoners




Casualties
Economic history
1918 flu pandemic
Destruction of Kalisz
Rape of Belgium
German occupation of Belgium
German occupation of Luxembourg
German occupation of northeastern France
Ober Ost
Ottoman people

Armenian Genocide
Assyrian genocide
Pontic Greek genocide


Urkun (Kyrgyzstan)
Blockade of Germany
Women

Australia


Popular culture
German prisoners of war in the United States






Agreements




Partition of the Ottoman Empire
Sykes–Picot Agreement
Agreement of Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne
French-Armenian Agreement
Damascus Protocol
Paris Peace Conference
Venizelos–Tittoni agreement






Treaties




Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
Treaty of Lausanne
Treaty of London
Treaty of Neuilly
Treaty of St. Germain
Treaty of Sèvres
Treaty of Trianon
Treaty of Versailles





Consequences



Aftermath
"Fourteen Points"
League of Nations
World War I memorials
Centenary

outbreak













Category
Portal












v
t
e


Russian Civil War






Northern
Southern
Eastern
Central Asian


Casualties
Military engagements
Commanders





Participants





Red Army and
Red Army-aligned
(leaders)




Red Army






White movement and
White movement-aligned
(leaders)




White movement






Green armies
(leaders)




Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine








Theaters




Prelude



October Revolution
"The Storming of the Winter Palace"
Left-wing uprisings
Kerensky–Krasnov uprising
Left SR uprising





Northern Theater



Arkhangelsk and Murmansk

North Russia Intervention
Battle of Shenkursk


Finland

Finland
Finnic peoples
Soviet–Finnish war 1921–22


Baltic states

Petrograd
Estonia
Latvia
Lithuania


Kronstadt rebellion
Baltic


Anti-Bolshevik Uprisings

Murom Rebellion







Southern Theater



Ukraine
Don
1st Kuban
2nd Kuban
Tsaritsyn
Voronezh and Povorino
North Caucasus (1918–19)
March on Moscow
Mamantov Corps Raid
Orel and Kursk
Voronezh and Kastornoye
Donbass Operation
Rostov and Novocherkassk
North Caucasus (1920)
Ulagaev Landing
Northern Tavriya
Perekop-Chongar


Ukraine and Poland

Crimea (1918)
Ukrainian Front Offensive
Kiev (1917–18)
Ukraine (1918–19)
Kiev (1919)
Kharkiv (1919)
Donets Basin Offensive (1919)
Odessa
Slutsk Defence Action
West Ukraine
Polish–Lithuanian War
Poland




Transcaucasia

German Caucasus Expedition
Sochi
Shamkhor Massacre
Battle of Baku
Ossetia
Georgian–Armenian War
Armenian–Azerbaijani War
Georgia
Anzali
Ganja revolt
Turkish–Armenian War




Anti-Bolshevik Uprisings

Sheksna Uprising
Peasant Uprising in Penza Government
Livny Uprising
Grigoriev Uprising
Sapozhkov Uprising
Tambov Peasant Uprising




Uprisings against the White Army

Bender Rebellion
Bashtanka Uprising







Eastern Theater



Volga and Urals

Revolt of the Czechoslovak Legion
Capture of Kazan by the White Army
Kazan Operation
Simbirsk
Syzran and Samara
Spring Offensive (1919)
Counteroffensive of Eastern Front
Zlatoust
Perm (1918–19)
Perm (1919)
Yekaterinburg
Chelyabinsk




Siberia

Siberian Intervention
Petropavlovsk
Great Siberian Ice March
Omsk
Novonikolaevsk
Krasnoyarsk




Far East

Chita
Mongolia
Volochayevka
Spassk
Primorye
Yakutia




Anti-Bolshevik uprisings

Izhevsk–Votkinsk Uprising
Chapan War
Pitchfork Uprising
West Siberia




Uprisings against the White Army

Minusinsk Uprising







Central Asian Theater



Tashkent Rebellion (1917)
Basmachi
Kokand Autonomy
Tashkent Rebellion (1919)


Aktyubinsk Front

Aktyubinsk Operation


Fergana Front
Semirechye Front

Cherkassy
Belovodskoe Uprising
Verniy Uprising


Transcaspian Front

Ashgabat
Kushka
British Campaign in Central Asia (1918–20)
Ural Cossacks March from Fort Aleksandrovskoe to Persia


Bukhara Revolution

March of Kolesov
Bukhara operation










Aspects




General



War communism policy
New States during Russian Civil War





Aftermath



Effects
New Economic Policy





War crimes



Red Army War Crimes during Russian Civil War











Category
Portal


 definition
 textbooks
 quotes
 source texts
 media
 news stories












v
t
e


Russian Revolution/Russian Civil War



Events




Revolution



February Revolution
July Days
Kornilov affair
October Revolution
Kerensky–Krasnov uprising
Junker mutiny





Civil War



Russian Civil War
Ukrainian War of Independence

Ukrainian–Soviet War
Kiev Bolshevik Uprising
Polish–Ukrainian War


Finnish Civil War
Heimosodat
Polish–Soviet War
Estonian War of Independence
Latvian War of Independence
Lithuanian Wars of Independence
Red Army invasion of Georgia
Armenian–Azerbaijani War
Left-wing uprisings against the Bolsheviks
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Siberian Intervention








Groups



Provisional Committee of the State Duma
Russian Provisional Government
White movement
Pro-independence movements
Petrograd Soviet
Council of the People's Commissars
Military Revolutionary Committee
Russian Constituent Assembly

elections


Black Guards
Red Guards
Group of forces in battle with the counterrevolution in the South of Russia
Tsentralna Rada

Ukrainian People's Republic







Parties



Kadets
Russian Social Democratic Labour Party

Bolsheviks
Mensheviks


Socialist Revolutionary Party

Left SRs


Union of October 17





Figures




Monarchists



Nicholas II of Russia





Provisional Government



Georgy Lvov
Pavel Milyukov
Alexander Guchkov





White movement



Pyotr Nikolayevich Wrangel
Alexander Kolchak
Anton Denikin
Pyotr Krasnov
Nikolai Yudenich





Bolsheviks



Vladimir Lenin
Lev Kamenev
Grigory Zinoviev
Leon Trotsky
Mikhail Frunze
Joseph Stalin
Semyon Budyonny





Right SRs



Alexander Kerensky
Stepan Petrichenko
Boris Savinkov








International



Revolutions of 1917–23
German Revolution of 1918–1919
Bavarian Soviet Republic
Hungarian Soviet Republic
Hungarian–Romanian War
Workers' Councils in Poland
Polish–Ukrainian War
Polish–Soviet War
Slovak Soviet Republic
Finnish Civil War
Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic












v
t
e


Armed conflicts involving Russia (incl. Imperial and Soviet times)



Internal



Razin's Rebellion
Bulavin Rebellion
Pugachev's Rebellion
Decembrist revolt
Russian Civil War
August Uprising
Coup d'état attempt (1991)
1993 Russian constitutional crisis
First Chechen War
War of Dagestan
Second Chechen War
Insurgency in the North Caucasus





Pre-17th
century



Muscovite–Volga Bulgars war (1376)
Battle on Pyana River (1377)
Battle of the Vozha River (1378)
First Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1492–94)
Russo-Swedish War (1495–97)
Second Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1500–03)
Battle of the Siritsa River (1501)
Third Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1507–08)
Fourth Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1512–22)
Fifth Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1534–37)
Russo-Crimean Wars
Russo-Kazan Wars
Russo-Swedish War (1554–57)
Livonian War
Russian Conquest of Siberia (1580-1747)
Russo-Swedish War (1590–95)
Polish–Muscovite War (1605–18) and the Time of Troubles
Ingrian War
Smolensk War
Russo-Persian War (1651–53)
Sino-Russian border conflicts (1652–89)
Russo-Polish War (1654–67)
Second Northern War
Russo-Turkish War (1676–81)
Russo-Turkish War (1686–1700)





18th–19th
century



Great Northern War
Russo-Turkish War (1710–11)
Russo-Persian War (1722–23)
War of the Polish Succession (1733–38)
Austro-Russian–Turkish War (1735–39)
War of the Austrian Succession (1740–48)
Russo-Swedish War (1741–43)
Seven Years' War
Russo-Turkish War (1768–74)
Bar Confederation
Russo-Turkish War (1787–92)
Russo-Swedish War (1788–90)
Russo-Polish War (1792)
Kościuszko Uprising
Russo-Persian War (1796)
War of the Second Coalition
War of the Third Coalition
Russo-Persian War (1804–13)
War of the Fourth Coalition
Russo-Turkish War (1806–12)
Anglo-Russian War
Finnish War
War of the Fifth Coalition
French invasion of Russia
War of the Sixth Coalition
War of the Seventh Coalition
Russian conquest of the Caucasus
Caucasian War

Russo-Circassian War
Murid War


Russo-Persian War (1826–28)
Russo-Turkish War (1828–29)
November Uprising
Russian conquest of Bukhara
Hungarian Revolution of 1848
Crimean War
January Uprising
Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)
Boxer Rebellion

Russian invasion of Manchuria







20th
century



Russo-Japanese War
Russian Invasion of Tabriz, 1911
World War I
Russian Civil War
Ukrainian–Soviet War
Finnish Civil War
Heimosodat
Soviet westward offensive of 1918–19

Estonian War of Independence
Latvian War of Independence
Lithuanian–Soviet War


Polish–Soviet War
Red Army invasion of Azerbaijan
Red Army invasion of Armenia
Red Army invasion of Georgia
Red Army intervention in Mongolia
Sino-Soviet conflict (1929)
Soviet–Japanese border conflicts
Soviet invasion of Xinjiang
Xinjiang War (1937)
World War II

Soviet invasion of Poland
Winter War
Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1940)
Continuation War
Eastern Front (World War II)
Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran
Soviet-Japanese War (1945)


Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Ili Rebellion
First Indochina War
Korean War
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Eritrean War of Independence
War of Attrition
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Vietnam War
Ethio-Somali (Ogaden) War
Soviet–Afghan War





Post-Soviet



Nagorno-Karabakh War
Transnistria War
Georgian Civil War
Tajikistani Civil War
Russo-Georgian War
Intervention in Ukraine

Annexation of Crimea
War in Donbass


Intervention in Syria








Military history of Russia
Russian Winter
Russian Revolution
Cold War
Sphere of influence












v
t
e


Soviet Union topics



History



Index of Soviet Union-related articles
Russian Revolution

February
October


Russian Civil War
Russian SFSR
USSR creation treaty
New Economic Policy
Stalinism
Great Purge
Great Patriotic War (World War II)
Cold War
Khrushchev Thaw
1965 reform
Stagnation
Perestroika
Glasnost
Revolutions of 1989
Dissolution
Nostalgia
Post-Soviet states








Geography




Subdivisions



Republics

autonomous


Oblasts

autonomous


Autonomous okrugs
Closed cities

list







Regions



Caspian Sea
Caucasus Mountains
European Russia
North Caucasus
Siberia
Ural Mountains
West Siberian Plain








Politics




General



Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations

Brezhnev Doctrine


Government

list


Human rights

LGBT


Law
Leaders

Collective leadership


Passport system
State ideology

Marxism–Leninism
Leninism
Stalinism







Bodies



Communist Party

organisation
Central Committee

Politburo
Secretariat


Congress
General Secretary


Congress of Soviets (1922–1936)
Supreme Soviet (1938–1991)
Congress of People's Deputies (1989–1991)
Supreme Court





Offices



Premier
President
Deputy Premier
First Deputy Premier





Security services



Cheka
GPU
NKVD
MVD
MGB
KGB





Political repression



Red Terror
Collectivization
Great Purge
Population transfer
Gulag

list


Holodomor
Political abuse of psychiatry





Ideological repression



Religion
Suppressed research
Censorship
Censorship of images








Economy



Agriculture
Central Bank
Energy policy
Five-Year Plans
Net material product
Inventions
Ruble (currency)
Internet domain
Transport





Science



Communist Academy
Academy of Sciences
Academy of Medical Sciences
Lenin All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Sharashkas
Naukograds

list







Society







Crime
Demographics

Soviet people
working class
1989 census


Languages

Linguistics


LGBT





Culture



Ballet
Cinema
Fashion
Literature
Music

opera


Propaganda
Sports
Stalinist architecture





Opposition



Soviet dissidents and their groups

list










Anthem

republics


Emblem

republics


Flag

republics










 Templates



Departments
Russian Revolution 1917
Joseph Stalin
Stagnation Era
Fall of Communism








 Book
 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Russian_Civil_War&oldid=818473007"					Categories: Soviet UnionCivil wars involving the states and peoples of EuropeCivil wars of the Industrial eraRevolution-based civil warsRussian RevolutionWars involving RussiaWars involving the Soviet UnionRussian Civil WarConflicts in 1917Conflicts in 1918Conflicts in 1919Communism-based civil warsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2016CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru)CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles containing Russian-language textWikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2016Articles with unsourced statements from December 2008Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012Interlanguage link template link numberArticles with unsourced statements from September 2009Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016Articles needing additional references from June 2015All articles needing additional referencesPages containing links to subscription-only contentCS1 Estonian-language sources (et)