For other uses, see Sand (disambiguation).




Sand dunes in the Idehan Ubari, Libya.






Close-up (1×1 cm) of sand from the Gobi Desert, Mongolia.


Sand is a naturally occurring granular material composed of finely divided rock and mineral particles. It is defined by size, being finer than gravel and coarser than silt. Sand can also refer to a textural class of soil or soil type; i.e., a soil containing more than 85 percent sand-sized particles by mass.[1]
The composition of sand varies, depending on the local rock sources and conditions, but the most common constituent of sand in inland continental settings and non-tropical coastal settings is silica (silicon dioxide, or SiO2), usually in the form of quartz. The second most common type of sand is calcium carbonate, for example, aragonite, which has mostly been created, over the past half billion years, by various forms of life, like coral and shellfish. For example, it is the primary form of sand apparent in areas where reefs have dominated the ecosystem for millions of years like the Caribbean.
Sand is a non-renewable resource over human timescales, and sand suitable for making concrete is in high demand.[2]



Contents


1 Composition
2 Study
3 Uses
4 Resources and environmental concerns
5 Hazards
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Composition




Heavy minerals (dark) in a quartz beach sand (Chennai, India).






Sand from Coral Pink Sand Dunes State Park, Utah. These are grains of quartz with a hematite coating providing the orange color.






Sand from Pismo Beach, California. Components are primarily quartz, chert, igneous rock and shell fragments.


The exact definition of sand varies. The scientific Unified Soil Classification System used in engineering and geology corresponds to US Standard Sieves,[3] and defines sand as particles with a diameter of between 0.074 and 4.75 millimeters. By another definition, in terms of particle size as used by geologists, sand particles range in diameter from 0.0625 mm (or ​1⁄16 mm) to 2 mm. An individual particle in this range size is termed a sand grain. Sand grains are between gravel (with particles ranging from 2 mm up to 64 mm by the latter system, and from 4.75 mm up to 75 mm in the former) and silt (particles smaller than 0.0625 mm down to 0.004 mm). The size specification between sand and gravel has remained constant for more than a century, but particle diameters as small as 0.02 mm were considered sand under the Albert Atterberg standard in use during the early 20th century. A 1953 engineering standard published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials set the minimum sand size at 0.074 mm. A 1938 specification of the United States Department of Agriculture was 0.05 mm.[4] Sand feels gritty when rubbed between the fingers. Silt, by comparison, feels like flour).
ISO 14688 grades sands as fine, medium, and coarse with ranges 0.063 mm to 0.2 mm to 0.63 mm to 2.0 mm. In the United States, sand is commonly divided into five sub-categories based on size: very fine sand (​1⁄16 – ​1⁄8 mm diameter), fine sand (​1⁄8 mm – ​1⁄4 mm), medium sand (​1⁄4 mm – ​1⁄2 mm), coarse sand (​1⁄2 mm – 1 mm), and very coarse sand (1 mm – 2 mm). These sizes are based on the Krumbein phi scale, where size in Φ = -log2D; D being the particle size in mm. On this scale, for sand the value of Φ varies from −1 to +4, with the divisions between sub-categories at whole numbers.




Close up of black volcanic sand from Perissa, Santorini, Greece


The most common constituent of sand, in inland continental settings and non-tropical coastal settings, is silica (silicon dioxide, or SiO2), usually in the form of quartz, which, because of its chemical inertness and considerable hardness, is the most common mineral resistant to weathering.
The composition of mineral sand is highly variable, depending on the local rock sources and conditions. The bright white sands found in tropical and subtropical coastal settings are eroded limestone and may contain coral and shell fragments in addition to other organic or organically derived fragmental material, suggesting sand formation depends on living organisms, too.[5] The gypsum sand dunes of the White Sands National Monument in New Mexico are famous for their bright, white color. Arkose is a sand or sandstone with considerable feldspar content, derived from weathering and erosion of a (usually nearby) granitic rock outcrop. Some sands contain magnetite, chlorite, glauconite or gypsum. Sands rich in magnetite are dark to black in color, as are sands derived from volcanic basalts and obsidian. Chlorite-glauconite bearing sands are typically green in color, as are sands derived from basaltic (lava) with a high olivine content. Many sands, especially those found extensively in Southern Europe, have iron impurities within the quartz crystals of the sand, giving a deep yellow color. Sand deposits in some areas contain garnets and other resistant minerals, including some small gemstones.
Study




An electron micrograph showing grains of sand






Pitted sand grains from the Western Desert, Egypt. Pitting is a consequence of wind transportation.


The study of individual grains can reveal much historical information as to the origin and kind of transport of the grain.[6] Quartz sand that is recently weathered from granite or gneiss quartz crystals will be angular. It is called grus in geology or sharp sand in the building trade where it is preferred for concrete, and in gardening where it is used as a soil amendment to loosen clay soils. Sand that is transported long distances by water or wind will be rounded, with characteristic abrasion patterns on the grain surface. Desert sand is typically rounded.
People who collect sand as a hobby are known as arenophiles. Organisms that thrive in sandy environments are psammophiles.[7]
Uses






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Sand sorting tower at a gravel pit.



Agriculture: Sandy soils are ideal for crops such as watermelons, peaches and peanuts, and their excellent drainage characteristics make them suitable for intensive dairy farming.
Aquaria: Sand makes a low cost aquarium base material which some believe is better than gravel for home use. It is also a necessity for saltwater reef tanks, which emulate environments composed largely of aragonite sand broken down from coral and shellfish.
Artificial reefs: Geotextile bagged sand can serve as the foundation for new reefs.
Artificial islands in the Persian Gulf.
Beach nourishment: Governments move sand to beaches where tides, storms or deliberate changes to the shoreline erode the original sand.[8]
Brick: Manufacturing plants add sand to a mixture of clay and other materials for manufacturing bricks.
Cob: Coarse sand makes up as much as 75% of cob.
Concrete: Sand is often a principal component of this critical construction material.
Glass: Sand rich in silica is the principal component in common glasses.
Hydraulic fracturing: A drilling technique for natural gas, which uses rounded silica sand as a "proppant", a material to hold open cracks that are caused by the hydraulic fracturing process.
Landscaping: Sand makes small hills and slopes (golf courses would be an example).
Mortar: Sand is mixed with masonry cement or Portland cement and lime to be used in masonry construction.
Paint: Mixing sand with paint produces a textured finish for walls and ceilings or non-slip floor surfaces.
Railroads: Engine drivers and rail transit operators use sand to improve the traction of wheels on the rails.
Recreation. Playing with sand is a favorite beach time activity. One of the most beloved uses of sand is to make sometimes intricate, sometimes simple structures known as sand castles. Such structures are well known for their impermanence. Sand is also used in children's play. Special play areas enclosing a significant area of sand, known as sandboxes, are common on many public playgrounds, and even at some single family homes.
Roads: Sand improves traction (and thus traffic safety) in icy or snowy conditions.
Sand animation: Performance artists draw images in sand. Makers of animated films use the same term to describe their use of sand on frontlit or backlit glass.
Sand casting: Casters moisten or oil molding sand, also known as foundry sand and then shape it into molds into which they pour molten material. This type of sand must be able to withstand high temperatures and pressure, allow gases to escape, have a uniform, small grain size and be non-reactive with metals.
Sand castles: Shaping sand into castles or other miniature buildings is a popular beach activity.
Sandbags: These protect against floods and gunfire. The inexpensive bags are easy to transport when empty, and unskilled volunteers can quickly fill them with local sand in emergencies.
Sandblasting: Graded sand serves as an abrasive in cleaning, preparing, and polishing.
Thermal weapon: While not in widespread use anymore, sand used to be heated and poured on invading troops in the classical and medieval time periods.
Water filtration: Media filters use sand for filtering water.
Wuḍūʾ: the Islamic procedure for washing parts of the body.
Zoanthid "skeletons": Animals in this order of marine benthic cnidarians related to corals and sea anemones, incorporate sand into their mesoglea for structural strength, which they need because they lack a true skeleton.

Resources and environmental concerns
Only some sands are suitable for the construction industry, for example for making concrete. Because of the growth of population and of cities and the consequent construction activity there is a huge demand for these special kinds of sand, and natural sources are running low. In 2012 French director Denis Delestrac made a documentary called "Sand Wars" about the impact of the lack of construction sand. It shows the ecological and economic effects of both legal and illegal trade in construction sand.[9][10][11]
Sand's many uses require a significant dredging industry, raising environmental concerns over fish depletion, landslides, and flooding.[12] Countries such as China, Indonesia, Malaysia and Cambodia ban sand exports, citing these issues as a major factor.[13] It is estimated that the annual consumption of sand and gravel is 40 billion tons and sand is a US$70 billion global industry.[14]
Hazards
While sand is generally non-toxic, sand-using activities such as sandblasting require precautions. Bags of silica sand used for sandblasting now carry labels warning the user to wear respiratory protection to avoid breathing the resulting fine silica dust. Safety data sheets for silica sand state that "excessive inhalation of crystalline silica is a serious health concern".[15]
In areas of high pore water pressure, sand and salt water can form quicksand, which is a colloid hydrogel that behaves like a liquid. Quicksand produces a considerable barrier to escape for creatures caught within, who often die from exposure (not from submersion) as a result.
See also



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Sand



Aggregate (geology)
Beach
Construction aggregate
Desert sand (color)
Dry quicksand
Energetically modified cement (EMC)
Heavy mineral sands ore deposits
Oil sands
Particle size
Quicksand
Revolving rivers
Sand island
Sand rat
Sandstone
Sandstorm
Sand theft
Singing sand
White Sands National Monument

References


^ Glossary of terms in soil science (PDF). Ottawa: Agriculture Canada. 1976. p. 35. ISBN 0662015339. 
^ Constable, Harriet (3 September 2017). "How the demand for sand is killing rivers". BBC News Magazine. Retrieved 9 September 2017. 
^ Unified Soil Classification System
^ Urquhart, Leonard Church, "Civil Engineering Handbook" McGraw-Hill Book Company (1959) p. 8-2
^ Seaweed also plays a role in the formation of sand. Susanscott.net (1 March 2002). Retrieved on 24 November 2011.
^ Krinsley, D.H., Smalley, I.J. 1972. Sand. American Scientist 60, 286-291
^ "Psammophile". Merriam-Webster.com. Retrieved 27 January 2016. 
^ "Importing Sand, Glass May Help Restore Beaches". NPR.org. 17 July 2007. 
^ See Sand Wars teaser here.
^ Simon Ings (26 April 2014). "The story of climate change gets star treatment". New Scientist: 28–9. 
^ Strände in Gefahr? Arte Future, last updated 23 April 2014
^ Torres, Aurora; et al. (8 September 2017). "The world is facing a global sand crisis". The Conversation. Retrieved 9 September 2017. CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al. (link)
^ "The hourglass effect". The Economist. 8 October 2009. Retrieved 14 October 2009. 
^ Beiser, Vince (26 March 2015). "The Deadly Global War for Sand". Wired. Retrieved 26 March 2015. 
^ Silica sand MSDS. Simplot (13 March 2011). Retrieved on 24 November 2011.


External links



Look up sand in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.


 Media related to Sand at Wikimedia Commons

Beach Sand: What It Is, Where It Comes From and How It Gets Here - Beaufort County Library
 Beach, Chandler B., ed. (1914). "Sand". The New Student's Reference Work. Chicago: F. E. Compton and Co. 


Sand Mining Side Effects


The World Is Running Out Of Sand - New York Times
Sand Mining In India Rivers Causing Problems - New York Times
How Demand For Sand Is Killing Rivers In Africa - BBC
Dubai Imports Sand - BBC







v
t
e


Geotechnical engineering






Exploration
Investigation
Testing







On-site



Cone penetration test
Standard penetration test
Monitoring well

piezometer


Borehole
Crosshole sonic logging
Nuclear densometer test
Static load testing





Laboratory



Atterberg limits
California bearing ratio
Direct shear test
Hydrometer
Proctor compaction test
R-value
Sieve analysis
Triaxial shear test
Hydraulic conductivity tests
Water content tests








Soil




Materials



Clay
Silt
Sand
Gravel
Peat
Permafrost
Loam
Loess





Properties



Soil classification
Hydraulic conductivity
Water content
Void ratio
Bulk density
Thixotropy
Reynolds' dilatancy
Angle of repose
Cohesion
Porosity
Permeability
Specific storage





Mechanics



Effective stress
Pore water pressure
Shear strength
Overburden pressure
Consolidation
Compaction
Shear wave
Lateral earth pressure








Foundations



Shallow
Deep
Bearing capacity
Dynamic load testing
Pile integrity test
Wave equation analysis
Statnamic load test





Retaining walls



Gabion
Ground freezing
Mechanically stabilized earth
Pressure grouting
Slurry wall
Soil nailing
Tieback





Stability



Slope

analysis
mass wasting
landslide


Deformation monitoring

automated







Earthquakes



Soil liquefaction
Response spectrum
Seismic hazard
Ground–structure interaction





Geosynthetics



Geotextile
Geomembrane
Geosynthetic clay liner
Cellular confinement





Numerical analysis



SEEP2D
STABL
SVFlux
SVSlope
UTEXAS












v
t
e


Coastal geography



Landforms



Anchialine pool
Archipelago
Atoll
Avulsion
Ayre
Barrier island
Bay
Baymouth bar
Bight
Bodden
Brackish marsh
Cape
Channel
Cliff
Coast
Coastal plain
Coastal waterfall
Continental margin
Continental shelf
Coral reef
Cove
Dune

cliff-top


Estuary
Firth
Fjard
Fjord
Freshwater marsh
Fundus
Gat
Geo
Gulf
Gut
Headland
Inlet
Intertidal wetland
Island
Islet
Isthmus
Lagoon
Machair
Marine terrace
Mega delta
Mouth bar
Mudflat
Natural arch
Peninsula
Reef
Regressive delta
Ria
River delta
Salt marsh
Shoal
Shore
Skerry
Sound
Spit
Stack
Strait
Strand plain
Submarine canyon
Tidal island
Tidal marsh
Tide pool
Tied island
Tombolo
Windwatt










Beaches



Beach cusps
Beach evolution
Coastal morphodynamics
Beach ridge
Beachrock
Pocket beach
Raised beach
Recession
Shell beach
Shingle beach
Storm beach
Wash margin





Processes



Blowhole
Cliffed coast
Coastal biogeomorphology
Coastal erosion
Concordant coastline
Current
Cuspate foreland
Discordant coastline
Emergent coastline
Feeder bluff
Fetch
Flat coast
Graded shoreline
Headlands and bays
Ingression coast
Large-scale coastal behaviour
Longshore drift
Marine regression
Marine transgression
Raised shoreline
Rip current
Rocky shore
Sea cave
Sea foam
Shoal
Steep coast
Submergent coastline
Surf break
Surf zone
Surge channel
Swash
Undertow
Volcanic arc
Wave-cut platform
Wave shoaling
Wind wave
Wrack zone





Management



Accretion
Coastal management
Integrated coastal zone management
Submersion





Related



Bulkhead line
Grain size

boulder
clay
cobble
granule
pebble
sand
shingle
silt


Intertidal zone
Littoral zone
Physical oceanography
Region of freshwater influence








 Category
 Commons









Authority control



GND: 4051537-0
NDL: 00571682











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sand&oldid=818399392"					Categories: SandSoil-based building materialsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al.Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse dmy dates from July 2014Articles needing additional references from January 2018All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRWWikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameterWikipedia articles with GND identifiers