This article is about the administrative territorial entity. For the region in Serbia and Montenegro, see Sandžak. For the village in Iran, see Sanjaq, Iran.
Distinguish from Saint Jacques.


State organisation of
the Ottoman Empire







House of Osman



Classic period





Divan (Porte)
Grand Vizier





Constitutional period





Imperial Government

General Assembly
(Senate • Chamber of Deputies)









Millets · Administrative divisions
Vassal and tributary states








v
t
e





Sanjaks (Turkish pronunciation: [sanˈdʒak], Ottoman Turkish: سنجاق‎, modern: Sancak) were administrative divisions of the Ottoman Empire. Sanjak, and the variant spellings sandjak, sanjaq, and sinjaq, are English transliterations of the Turkish word sancak, meaning district, banner, or flag.[1] Sanjaks were also called by the Arabic word for banner or flag: لواء liwa.
Ottoman provinces (eyalets, later vilayets) were divided into sanjaks (also called livas) governed by sanjakbeys (also called Mutesarriff) and were further subdivided into timars (fiefs held by timariots), kadiluks (the area of responsibility of a judge, or Kadı)[2] and zeamets (also ziam; larger timars).
The unofficial, geo-political region of Sandžak in Serbia and Montenegro derives its name from the former Ottoman Sanjak of Novi Pazar.



Contents


1 Names
2 Ottoman Empire

2.1 History
2.2 Government


3 Occupied Enemy Territory Administration
4 Mandate of Syria
5 References



Names[edit]
Liwa or Liwa (Arabic: لواء‎) is an Arabic term interchangeable with the Turkish term Sanjak. After the fall of the Ottoman Empire, the term was used in the Arab countries formerly under Ottoman rule. It was gradually replaced by other terms like qadaa and mintaqah and is now defunct. It is used occasionally in Syria to refer to the Hatay Province, ceded by the French mandate of Syria to Turkey in 1939, at which time was known as Liwa' Iskenderun
Ottoman Empire[edit]
Main article: Administrative divisions of the Ottoman Empire
History[edit]
The first sanjaks appear to have been created by Orhan in circa 1340 or earlier. These were Sultan-öyügü (later Sultan-önü), Hudavendigar-eli, Koca-eli and Karasi-eli.[3]
The districts which made up an eyalet were known as sanjaks, each under the command of a sanjak-bey. The number of sanjaks in each eyalet varied considerably. In 1609, Ayn Ali noted that Rumelia Eyalet had 24 sanjaks, but that six of these in the Peloponnesos had been detached to form the separate Morea Eyalet. Anatolia had 14 sanjaks and the Damascus Eyalet had 11. There were, in addition, several eyalets where there was no formal division into sanjaks. These, in Ayn Ali’s list were Basra and part of the Baghdad, Al-Hasa, Egypt, Tripoli, Tunis and Algiers. He adds to the list Yemen, with the note that ‘at the moment the Imams have usurped control’. These eyalets were, however, exceptional: the typical pattern was the eyalet subdivided into sanjaks. By the 16th century, these presented a rational administrative pattern of territories, based usually around the town or settlement from which the sanjak took its name, and with a population of perhaps 100,000.[4]
However, this had not always been the case. It seems more likely that before the mid-15th century, the most important factor in determining the pattern of sanjaks was the existence of former lordships and principalities, and of areas where marcher lords had acquired territories for themselves and their followers. Some sanjaks in fact preserved the names of the dynasties that had ruled there before the Ottoman conquest.[4]
In 1609, Ayn Ali made a note on their formal status. In listing the sanjaks in the Diyarbekir Eyalet, he notes that it had ten ‘Ottoman districts’ and, in addition, eight ‘districts of the Kurdish lords’. In these cases, when a lord died, the governorship did not go to an outsider, but to his son. In other respects, however, they resembled normal Ottoman sanjaks, in that the revenues were registered and allocated to fief holders who went to war under their lord. In addition, however, Ayn Ali noted that there were five ‘sovereign sanjaks’, which their lords disposed of ‘as private property’, and which were outside the system of provincial government. Ayn Ali records similar independent or semi-independent districts in the Çıldır Eyalet in north-eastern Turkey and, most famously, in the Van Eyalet where the Khans of Bitlis ruled independently until the 19th century. There were other areas, too, which enjoyed autonomy or semi-autonomy. In the second half of the 16th century, Kilis came under the hereditary governorship of the Janbulad family, while Adana remained under the rule of the pre-Ottoman dynasty of Ramazanoghlu. In Lebanon, Ayn Ali refers to the Druze chieftains with the note: ‘there are non-Muslim lords in the mountains.’ There were other autonomous enclaves in the Empire, whether or not they received formal recognition as sanjaks but, by the 16th century, these were exceptional.[4]
In the 1840s, the boundaries of sanjaks were redrawn to establish equal units of comparable population and wealth. Each of these sanjaks was headed by a muhassil.[5]
Government[edit]
Most of the sanjaks throughout the Empire were under the rule of non-hereditary appointees, who had no permanent family of territorial connections with the area.[4]
The Sanjak was governed just as a Vilayet on a smaller scale.[6] The Mutesarrif was appointed by Imperial decree, and represented the Vali, corresponding with the Government through him, except in some special circumstances where the Sanjak was independent, in which case the Mutesarrif corresponded directly with the Ministry of the Interior.[6]
A sanjak was typically divided into kazas (Arabic qaḍāʾ, pl. aqḍiya), also known as kadiluks, each headed by a kadı, or judge.[2]
Occupied Enemy Territory Administration[edit]
The sanjaks were used as a basis for the Occupied Enemy Territory Administration.

OETA South, consisting of the former Ottoman sanjaks: Jerusalem Sanjak, Nablus Sanjak and Acre Sanjak,
OETA North (later renamed OETA West ) consisting of the former Ottoman sanjaks of Beirut Sanjak, Lebanon, Latakia Sanjak and a number of sub-districts,
OETA East consisting of the former Ottoman Syria Vilayet and Hejaz Vilayet.

Mandate of Syria[edit]

Alexandretta Sanjak

References[edit]



^ Dictionary.com - Sanjak entry
^ a b Malcolm, Noel (1994). Bosnia: A Short History. Macmillan. p. 50. ISBN 0-330-41244-2. 
^ D. E. Pitcher (1972). An Historical Geography of the Ottoman Empire: From Earliest Times to the End of the Sixteenth Century. Brill Archive. p. 125. Retrieved 2013-06-02. 
^ a b c d Imber, Colin (2002). "The Ottoman Empire, 1300-1650: The Structure of Power" (PDF). pp. 177–200. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-07-26. 
^ Stanford Jay Shaw; Ezel Kural Shaw (1977). History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey. Cambridge University Press. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-521-29166-8. Retrieved 2013-06-04. 
^ a b A handbook of Asia Minor Published 1919 by Naval staff, Intelligence dept. in London. Page 204









v
t
e


State organisation of the Ottoman Empire



Central system




House of Osman



Ottoman dynasty (Ottoman Caliphate)
Imperial Harem
Enderûn

Palace Schools







Government





Imperial Council (Porte)
(Classical period)




Grand Vizier
Viziers
Kazaskers
Defterdars/Ministers of Finance
Nişancı
Reis ül-Küttab






Imperial Government
(reform period)




Ministry of Foreign Affairs






General Assembly
(constitutional period)




Senate
Chamber of Deputies
(political parties)















Administrative
divisions





Millets



Islam

Shaykh al-Islām


Christianity

Orthodox
Armenian
Syriac Orthodox
Coptic Orthodox


Judaism

Hakham Bashi







Provincial



Eyalets

Beylerbeys


Vilayets
Sanjaks

Sanjakbeys


Mutasarrifates
Kazas/Kadiluks
Vassal and tributary states

Rayas

















v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sanjak&oldid=814867223"					Categories: Subdivisions of the Ottoman EmpireTypes of country subdivisionsTurkish words and phrasesHidden categories: Articles containing Ottoman Turkish-language textArticles containing Arabic-language text