For other uses, see Science fiction (disambiguation).
"Sci Fi", "Scifi", and "Sci-Fi" redirect here. For other uses, see Scifi (disambiguation).




Martian invasion from H. G. Wells' The War of the Worlds







Speculative fiction




Alternate history


List of alternate history fiction
Retrofuturism
Sidewise Award
Writers








Fantasy fiction


Anime
Fantasy art
Fiction magazines
Films
Genres
History
Legendary creatures
Literature
Quests
Artifacts
Races
Superheroes
Television
Themes
Worlds
Writers








Science fiction


Anime
Artists
Awards
Climate fiction
Conventions
Editors
Fandom
Fiction magazines
Genres
History
Organizations
Film
Television
Themes
Writers








Horror fiction


Anime
Awards
Conventions
Fiction magazines
Films
Genres
Podcasts
Television
Writers








Miscellaneous


Fictional universe
Internet Speculative Fiction Database
The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction






 Portal





v
t
e





Science fiction (often shortened to SF or sci-fi) is a genre of speculative fiction, typically dealing with imaginative concepts such as futuristic science and technology, space travel, time travel, faster than light travel, parallel universes, and extraterrestrial life. Science fiction often explores the potential consequences of scientific and other innovations, and has been called a "literature of ideas".[1] It usually avoids the supernatural, unlike the related genre of fantasy. Historically, science-fiction stories have had a grounding in actual science, but now this is only expected of hard science fiction.[2]



Contents


1 Definitions
2 Characteristics
3 History

3.1 Film
3.2 Television
3.3 "sci-fi"


4 Influence

4.1 Sense of wonder


5 Hard and soft science fiction

5.1 Hard science fiction
5.2 Soft science fiction


6 Subgenres

6.1 Space opera
6.2 Space Western
6.3 Utopian and dystopian fiction
6.4 Time travel
6.5 Military science fiction
6.6 Superhuman
6.7 Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic
6.8 Steampunk
6.9 Cyberpunk and biopunk


7 Related genres

7.1 Speculative fiction
7.2 Fantasy
7.3 Horror fiction
7.4 Alternate history
7.5 Mystery fiction
7.6 Superhero fiction


8 Science fiction studies

8.1 As serious literature
8.2 As protest literature


9 Fandom and community

9.1 Authors
9.2 Awards
9.3 Conventions, clubs, and organizations
9.4 Fanzines and online fandom
9.5 Fan fiction


10 World-wide examples

10.1 Africa

10.1.1 African diaspora in the Americas


10.2 Asia

10.2.1 India
10.2.2 Bangladesh
10.2.3 China
10.2.4 Korea
10.2.5 Middle East


10.3 Europe

10.3.1 France and Belgium
10.3.2 Italy
10.3.3 Germany
10.3.4 Russia and ex-Soviet countries
10.3.5 Spain
10.3.6 Other European countries


10.4 Australia
10.5 Canada
10.6 Latin America


11 See also
12 References
13 Sources
14 External links



Definitions[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Definitions of science fiction.




Cover of Imagination, August 1958


Science fiction is difficult to define, as it includes a wide range of subgenres and themes. Hugo Gernsback, who suggested the term "scientifiction" for his Amazing Stories magazine, wrote: "By 'scientifiction' I mean the Jules Verne, H. G. Wells and Edgar Allan Poe type of story—a charming romance intermingled with scientific fact and prophetic vision... Not only do these amazing tales make tremendously interesting reading—they are always instructive. They supply knowledge... in a very palatable form... New adventures pictured for us in the scientifiction of today are not at all impossible of realization tomorrow... Many great science stories destined to be of historical interest are still to be written... Posterity will point to them as having blazed a new trail, not only in literature and fiction, but progress as well."[3][4]
James Blish wrote about the English term "science fiction": "Wells used the term originally to cover what we would today call ‘hard’ science fiction, in which a conscientious attempt to be faithful to already known facts (as of the date of writing) was the substrate on which the story was to be built, and if the story was also to contain a miracle, it ought at least not to contain a whole arsenal of them."[5] Rod Serling said, "fantasy is the impossible made probable. Science fiction is the improbable made possible."[6]
Isaac Asimov said: "Science fiction can be defined as that branch of literature which deals with the reaction of human beings to changes in science and technology."[7] According to Robert A. Heinlein, "a handy short definition of almost all science fiction might read: realistic speculation about possible future events, based solidly on adequate knowledge of the real world, past and present, and on a thorough understanding of the nature and significance of the scientific method."[8]
Lester del Rey wrote, "Even the devoted aficionado—or fan—has a hard time trying to explain what science fiction is", and that the reason for there not being a "full satisfactory definition" is that "there are no easily delineated limits to science fiction."[9] Author and editor Damon Knight summed up the difficulty, saying "science fiction is what we point to when we say it",[10] while author Mark C. Glassy argues that the definition of science fiction is like the definition of pornography: you do not know what it is, but you know it when you see it.[11]
Characteristics[edit]




A person reads from a futuristic wraparound display screen.


Science fiction is largely based on writing rationally about alternative possible worlds or futures.[12] Quoting Hal Clement, Frederik Pohl said that[13]

The author is entitled to One Big Lie. He can say, for example, that faster-than-light travel is possible; or that a time machine has been invented; or that men can read each other's minds. What comes after that may not be a lie, however; it must follow naturally and inevitably from that first premise.

Science fiction elements include:

A temporal setting in the future, in alternative timelines, or in a historical past that contradicts known facts of history or the archaeological record.
A spatial setting or scenes in outer space (e.g. spaceflight), on other worlds, or on subterranean earth.[14]
Characters that include aliens, mutants, robots, and other predicted and imagined beings.
Futuristic or plausible technology such as ray guns, teleportation, mind control, and superintelligent computers.[15]
Scientific principles that are new or that contradict accepted physical laws, for example time travel and faster-than-light travel or communication.
New and different political or social systems, including utopian, dystopian, post-scarcity, or post-apocalyptic.[16]
Future history of humans on earth or other planets.
Paranormal abilities such as telepathy and telekinesis.[17])
Other universes or dimensions and travel between them.

History[edit]
For more details on this topic, see History of science fiction.
As a means of understanding the world through speculation and storytelling, science fiction has antecedents which go back to an era when the dividing line separating the mythological from the historical was somewhat blurred. A True Story, written in the 2nd century AD by the Hellenized Syrian satirist Lucian, contains many themes and tropes that are characteristic of modern science fiction, including travel to other worlds, extraterrestrial lifeforms, interplanetary warfare, and artificial life, and is considered by some to be the first science fiction novel.[18] Some of the stories from The Arabian Nights,[19][20] along with the 10th century The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter[20] and Ibn al-Nafis's 13th century Theologus Autodidactus[21] also contain elements of science fiction.
A product of the Age of Reason and the development of modern science itself, Johannes Kepler's Somnium (1620–1630). Francis Bacon's The New Atlantis (1627),[22] Cyrano de Bergerac's Comical History of the States and Empires of the Moon (1657), his The States and Empires of the Sun (1662), Margaret Cavendish's "The Blazing World" (1666),[23] Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels (1726), Ludvig Holberg's novel Nicolai Klimii Iter Subterraneum (1741) and Voltaire's Micromégas (1752) are some of the first true science fantasy works,[24][25] which feature adventures in fictional and fantastical places, or the Moon. Isaac Asimov and Carl Sagan considered Kepler's work the first science fiction story.[26] It depicts a journey to the Moon and how the Earth's motion is seen from there.
Following the 18th-century development of the novel as a literary form, Mary Shelley's books Frankenstein (1818) and The Last Man (1826) helped define the form of the science fiction novel, and Brian Aldiss has argued that Frankenstein was the first work of science fiction.[27] Edgar Allan Poe wrote several stories which are considered to be science fiction, including one about a trip to the Moon.[28][29]




H. G. Wells


Then with the dawn of new technologies such as electricity, the telegraph, and new forms of powered transportation, writers including H. G. Wells and Jules Verne created a body of work that became popular across broad cross-sections of society.[30] Wells' The War of the Worlds (1898) describes an invasion of late Victorian England by Martians using tripod fighting machines equipped with advanced weaponry. It is a seminal depiction of an alien invasion of Earth.[31]
In the late 19th century, the term "scientific romance" was used in Britain to describe much of this fiction. This produced additional offshoots, such as the 1884 novella Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions by Edwin Abbott Abbott. The term would continue to be used into the early 20th century for writers such as Olaf Stapledon.




Jules Verne


In the early 20th century, pulp magazines helped develop a new generation of mainly American SF writers, influenced by Hugo Gernsback, the founder of Amazing Stories magazine.[32] In 1912, Edgar Rice Burroughs published A Princess of Mars, the first of his three-decade-long series of Barsoom novels, situated on Mars and featuring John Carter as the hero. The 1928 publication of Philip Francis Nowlan's original Buck Rogers story, Armageddon 2419, in Amazing Stories was a landmark event. This story led to comic strips featuring Buck Rogers (1929), Brick Bradford (1933), and Flash Gordon (1934). The comic strips and derivative movie serials greatly popularized science fiction.
In the late 1930s, John W. Campbell became editor of Astounding Science Fiction, and a critical mass of new writers emerged in New York City in a group called the Futurians, including Isaac Asimov, Damon Knight, Donald A. Wollheim, Frederik Pohl, James Blish, Judith Merril, and others.[33] Other important writers during this period include E.E. (Doc) Smith, Robert A. Heinlein, Arthur C. Clarke, Olaf Stapledon, and A. E. van Vogt. Working outside the Campbell influence were Ray Bradbury and Stanisław Lem. Campbell's tenure at Astounding is considered to be the beginning of the Golden Age of science fiction, characterized by hard SF stories celebrating scientific achievement and progress.[32] This lasted until post-war technological advances, new magazines such as Galaxy, edited by H. L. Gold, and a new generation of writers began writing stories with less emphasis on the hard sciences and more on the social sciences.
In the 1950s, the Beat generation included speculative writers such as William S. Burroughs. 1965's Dune by Frank Herbert featured a much more complex and detailed imagined future society than had been common in science fiction before.[34] Other writers of the 1960s and 1970s including Samuel R. Delany, Roger Zelazny, and Harlan Ellison explored new trends, ideas, and writing styles; while a group of writers, mainly in Britain, became known as the New Wave for their embrace of a high degree of experimentation, both in form and in content, and a highbrow and self-consciously "literary" or artistic sensibility;[24] while Larry Niven and others contributed to hard science fiction, [35] and Ursula K. Le Guin and others pioneered soft science fiction.[36]
In the 1980s, cyberpunk authors like William Gibson turned away from the optimism and support for progress of traditional science fiction.[37] This dystopian vision of the near future is described in the work of Philip K. Dick, such as Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? and We Can Remember It for You Wholesale. C. J. Cherryh's detailed explorations of alien life and complex scientific challenges influenced a generation of writers.[38]
Emerging themes in the 1990s included environmental issues, the implications of the global Internet and the expanding information universe, questions about biotechnology and nanotechnology, as well as a post-Cold War interest in post-scarcity societies; Neal Stephenson's The Diamond Age comprehensively explores these themes. Lois McMaster Bujold's Vorkosigan novels brought the character-driven story back into prominence.[39] Concern about the rapid pace of technological change crystallized around the concept of the technological singularity, popularized by Vernor Vinge's novel Marooned in Realtime and then taken up by other authors.[40]
Film[edit]
Main articles: Science fiction film and Lists of science fiction films
The first science fiction film is considered to be 1902's A Trip to the Moon, directed by French filmmaker Georges Méliès.[41] It was profoundly influential on later filmmakers, bringing creativity to the cinematic medium and offering fantasy for pure entertainment, a rare goal in film at the time. In addition, Méliès's innovative editing and special effects techniques were widely imitated and became important elements of the medium.[42] The film also spurred on the development of cinematic science fiction and fantasy by demonstrating that scientific themes worked on the screen and that reality could be transformed by the camera.[41][43]
1927's Metropolis, directed by Fritz Lang, is the first feature-length science fiction film.[44] Although not well received in its time, it has come to be considered one of the greatest and most influential films of all time.[45][46][47] Since that time science fiction films have become one of the most popular and enduring film genres.[48]
In 1954 Godzilla, directed by Ishirō Honda, began the kaiju subgenre of science fiction film, which feature large creatures of any form, usually attacking a major city or engaging other monsters in battle.[49][50]
1968's 2001: A Space Odyssey, directed by Stanley Kubrick and based on the work of Arthur C. Clarke, rose above the mostly B-movie offerings up to that time in scope and quality and greatly influenced later science fiction films.[51][52][53][54]
In 1977 the Star Wars film series, created by George Lucas, began with Star Wars (later subtitled Episode IV: A New Hope).[55][56] It and subsequent Star Wars films became a worldwide popular culture phenomenon[57] and the third highest-grossing film series.[58]
Science fiction films often “crossover” with other genres including animation (Wall-E), fantasy (Avatar), gangster (Sky Racket), Western (Serenity), comedy (Spaceballs), war (Enemy Mine), sports (Rollerball), mystery (Minority Report), film noir (Blade Runner), and romantic comedy (Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind).[48] Science fiction action films emphasize gun-play, space battles, invented weaponry, and other sci-fi elements weaved into action film premises. Examples include G.I. Samurai, Terminator 2: Judgment Day, The Matrix, Total Recall, The Island, Aliens, I Robot, Transformers, The Hunger Games, The Maze Runner, Equilibrium, Akira, Paycheck, Predator, RoboCop, Mad Max 2, Divergent, They Live, Escape from New York, The Fifth Element and Super 8.[59]
Television[edit]
Main articles: Science fiction on television and List of science fiction television programs
Science fiction and television have always had a close relationship. Television, as well as television-like devices, had often been featured in science fiction stories before it had become widely available in the late 1940s and early 1950s; perhaps most famously in George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four.[60] The first known science fiction television program was produced by the BBC's pre-war BBC Television service. On 11 February 1938 a thirty-five-minute adapted extract of the play RUR, written by the Czech playwright Karel Čapek, was broadcast live from the BBC's Alexandra Palace studios.[61] The first popular science-fiction program on American television was the children's adventure serial Captain Video and His Video Rangers, which ran from June 1949 to April 1955.[62]
The Twilight Zone, produced and narrated by Rod Serling, who also wrote or co-wrote most of the episodes, ran from 1959 to 1964. It featured fantasy and horror as well as science fiction, with each episode being a complete story.[63][64] Critics have ranked it as one of the best TV programs of any genre.[65][66]
The Jetsons, while intended as comedy and only running for one season (1962-1963), predicted many devices now in common use: flatscreen television, newspaper on a computer-like screen, computer viruses, video chat, tanning beds, home treadmills and more.[67]
In 1963 the time travel themed Doctor Who premiered on BBC Television. The original series ran until 1989 and was revived in 2005. It has been extremely popular world-wide and has greatly influenced later TV science fiction programs, as well as popular culture.[68][69]
Star Trek, produced by Gene Roddenberry, premiered in 1966 on NBC Television and ran through the 1969 season. It combined elements of space opera and space Western. Although only mildly successful it gained popularity through later syndication and eventually spawned a very popular and influential franchise through films, later programs, and novels; as well as by intense fan interest.[70][71][72] Other programs in the 1960s included The Prisoner,[73] The Outer Limits,[74] and Lost in Space.[75][76]
In 1987 Star Trek: The Next Generation began a torrent of new shows, including three further Star Trek continuation shows (Deep Space 9, Voyager and Enterprise) and Babylon 5.[77]
Red Dwarf, a comic science fiction series aired on BBC Two between 1988 and 1999, and on Dave since 2009, gaining a cult following.[78] To date, eleven full series of the show plus one "special" miniseries have aired. The latest series, dubbed Red Dwarf XII, started airing in October 2017.[79]
Stargate, a film about ancient astronauts and interstellar teleportation, was released in 1994. Stargate SG-1 premiered in 1997 and ran for 10 seasons. Spin-off series included Stargate Infinity, Stargate Atlantis, and Stargate Universe. Stargate SG-1 surpassed The X-Files as the longest-running North American science fiction television series, a record later broken by Smallville.[80]
"sci-fi"[edit]
Forrest J Ackerman is credited with first using the term sci-fi (analogous to the then-trendy "hi-fi") in 1954.[81] As science fiction entered popular culture, writers and fans active in the field came to associate the term with low-budget, low-tech "B-movies" and with low-quality pulp science fiction.[82] By the 1970s, critics within the field such as Terry Carr and Damon Knight were using sci-fi to distinguish hack-work from serious science fiction.[83] Peter Nicholls writes that "SF" (or "sf") is "the preferred abbreviation within the community of sf writers and readers."[84]
Influence[edit]
Science fiction’s great rise in popularity in the first half of the twentieth century was closely tied to the respect paid to science at that time, as well as the rapid pace of technological innovation and new inventions at the time.[85] Since that time science fiction has both contributed to the innovation of new technologies and criticized their possible harmful effects. This topic has been more often discussed in literary and sociological than in scientific forums. Cinema and media theorist Vivian Sobchack examines the dialogue between science fiction films and the technological imagination. Technology impacts artists and how they portray their fictionalized subjects, but the fictional world gives back to science by broadening imagination. How William Shatner Changed the World is a documentary that gave a number of real-world examples of actualized technological imaginations. While more prevalent in the early years of science fiction with writers like Arthur C. Clarke, new authors still find ways to make currently impossible technologies seem closer to being realized.[86]
Science fiction has almost always predicted scientific and technological progress. Some works predict this leading to improvements in life and society, for instance the stories of Arthur C. Clarke and the Star Trek series. While others warn about possible negative consequences, for instance H.G. Wells' The Time Machine and Adlous Huxley’s Brave New World.[87] The National Science Foundation has conducted surveys of "Public Attitudes and Public Understanding" of "Science Fiction and Pseudoscience."[88] They write that "Interest in science fiction may affect the way people think about or relate to science....one study found a strong relationship between preference for science fiction novels and support for the space program...The same study also found that students who read science fiction are much more likely than other students to believe that contacting extraterrestrial civilizations is both possible and desirable."[89]
Sense of wonder[edit]
Main article: Sense of wonder
Science fiction is often said to generate a sense of wonder. Science fiction editor and critic David Hartwell writes: "Science fiction’s appeal lies in combination of the rational, the believable, with the miraculous. It is an appeal to the sense of wonder."[90] While Isaac Asimov in 1967 commenting on the changes then occurring in SF wrote:
"And because today’s real life so resembles day-before-yesterday’s fantasy, the old-time fans are restless. Deep within, whether they admit it or not, is a feeling of disappointment and even outrage that the outer world has invaded their private domain. They feel the loss of a 'sense of wonder' because what was once truly confined to “wonder” has now become prosaic and mundane."[91]
Hard and soft science fiction[edit]




Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea by Jules Verne, one of the earliest examples of hard science fiction.


Hard science fiction[edit]
Main article: Hard science fiction
Hard science fiction is characterized by an emphasis on scientific accuracy.[92][93] The term was first used in print in 1957 by P. Schuyler Miller in a review of John W. Campbell's Islands of Space in Astounding Science Fiction.[94][95][96] The complementary term soft science fiction, formed by analogy to hard science fiction,[97] first appeared in the late 1970s. The term is formed by analogy to the popular distinction between the "hard" (natural) and "soft" (social) sciences. Science fiction critic Gary Westfahl argues that neither term is part of a rigorous taxonomy; instead they are approximate ways of characterizing stories that reviewers and commentators have found useful.[98]
Some hard SF authors have distinguished themselves as working scientists, including Gregory Benford, Fred Hoyle, Geoffrey A. Landis, David Brin,[99] and Robert L. Forward, while mathematician authors include Rudy Rucker and Vernor Vinge. Other noteworthy hard SF authors include Isaac Asimov, Arthur C. Clarke, Hal Clement, Greg Bear, Larry Niven, Catherine Asaro, Robert J. Sawyer, Stephen Baxter, Nancy Kress, Alastair Reynolds, Charles Sheffield, C. J. Cherryh, Ben Bova, Kim Stanley Robinson, Andy Weir and Greg Egan.
Soft science fiction[edit]
Main articles: Soft science fiction and Social science fiction




Mary Shelly's Frankenstein: or, The Modern Prometheus, one of the earliest examples of soft science fiction


Soft science fiction includes works based on social sciences such as psychology, economics, political science, sociology, and anthropology.[32][100] The term can describe stories focused primarily on character and emotion.[101] The early members of the soft science fiction genre were Alfred Bester, Fritz Leiber, Ray Bradbury and James Blish, who were the first to make a "radical" break from the hard science fiction tradition and "take extrapolation explicitly inward", emphasising the characters and their characterisation.[102] In calling out specific examples from this period, McGuirk describes Ursula K. Le Guin's 1969 novel The Left Hand of Darkness as "a soft SF classic".[102] The New Wave movement in science fiction developed out of soft science fiction in the 1960s and 70s.[102][103]
Social science fiction focuses on themes of society and human nature in a science fiction setting. Since it usually focuses more on speculation about humanity and less on scientific accuracy, it is usually placed within soft science fiction. The Eastern Bloc produced a large quantity of social science fiction, including works by Polish authors Stanislaw Lem and Janusz Zajdel, as well as Soviet authors such as the Strugatsky brothers, Kir Bulychov, Yevgeny Zamyatin and Ivan Yefremov.[104]
Subgenres[edit]
Space opera[edit]
Main article: Space opera
Space opera is adventure science fiction set mainly or entirely in outer space or on sometimes distant planets. The conflict is heroic, and typically on a large scale. It is also used nostalgically, and modern space opera may be an attempt to recapture the sense of wonder of the golden age of science fiction. A pioneer of this subgenre is generally recognized to be Edward E. (Doc) Smith, with his Skylark and Lensman series.[105] Isaac Asimov built his Foundation series along these lines. The German series Perry Rhodan, which has been published since 1961 with various authors, started with an account of the first Moon landing and has expanded to the entire Universe and billions of years of time.[106] George Lucas's Star Wars series, which started in 1977, is among the most popular franchises in space opera. Alastair Reynolds's Revelation Space series, Peter F. Hamilton's Void, Night's Dawn, Pandora's Star series, Stephen Hunt's Sliding Void series, Vernor Vinge's A Fire Upon the Deep, A Deepness in the Sky are newer examples of this genre.
Space Western[edit]
Main article: Space Western
The space Western transposes themes of American Western books and films to a backdrop of futuristic space frontiers. These stories typically involve colony worlds that have only recently been terraformed and/or settled, serving as stand-ins for the backdrop of lawlessness and economic expansion that were predominant in the American west. Examples include the Sean Connery film Outland, Heinlein's Farmer in the Sky, Sparks Nevada: Marshall on Mars from the Thrilling Adventure Hour, the Firefly television series, and the film sequel Serenity by Joss Whedon, the animated series BraveStarr, the videogame series Borderlands as well as the manga and anime series Cowboy Bebop, Outlaw Star, and Trigun.
Utopian and dystopian fiction[edit]
Main article: Utopian and dystopian fiction
Related to social SF and soft SF are utopian and dystopian stories. George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four, Aldous Huxley's Brave New World, and Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale and Oryx and Crake are examples. Utopian fiction portrays a setting that agrees with the author's ethos, having various attributes of another reality intended to appeal to readers. Dystopian (or dystopic) fiction (sometimes combined with, but distinct from apocalyptic literature) is the opposite: the portrayal of a setting that completely disagrees with the author's ethos.[107]
Time travel[edit]
Main article: Time travel in fiction
Time-travel stories have antecedents in the 18th and 19th centuries. The first major time-travel novel was Mark Twain's A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court. The most famous is H. G. Wells' 1895 novel The Time Machine, which uses a vehicle that allows an operator to travel purposefully and selectively. The term time machine, coined by Wells, is now universally used to refer to such a vehicle.[108] Back to the Future is one of the most popular movie franchises in this category; Doctor Who is a similarly popular long-running television franchise. Stories of this type are complicated by logical problems such as the grandfather paradox,[109] as exemplified in the classic Robert Heinlein story "—All You Zombies—" and the Futurama episode "Roswell That Ends Well". Time travel continues to be a popular subject in modern science fiction, in print, movies, and television.
Military science fiction[edit]
Main article: Military science fiction
Military science fiction is set in the context of conflict between national, interplanetary, or interstellar armed forces; the primary viewpoint characters are usually soldiers. Stories include detail about military technology, procedure, ritual, and history; military stories may use parallels with historical conflicts. Heinlein's Starship Troopers is an early example, along with the Dorsai novels of Gordon Dickson. Joe Haldeman's The Forever War is a Vietnam-era response to the World War II–style stories of earlier authors.[110] Other military science fiction authors include John Scalzi, John Ringo, David Drake, David Weber, Tom Kratman, Michael Z. Williamson, S. M. Stirling, and John Carr. The publishing company Baen Books is known for cultivating several of these military science fiction authors.[111]
Superhuman[edit]
Main article: Superhuman
Superhuman stories address the emergence of humans who have abilities beyond the normal. This can stem either from natural causes such as in Olaf Stapledon's novel Odd John, Theodore Sturgeon's More Than Human, and Philip Wylie's Gladiator, or be the result of scientific advances, such as the intentional augmentation in A. E. van Vogt's Slan and Frederik Pohl's Man Plus. These stories usually focus on the alienation these beings feel, as well as society's reaction to them. The stories have played a role in the real life discussion of human enhancement.
Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic[edit]
Main article: Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction
Apocalyptic fiction is concerned with the end of civilization through war (On the Beach), pandemic (The Last Man), astronomic impact (When Worlds Collide), ecological disaster (The Wind from Nowhere), or some other general disaster or with a world or civilization after such a disaster. Typical of the genre are George R. Stewart's novel Earth Abides and Pat Frank's novel Alas, Babylon. Apocalyptic fiction generally concerns the disaster itself and the direct aftermath, while post-apocalyptic fiction can deal with anything from the near aftermath (as in Cormac McCarthy's The Road and Margaret Atwood's Oryx and Crake) to centuries in the future (as in Stephen Vincent Benét's By the Waters of Babylon and Octavia Butler's Lilith's Brood) to hundreds or thousands of years in the future, as in Russell Hoban's novel Riddley Walker and Walter M. Miller, Jr.'s A Canticle for Leibowitz. Apocalyptic science-fiction is a popular genre in video games. The critically acclaimed, role-playing, action-adventure, video-game series Fallout is set on a post-apocalyptic Earth, where civilization is recovering from a nuclear war as survivors struggle to survive and seek to rebuild society.
Steampunk[edit]
Main articles: Steampunk and Dieselpunk
Steampunk is based on the idea of futuristic technology existing in the past, usually the 19th century, and often set in Victorian era England—but with prominent elements of either science fiction or fantasy, such as fictional technological inventions like those found in the works of H. G. Wells and Jules Verne, or real technological developments like the computer occurring at an earlier date. Popular examples include The Difference Engine by William Gibson and Bruce Sterling, Leviathan series by Scott Westerfeld, Bas-Lag series by China Miéville, as well as Girl Genius web comic by Phil and Kaja Foglio, although seeds of the subgenre may be seen in certain works of Michael Moorcock, Philip José Farmer and Steve Stiles, and in such games as Space: 1889 and Marcus Rowland's Forgotten Futures. Machines are most often powered by steam in this genre (hence the name). Terry Gilliam's 1985 film Brazil is seen as inspiration for writers and artists of the steampunk sub-culture.[112] Dieselpunk is a genre similar to steampunk that combines the aesthetics of the diesel-based technology of the interwar period through to the 1950s with retro-futuristic technology[113][114] and postmodern sensibilities.[115] Coined in 2001 by game designer Lewis Pollak to describe his role-playing game Children of the Sun.[114]
Cyberpunk and biopunk[edit]
Main articles: Cyberpunk and Biopunk
See also: Cyberpunk derivatives
The cyberpunk genre emerged in the early 1980s; combining cybernetics and punk,[116] the term was coined by author Bruce Bethke for his 1980 short story Cyberpunk.[117] The time frame is usually near-future and the settings are often dystopian in nature and characterized by misery. Common themes in cyberpunk include advances in information technology and especially the Internet, visually abstracted as cyberspace, artificial intelligence, and cybernetics and post-democratic societal control where corporations have more influence than governments. Nihilism, post-modernism, and film noir techniques are common elements, and the protagonists may be disaffected or reluctant anti-heroes. Noteworthy authors in this genre are William Gibson, Bruce Sterling, Neal Stephenson, and Pat Cadigan. James O'Ehley has called Ridley Scott's 1982 film Blade Runner a definitive example of the cyberpunk visual style.[118] Biopunk focuses on biotechnology and subversives. The main underlying theme within these stories is the attempt to change the human body and engineer humans for specific purposes through enhancements in genetic and molecular makeups. Many examples of this subgenre include subjects such as human experimentation, the misuse of biotechnology and synthetic biotechnology. This subgenre also includes works involving human cloning and how clones might exist within human society in the future.
Related genres[edit]
Speculative fiction[edit]
Main article: Speculative fiction
The broader category of speculative fiction[119] includes science fiction, fantasy, alternate histories (which may have no particular scientific or futuristic component), and even literary stories that contain fantastic elements, such as the work of Jorge Luis Borges or John Barth. For some editors, magic realism is considered to be within the broad definition of speculative fiction.[120]
Fantasy[edit]
Main articles: Fantasy and Science fantasy
Fantasy is commonly associated with science fiction, and a number of writers have worked in both genres, while writers such as Anne McCaffrey, Ursula K. Le Guin, and Marion Zimmer Bradley have written works that appear to blur the boundary between the two related genres.[121] The authors' professional organization is called the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA).[122] SF conventions routinely have programming on fantasy topics,[123] and fantasy authors such as J. K. Rowling have won the highest honor within the science fiction field, the Hugo Award.[124]
In general, science fiction differs from fantasy in that the former concerns things that might someday be possible or that at least embody the pretense of realism. Supernaturalism, usually absent in science fiction, is the distinctive characteristic of fantasy literature. A dictionary definition referring to fantasy literature is "fiction characterized by highly fanciful or supernatural elements." [125] Examples of fantasy supernaturalism include magic, magical places, supernatural creatures, supernatural transportation, and shapeshifting.[126]
Literary critic Fredric Jameson has characterized the difference between the two genres by describing science fiction as turning "on a formal framework determined by concepts of the mode of production rather than those of religion" – that is, science fiction texts are bound by an inner logic based more on historical materialism than on magic or the forces of good and evil.[127] Some narratives are described as being essentially science fiction but "with fantasy elements." The term "science fantasy" is sometimes used to describe such material. In science fantasy elements of science fiction and fantasy co-exist or combine. Stories and franchises that display fictional science as well as supernatural elements, sorcery or/and "magical technology" are considered science fantasy.[128]
Horror fiction[edit]
Main article: Horror fiction
Horror fiction is the literature of the unnatural and supernatural, with the aim of unsettling or frightening the reader, sometimes with graphic violence. Historically it has also been known as weird fiction. Although horror is not per se a branch of science fiction, some works of horror literature incorporates science fictional elements. One of the defining classical works of horror, Mary Shelley's novel Frankenstein, is the first fully realized work of science fiction, where the manufacture of the monster is given a rigorous science-fictional grounding. The works of Edgar Allan Poe also helped define both the science fiction and the horror genres.[129] In H. G. Wells' science fiction The Invisible Man (1896), the titular protagonist Dr. Griffin has become an iconic character in the horror genre.[130] Today horror is one of the most popular categories of films.[131] Science fiction horror often revolves around subjects that include but are not limited to killer aliens, mad scientists, and experiments gone wrong.
Alternate history[edit]
Main article: Alternate history
Alternative history stories are based on the premise that historical events might have turned out differently. These stories may use time travel to change the past, or may simply set a story in a universe with a different history from our own. Classics in the genre include Bring the Jubilee by Ward Moore, in which the South wins the American Civil War, and The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick, in which Germany and Japan win World War II. The Sidewise Award acknowledges the best works in this subgenre; the name is taken from Murray Leinster's 1934 story Sidewise in Time. Harry Turtledove is one of the most prominent authors in the subgenre and is sometimes called the "master of alternate history".[132]
Mystery fiction[edit]
Main articles: Mystery fiction and Spy-Fi (subgenre)
Works in which science and technology are a dominant theme, but based on current reality, may be considered mainstream fiction. Much of the thriller genre would be included, such as the novels of Tom Clancy or Michael Crichton, or the James Bond films.[133] Modernist works from writers like Kurt Vonnegut, Philip K. Dick, and Stanisław Lem have focused on speculative or existential perspectives on contemporary reality and are on the borderline between SF and the mainstream.[134] According to Robert J. Sawyer, "Science fiction and mystery have a great deal in common. Both prize the intellectual process of puzzle solving, and both require stories to be plausible and hinge on the way things really do work."[135] Isaac Asimov, Walter Mosley, and other writers incorporate mystery elements in their science fiction, and vice versa.
Distinct from the above, a full-fledged Science Fiction Mystery is one which is set in a completely different world from ours, in which the circumstances and motives of the crime committed and the identity of the detective(s) seeking to solve it are of an essentially science fictional character. An example is Isaac Asimov's The Caves of Steel and its sequels, set in a world thousands of years in the future and presenting the Robot detective R. Daneel Olivaw. An allied genre is the Fantasy Mystery, a detective mystery set in a world of fantasy - such as the Lord Darcy mysteries taking place in a world where magic works, or The Idylls of the Queen set in the mythical King Arthur's court.
Spy-fi is a subgenre of spy fiction that includes significant elements of science fiction.
Superhero fiction[edit]
Main article: Superhero fiction
Superhero fiction is a genre characterized by beings with much higher than usual capability and prowess, generally with a desire or need to help the citizens of their chosen country or world by using their powers to defeat natural or superpowered threats. A number of superhero fiction characters involve themselves (either intentionally or accidentally) with science fiction and fact, including advanced technologies, alien worlds, time travel, and interdimensional travel; but the standards of scientific plausibility are lower than with actual science fiction. Authors of this genre include Stan Lee (co-creator of Spider-Man, the Fantastic Four, the Iron Man, the X-Men, and the Hulk); Marv Wolfman, the creator of Blade for Marvel Comics, and The New Teen Titans for DC Comics; Dean Wesley Smith (Smallville, Spider-Man, and X-Men novels) and Superman writers Roger Stern and Elliot S! Maggin.
Science fiction studies[edit]


[Science fiction] is the one real international literary form we have today, and as such has branched out to visual media, interactive media and on to whatever new media the world will invent in the 21st century... crossover issues between the sciences and the humanities are crucial for the century to come.
“
”

George Edgar Slusser[136]
The study of science fiction, or science fiction studies, is the critical assessment, interpretation, and discussion of science fiction literature, film, new media, fandom, and fan fiction. Science fiction scholars take science fiction as an object of study in order to better understand it and its relationship to science, technology, politics, and culture-at-large. Science fiction studies has a long history dating back to the turn of the 20th century, but it was not until later that science fiction studies solidified as a discipline with the publication of the academic journals Extrapolation (1959), Foundation: The International Review of Science Fiction (1972), and Science Fiction Studies (1973), and the establishment of the oldest organizations devoted to the study of science fiction, the Science Fiction Research Association and the Science Fiction Foundation, in 1970. The field has grown considerably since the 1970s with the establishment of more journals, organizations, and conferences with ties to the science fiction scholarship community, and science fiction degree-granting programs such as those offered by the University of Liverpool and Kansas University.
As serious literature[edit]
Mary Shelley wrote a number of science fiction novels including Frankenstein, and is considered a major writer of the Romantic Age.[137] A number of science fiction works have received critical acclaim including Childhood's End and Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, and some respected writers of mainstream literature have written science fiction, including Aldous Huxley's Brave New World, George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four, Anthony Burgess' A Clockwork Orange and Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale. Nobel Laureate Doris Lessing wrote a series of SF novels, Canopus in Argos, and nearly all of Kurt Vonnegut's works contain science fiction premises or themes.
In her much reprinted essay "Science Fiction and Mrs Brown,"[138] Ursula K. Le Guin first asks: "Can a science fiction writer write a novel?"; and answers: "I believe that all novels, ... deal with character, and that it is to express character – not to preach doctrines, sing songs, or celebrate the glories of the British Empire, that the form of the novel, so clumsy, verbose, and undramatic, so rich, elastic, and alive, has been evolved ... The great novelists have brought us to see whatever they wish us to see through some character. Otherwise they would not be novelists, but poets, historians, or pamphleteers."
Tom Shippey asks: "What is its relationship to fantasy fiction, is its readership still dominated by male adolescents, is it a taste which will appeal to the mature but non-eccentric literary mind?"[139] He compares George Orwell's Coming Up for Air with Frederik Pohl and C. M. Kornbluth's The Space Merchants and concludes that the basic building block and distinguishing feature of a science fiction novel is the presence of the novum, a term Darko Suvin adapts from Ernst Bloch and defines as "a discrete piece of information recognizable as not-true, but also as not-unlike-true, not-flatly- (and in the current state of knowledge) impossible."[140]
Orson Scott Card, an author of both science fiction and non-SF fiction, has postulated that in science fiction the message and intellectual significance of the work is contained within the story itself and, therefore, there need not be stylistic gimmicks or literary games; but that some writers and critics confuse clarity of language with lack of artistic merit. In Card's words: "...a great many writers and critics have based their entire careers on the premise that anything that the general public can understand without mediation is worthless drivel. [...] If everybody came to agree that stories should be told this clearly, the professors of literature would be out of a job, and the writers of obscure, encoded fiction would be, not honored, but pitied for their impenetrability."[141]
Science fiction author and physicist Gregory Benford has declared that: "SF is perhaps the defining genre of the twentieth century, although its conquering armies are still camped outside the Rome of the literary citadels."[142] This sense of exclusion was articulated by Jonathan Lethem in an essay published in the Village Voice entitled "Close Encounters: The Squandered Promise of Science Fiction."[143] Lethem suggests that the point in 1973 when Thomas Pynchon's Gravity's Rainbow was nominated for the Nebula Award, and was passed over in favor of Arthur C. Clarke's Rendezvous with Rama, stands as "a hidden tombstone marking the death of the hope that SF was about to merge with the mainstream." Among the responses to Lethem was one from the editor of the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction who asked: "When is it [the SF genre] ever going to realize it can't win the game of trying to impress the mainstream?"[144]
David Barnett has remarked:[145] "The ongoing, endless war between "literary" fiction and "genre" fiction has well-defined lines in the sand. Genre's foot soldiers think that literary fiction is a collection of meaningless but prettily drawn pictures of the human condition. The literary guard consider genre fiction to be crass, commercial, whizz-bang potboilers. Or so it goes." In an earlier essay he said[146]: "What do novels about a journey across post-apocalyptic America, a clone waitress rebelling against a future society, a world-girdling pipe of special gas keeping mutant creatures at bay, a plan to rid a colonizable new world of dinosaurs, and genetic engineering in a collapsed civilization have in common? They are all most definitely not science fiction. Literary readers will probably recognize The Road by Cormac McCarthy, one of the sections of Cloud Atlas by David Mitchell, The Gone-Away World by Nick Harkaway, The Stone Gods by Jeanette Winterson and Oryx and Crake by Margaret Atwood from their descriptions above. All of these novels use the tropes of what most people recognize as science fiction, but their authors or publishers have taken great pains to ensure that they are not categorized as such."
As protest literature[edit]
Science fiction has sometimes been used as a means of social protest. James Cameron’s film Avatar was intended as a protest against imperialism, and specifically against the European conquest of North and South America.[147] Its images were used by, among others, Palestinians in their protest against Israel.[148]
Robots, artificial humans, human clones, intelligent computers, and their possible conflicts with humans has been a major theme of science fiction since the publication of Frankenstein. Some critics have seen this as reflecting authors’ concerns over the social alienation seen in modern society. [149]
Feminist science fiction poses questions about social issues such as how society constructs gender roles, the role reproduction plays in defining gender and the unequal political and personal power of men over women. Some of the most notable feminist science fiction works have illustrated these themes using utopias to explore a society in which gender differences or gender power imbalances do not exist, or dystopias to explore worlds in which gender inequalities are intensified, thus asserting a need for feminist work to continue.[150]
Libertarian science fiction focuses on the politics and social order implied by right libertarian philosophies with an emphasis on individualism and private ownership of the means of production—and in some cases, anti-statism.[151]
Climate fiction, or "cli-fi" deals with issues concerning climate change and global warming.[152][153] University courses on literature and environmental issues may include climate change fiction in their syllabi,[154] as well as it being discussed by the media, outside of SF fandom.[155]
Comic science fiction often satirizes and criticizes present-day society, as well as sometimes making fun of the conventions and cliches of serious science fiction.[156][157]
Fandom and community[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Science fiction fandom.
Science fiction fandom is the "community of the literature of ideas... the culture in which new ideas emerge and grow before being released into society at large."[158] Members of this community, "fans", are in contact with each other at conventions or clubs, through print or online fanzines, or on the Internet using web sites, mailing lists, and other resources.
SF fandom emerged from the letters column in Amazing Stories magazine. Soon fans began writing letters to each other, and then grouping their comments together in informal publications that became known as fanzines.[159] Once they were in regular contact, fans wanted to meet each other, and they organized local clubs. In the 1930s, the first science fiction conventions gathered fans from a wider area.[160] Conventions, clubs, and fanzines were the dominant form of fan activity, or "fanac", for decades, until the Internet facilitated communication among a much larger population of interested people.
Authors[edit]
Science fiction is being written worldwide by a diverse population of authors. According to 2013 statistics by the science fiction publisher Tor Books, men outnumber women by 78% to 22% among submissions to the publisher.[161] A controversy about voting slates in the 2015 Hugo Awards highlighted tensions in the science fiction community between a trend of increasingly diverse works and authors being honored by awards, and a backlash by groups of authors and fans who preferred what they considered more traditional science fiction.[162]
Awards[edit]
For more details on this topic, see List of science fiction awards.
Among the most respected awards for science fiction are the Hugo Award, presented by the World Science Fiction Society at Worldcon; the Nebula Award, presented by SFWA and voted on by the community of authors; and the John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel and Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award for short fiction. One notable award for science fiction films is the Saturn Award. It is presented annually by The Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror Films.
There are national awards, like Canada's Prix Aurora Awards, regional awards, like the Endeavour Award presented at Orycon for works from the Pacific Northwest, special interest or subgenre awards like the Chesley Award for art or the World Fantasy Award for fantasy. Magazines may organize reader polls, notably the Locus Award.
Conventions, clubs, and organizations[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Science fiction convention.




Pamela Dean reading at Minicon


Conventions (in fandom, shortened as "cons"), are held in cities around the world, catering to a local, regional, national, or international membership. General-interest conventions cover all aspects of science fiction, while others focus on a particular interest like media fandom, filking, etc. Most are organized by volunteers in non-profit groups, though most media-oriented events are organized by commercial promoters. The convention's activities are called the "program", which may include panel discussions, readings, autograph sessions, costume masquerades, and other events. Activities that occur throughout the convention are not part of the program; these commonly include a dealer's room, art show, and hospitality lounge (or "con suites").[163]
Conventions may host award ceremonies; Worldcons present the Hugo Awards each year. SF societies, referred to as "clubs" except in formal contexts, form a year-round base of activities for science fiction fans. They may be associated with an ongoing science fiction convention, or have regular club meetings, or both. Most groups meet in libraries, schools and universities, community centers, pubs or restaurants, or the homes of individual members. Long-established groups like the New England Science Fiction Association and the Los Angeles Science Fantasy Society have clubhouses for meetings and storage of convention supplies and research materials.[164] The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA) was founded by Damon Knight in 1965 as a non-profit organization to serve the community of professional science fiction authors,[122]
Fanzines and online fandom[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Science fiction fanzine.
The first science fiction fanzine, The Comet, was published in 1930.[165] Fanzine printing methods have changed over the decades, from the hectograph, the mimeograph, and the ditto machine, to modern photocopying. Distribution volumes rarely justify the cost of commercial printing. Modern fanzines are printed on computer printers or at local copy shops, or they may only be sent as email. The best known fanzine (or "'zine") today is Ansible, edited by David Langford, winner of numerous Hugo awards. Other fanzines to win awards in recent years include File 770, Mimosa, and Plokta.[166] Artists working for fanzines have risen to prominence in the field, including Brad W. Foster, Teddy Harvia, and Joe Mayhew; the Hugos include a category for Best Fan Artists.[166] The earliest organized fandom online was the SF Lovers community, originally a mailing list in the late 1970s with a text archive file that was updated regularly.[167] In the 1980s, Usenet groups greatly expanded the circle of fans online. In the 1990s, the development of the World-Wide Web exploded the community of online fandom by orders of magnitude, with thousands and then literally millions of web sites devoted to science fiction and related genres for all media.[164] Most such sites are small, ephemeral, and/or very narrowly focused, though sites like SF Site and SFcrowsnest offer a broad range of references and reviews about science fiction.

Fan fiction[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Fan fiction.
Fan fiction, known to aficionados as "fanfic", is non-commercial fiction created by fans in the setting of an established book, film, video game, or television series.[168] This modern meaning of the term should not be confused with the traditional (pre-1970s) meaning of "fan fiction" within the community of fandom, where the term meant original or parody fiction written by fans and published in fanzines, often with members of fandom as characters therein. Examples of this would include the Goon Defective Agency stories, written starting in 1956 by Irish fan John Berry and published in his and Arthur Thomson's fanzine Retribution. In the last few years, sites have appeared such as Orion's Arm and Galaxiki, which encourage collaborative development of science fiction universes. In some cases, the copyright owners of the books, films, or television series have instructed their lawyers to issue "cease and desist" letters to fans.
World-wide examples[edit]
Although perhaps most developed as a genre and community in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom, science fiction is a worldwide phenomenon. Organisations devoted to promotion and translation in particular countries are commonplace, as are country- or language-specific genre awards.
Africa[edit]
Mohammed Dib, an Algerian writer, wrote a science fiction allegory about his nation's politics, Qui se souvient de la mer (Who Remembers the Sea?) in 1962.[169] Masimba Musodza, a Zimbabwean author, published MunaHacha Maive Nei? the first science-fiction novel in the Shona language,[170] which also holds the distinction of being the first novel in the Shona language to appear as an ebook first before it came out in print. In South Africa, a movie titled District 9 came out in 2009, an apartheid allegory featuring extraterrestrial life forms, produced by Peter Jackson.
African diaspora in the Americas[edit]
Main articles: Afrofuturism and Black science fiction
Afrofuturism is a genre of science fiction and speculative fiction which consists largely of the work produced by members of the African diaspora in the Americas. The term "afrofuturism" was coined in 1993 by Mark Dery in his essay "Black to the Future."[171] "For better or worse, I am often spoken of as the first African-American science fiction writer," Samuel R. Delany said in an interview with Dark Matter, recognizing, too, writers of "proto-science fiction" such as black nationalist Martin Delany and M. P. Shiel, a British writer of Creole descent.[172]
Asia[edit]
Main articles: Bengali science fiction, Chinese science fiction, and Japanese science fiction
India[edit]
Indian science fiction, defined loosely as science fiction by writers of Indian descent, began with the English-language publication of Kylas Chundar Dutt's A Journal of Forty-Eight Hours of the Year 1945 in the Calcutta Literary Gazette (6 June 1835). Since this story was intended as a political polemic, credit for the first science fiction story is often given to later Bengali authors such as Jagadananda Roy, Hemlal Dutta and the polymath Jagadish Chandra Bose. Eminent film maker and writer Satyajit Ray also enriched Bengali science fiction by writing many short stories as well as science fiction series, Professor Shonku (see Bengali science fiction). Similar traditions exist in Hindi, Marathi, Tamil and English.[173] In English, the modern era of Indian speculative fiction began with the works of authors such as Samit Basu, Payal Dhar, Vandana Singh and Anil Menon. Works such as Amitav Ghosh's The Calcutta Chromosome, Salman Rushdie's Grimus, and Boman Desai's The Memory of Elephants are generally classified as magic realist works but make essential use of SF tropes and techniques. In recent years authors in some other Indian languages have begun telling stories in this genre; for example in Punjabi IP Singh and Roop Dhillon have written stories that can clearly be defined as Punjabi science fiction. The latter has coined the term Vachitarvaad to describe such literature.[citation needed]
Bangladesh[edit]




Muhammed Zafar Iqbal at Ekushey Book Fair, Dhaka in February 2015


Bangladesh has a strong science fiction literature. After Qazi Abdul Halim's Mohasunner Kanna (Tears of the Cosmos) (1970), Humayun Ahmed published Tomader Jonno Valobasa (Love For You All) in 1973. Another Bengali writer of science fiction is Muhammed Zafar Iqbal, who wrote "Copotronic Sukh Dukho" ("Copotronic Emotions"). This story was later included in a compilation of Iqbal's work in a book by the same name. Iqbal later transformed his own science fiction cartoon strip Mohakashe Mohatrash (Terror in the Cosmos) into a novel.
China[edit]
Modern science fiction in China mainly depends on the magazine Science Fiction World. A number of works were originally published in it in installments, including the highly successful novel The Three-Body Problem, written by Liu Cixin.
Korea[edit]
Until recently, there has been little domestic science fiction literature in Korea.[174] Within the small field, the author and critic writing under the nom de plume Djuna has been credited with being the major force.[175] Kim Boyoung, Bae Myunghoon and Kwak Jaesik are also often mentioned as the new generation of Korean science fiction writers of 2010s.[176] The upswing that began in 2009 has been attributed by Shin Junebong to a combination of factors.[177] Shin quotes Djuna as saying, "'It looks like the various literary awards established by one newspaper after another, with hefty sums of prize money, had a big impact.'" [177] Another factor cited was the active use of Web bulletin boards among the then-young writers brought up on translations of Western SF.[178] In spite of the increase, there were still no more than sixty or so authors writing in the field at that time.[177]
Middle East[edit]
Chalomot Be'aspamia is an Israeli magazine of short science fiction and fantasy stories. The Prophecies Of Karma, published in 2011, is advertised as the first work of science fiction by an Arabic author, the Lebanese writer Nael Gharzeddine.
Europe[edit]
Main articles: Croatian science fiction, Czech science fiction and fantasy, French science fiction, Norwegian science fiction, Science fiction in Poland, Romanian science fiction, Science fiction in Russia, Science fiction in Serbia, and Spanish science fiction
France and Belgium[edit]




Moonshot from Le Voyage dans la lune (1902), a silent film by George Méliès


Jules Verne, a 19th-century French novelist known for his pioneering science fiction works (Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea, Journey to the Center of the Earth, From the Earth to the Moon) is the prime representative of the French legacy of science fiction. French science fiction of the 19th century was also represented with such artists as Albert Robida and Isidore Grandville. In the 20th century, traditions of French science fiction were carried on by writers like Pierre Boulle (best known for his Planet of the Apes), Serge Brussolo, Bernard Werber, René Barjavel and Robert Merle, among others.
In Franco-Belgian comics, bande dessinée ("BD") science-fiction is a well established genre.[citation needed] Notable French science fiction comics include Valerian et Laureline by Pierre Christin and Jean-Claude Mézières, a space opera franchise that has lasted since 1967. Metal Hurlant magazine (known in US as Heavy Metal) was one of the largest contributors to francophone science-fiction comics. Its major authors include Jean "Moebius" Giraud, creator of Arzach; Chilean Alejandro Jodorowsky, who created a series of comics, including L'Incal and Les Metabarons, set in Jodoverse; and Enki Bilal with The Nikopol Trilogy. Giraud also contributed to French SF animation, collaborating with René Laloux on several animated features. A number of artists from neighboring countries, such as Spain and Italy, create science fiction and fantasy comics in French aimed at a Franco-Belgian market.[citation needed]
In French cinema, science fiction began with silent film director and visual effects pioneer George Méliès, whose most famous film was Voyage to the Moon, loosely based on books by Verne and Wells. In the 20th and 21st centuries, French science fiction films were represented by René Laloux's animated features, as well as Enki Bilal's adaptation of the Nikopol Trilogy, Immortal. Luc Besson filmed The Fifth Element as a joint Franco-American production.
In the French-speaking world, the colloquial use of the term sci-fi is an accepted Anglicism for the term science fiction.[179] This probably stems from the fact that science fiction writing never expanded there to the extent it did in the English-speaking world, particularly with the dominance of the United States. Nevertheless, France has made a tremendous contribution to science fiction in its seminal stages of development. Although the term "science fiction" is understood in France, their penchant for the "weird and wacky" has a long tradition and is sometimes called "le culte du merveilleux." This uniquely French tradition certainly encompasses what the anglophone world would call French science fiction but also ranges across fairies, Dadaism, and surrealism.[citation needed]
Italy[edit]
Italy has a vivid history in science fiction, though almost unknown outside its borders. The history of Italian science fiction recognizes a varied roadmap of this genre which spread to a popular level after World War Two, and in particular in the second half of the 1950s, on the wave of American and British literature.[180]
The earliest pioneers may be found in the literature of the fantastic voyage and of the Renaissance Utopia, even in previous masterpieces such as "The Million" of Marco Polo. In the second half of the 19th century stories and short novels of "scientific fantasies" (also known as "incredible stories" or "fantastic" or "adventuristic", "novels of the future times" or "utopic", "of the tomorrow") appeared in Sunday newspaper supplements, in literary magazines, and as booklets published in installments. Added to these, at the beginning of the 20th century, were the most futuristic masterpieces of the great Emilio Salgari, considered by most the father of Italian science fiction, and Yambo and Luigi Motta, well known authors of popular novels of the time, with extraordinary adventures in remote and exotic places, and even works of authors representing known figures of the "top" literature, among them Massimo Bontempelli, Luigi Capuana, Guido Gozzano, Ercole Luigi Morselli.[181]
The true birth of Italian science fiction is placed in 1952, with the publishing of the first specialized magazines, Scienza Fantastica (Fantastic Science) and Urania, and with the appearance of the term "fantascienza" which has become the usual translation of the English term "science fiction." The "Golden Years" span the period 1957-1960.
From the end of the 1950s science fiction became in Italy one of the most popular genres, although its popular success was not followed by critical success. In spite of an active and organized fandom there hasn't been an authentic sustained interest on the part of the Italian cultural élite towards science fiction.[182]
Popular Italian science fiction writers include Gianluigi Zuddas, Giampietro Stocco, Lino Aldani,[183] as well as comic artists, such as Milo Manara. Valerio Evangelisti is the best known modern author of Italian science fiction and fantasy.[184] Also, popular Italian children's writer Gianni Rodari often turned to science fiction aimed at children, most notably, in Gip in the Television.
Germany[edit]




Director Fritz Lang and cameraman Curt Courant, creators of Metropolis


The main German science fiction writer in the 19th century was Kurd Laßwitz.[185] According to Austrian SF critic Franz Rottensteiner, though significant German novels of a science-fiction nature were published in the first half of the 20th century, SF did not exist as a genre in the country until after World War II and the heavy importing and translation of American works. In the 20th century, during the years of divided Germany, both East and West spawned a number of successful writers. Top East German writers included Angela and Karlheinz Steinmüller, as well as Günther Krupkat. West German authors included Carl Amery, Gudrun Pausewang, Wolfgang Jeschke and Frank Schätzing, among others. A well known science fiction book series in the German language is Perry Rhodan, which started in 1961. Having sold over two billion copies (in pulp, paperback and hardcover formats), it is the most successful science fiction book series ever written, worldwide.[106] Current well-known SF authors from Germany are five-time Kurd-Laßwitz-Award winner Andreas Eschbach, whose books The Carpet Makers and Eine Billion Dollar are big successes, and Frank Schätzing, who in his book The Swarm mixes elements of the science thriller with SF elements to an apocalyptic scenario. The most prominent German-speaking author, according to Die Zeit, is[when?] Austrian Herbert W. Franke.[citation needed]
In the 1920s Germany produced a number of critically acclaimed high-budget science fiction and horror films. Metropolis by director Fritz Lang is credited as one of the most influential science fiction films ever made.[186] Other films of the era included Woman in the Moon, Alraune, Algol, Gold, Master of the World, among others. In the second half of the 20th century, East Germany also became a major science fiction film producer, often in a collaboration with fellow Eastern Bloc countries. Films of this era include Eolomea, First Spaceship on Venus and Hard to Be a God.
Russia and ex-Soviet countries[edit]




A scene from Aelita (1924), one of Russia's first science fiction films


Main article: Russian science fiction and fantasy
Russians made their first steps to science fiction in the mid-19th century, with utopias by Faddei Bulgarin and Vladimir Odoevsky.[187] However, it was the Soviet era that became the genre's golden age. Soviet writers were prolific,[188] despite limitations set up by state censorship. Early Soviet writers, such as Alexander Belayev, Alexey N. Tolstoy and Vladimir Obruchev, employed Vernian/Wellsian hard science fiction based on scientific predictions.[189] The most notable books of the era include Belayev's Amphibian Man, The Air Seller and Professor Dowell's Head; Tolstoy's Aelita and Engineer Garin's Death Ray. Early Soviet science fiction was influenced by communist ideology and often featured a leftist agenda or anti-capitalist satire. [190] Those few early Soviet books that challenged the communist worldview and satirized the Soviets, such as Yevgeny Zamyatin's dystopia We or Mikhail Bulgakov's Heart of a Dog and Fatal Eggs, were banned from publishing until the 1980s, although they still circulated in fan-made copies.
In the second half of the 20th century, a new generation of writers developed a more complex approach. Social science fiction, concerned with philosophy, ethics, utopian and dystopian ideas, became the prevalent subgenre.[191] The breakthrough was started by Ivan Yefremov's utopian novel Andromeda Nebula (1957). He was soon followed by brothers Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, who explored darker themes and social satire in their Noon Universe novels, such as Hard to be a God (1964) and Prisoners of Power (1969), as well as in their science fantasy trilogy Monday Begins on Saturday (1964). A good share of Soviet science fiction was aimed at children. Probably the best known[189][192] was Kir Bulychov, who created Alisa Selezneva (1965-2003), a children's space adventure series about a teenage girl from the future.
The Soviet film industry also contributed to the genre, starting from the 1924 film Aelita. Some of early Soviet films, namely Planet of the Storms (1962) and Battle Beyond the Sun (1959), were pirated, re-edited and released in the West under new titles.[193] Late Soviet science fiction films include Mystery of the Third Planet (1981), Ivan Vasilyevich (1973) and Kin-dza-dza! (1986), as well as Andrey Tarkovsky's Solaris and Stalker, among others.
After the fall of the Soviet Union, science fiction in the former Soviet republics is still written mostly in Russian, which allows an appeal to a broader audience. Aside from Russians themselves, especially notable are Ukrainian writers, who have greatly contributed to science fiction and fantasy in Russian language.[194] Among the most notable post-Soviet authors are H. L. Oldie, Sergey Lukyanenko, Alexander Zorich and Vadim Panov. Russia's film industry, however, has been less successful recently, producing only a few science fiction films, most of them are adaptations of books by the Strugatskys (The Inhabited Island, The Ugly Swans) or Bulychov (Alice's Birthday). Science fiction media in Russia is represented with such magazines as Mir Fantastiki and Esli.
Spain[edit]


Play media


El hotel eléctrico (1905), directed, written and special effects by Segundo de Chomón, can be considered the first Spanish science fiction film, even though the film was made for Pathé.


Spanish science fiction starts mid 19th century; depending on how it is defined, Lunigrafía (1855) from M. Krotse or Una temporada en el más bello de los planetas from Tirso Aguimana de Veca — a trip to Saturn published in 1870-1871, but written in the 1840s — is the first science fiction novel.[195][196][197] As such, science fiction was very popular in the second half of the 19th century, but mainly produced alternate history and post-apocalyptic futures, written by some of the most important authors of the generations of '98 and '14.[198] The influence of Verne also produced some singular works, like Enrique Gaspar y Rimbau's El anacronópete (1887), a story about time travel that predates the publication of The Chronic Argonauts by H. G. Wells; Rafael Zamora y Pérez de Urría's Crímenes literarios (1906), that describes robots and a "brain machine" very similar to our modern laptops; or Frederich Pujulà i Vallès' Homes artificials (1912), the first in Spain about "artificial people".[198][199] But the most prolific were Coronel Ignotus, and Coronel Sirius, who published their adventures in the magazine Biblioteca Novelesco-Científica. The 19th century up to the Spanish Civil War saw no less than four fictional trips to the Moon, one to Venus, five to Mars, one to Jupiter, and one to Saturn.[198][200]
The Spanish Civil War devastated this rich literary landscape. With few exceptions, only the arrival of pulp science fiction in the 1950s would reintroduce the genre in Spanish literature.[201][198] The space opera series La saga de los Aznar (1953-1958 and 1973-1978) by Pascual Enguídanos won the Hugo Award in 1978.[202] Also in the 1950s started the radio serial for children Diego Valor; inspired by Dan Dare, the serial produced 1200 episodes of 15 minutes, and spawned a comic (1954-1964), three theater plays (1956-1959) and the first Spanish sf TV series (1958), that has been lost.[203]
Modern, prospective, self-aware science fiction crystallized in the 1970s around the magazine Nueva Dimensión (1968-1983), and its editor Domingo Santos, one of the most important Spanish sf authors of the time.[200][198] Other important authors of the 1970s and 1980s are Manuel de Pedrolo (Mecanoscrit del segon origen, 1974), Carlos Saiz Cidoncha (La caída del Imperio galáctico, 1978), Rafael Marín (Lágrimas de luz, 1984), and Juan Miguel Aguilera (the Akasa-Puspa saga, 1988-2005).[198] In the 1990s the genre exploded with the creation many small dedicated fanzines, important SF prizes, and the convention HispaCon; Elia Barceló (El mundo de Yarek, 1992), became the most prolific.[198] Other recent authors are Eduardo Vaquerizo (Danza de tinieblas, 2005), Félix J. Palma (The Victorian trilogy, 2008-2014), and Carlos Sisí (Panteón, 2013).[204]
Spain has been continuously producing sf films since the 1960s, at a rate of five to ten per decade. The 1970s was specially prolific; the director, and screenwriter Juan Piquer Simón is the most important figure of fantaterror, producing some low budget sf films. La cabina (1972) is the most awarded Spanish TV production in history. In the 1990s Acción mutante (1992), by Álex de la Iglesia, and Abre los ojos (1997), by Alejandro Amenábar, represent a watershed in Spanish sf filming, with a quality that would only be reached again by Los cronocrímenes (2007), by Nacho Vigalondo.[205][206] The most important sf TV series produced in Spain is El ministerio del tiempo (2015-), even though Mañana puede ser verdad (1964-1964) by Chicho Ibáñez Serrador, and Plutón BRB Nero (2008-2009), should also be mentioned.
Other European countries[edit]
Poland is a traditional producer of science fiction and fantasy. The country's most influential science fiction writer of all time is Stanisław Lem, who is probably best known for his science fiction books, such as Solaris and the stories involving Ijon Tichy, but who also wrote very successful hard sci-fi such as The Invincible and the stories involving Pilot Pirx. A number of Lem's books were adapted for screen, both in Poland and abroad. Other notable Polish writers of the genre include Jerzy Żuławski, Janusz A. Zajdel, Konrad Fiałkowski, Jacek Dukaj and Rafał A. Ziemkiewicz.
Czech writer and playwright Karel Čapek in his play R.U.R. (1920) introduced the word robot into science fiction. Čapek is also known for his satirical science fiction novels and plays, such as War with the Newts and The Absolute at Large. Traditions of Czech science fiction were carried on despite the general political climate by writers like Ludvík Souček, Josef Nesvadba, Ondřej Neff and Jaroslav Velinský. In the years 1980 - 2000 a new vawe of young writers appeared (J. W. Procházka, F. Novotný, E. Hauserová, V. Kadlečková, J. Rečková, E. Dufková).
Early writers of Yugoslav science fiction were mid-19th century Slovene writer Simon Jenko, late 19th century Slovene writers Josip Stritar, Janez Trdina and Janez Mencinger (who, in 1893, published a notable dystopian novel Abadon) and late 19th century Serbian writers Dragutin Ilić and Lazar Komarčić. Since the beginning of the 20th century, a large number of authors incorporated science fiction elements into their work. Scientist Milutin Milanković wrote the book Through Distant Worlds and Times (1928), which mixes elements of autobiography, scientific discussion and science fiction. In the 1930s, Vladimir Bartol wrote a series of science fiction novels. The period after World War II brought the appearance of a large number of writers, most notably the duo Zvonimir Furtinger and Mladen Bjažić, Vid Pečjak and Miha Remec, with some academically acclaimed writers, like Dobrica Ćosić, Erih Koš and Ivan Ivanji, occasionally turning towards science fiction.[207] Serbian writer Borislav Pekić published several science fiction works: Rabies (1983), 1999 (1984), The New Jerusalem (1988) and Atlantis (1988). Zoran Živković wrote a large number of essays on science fiction and one of the first encyclopedias of science fiction in the world. His early novels and stories featured elements of the genre. The films The Rat Savior (1977) by Krsto Papić and Visitors from the Galaxy (1981) by Dušan Vukotić won awards at international festivals. In the first half of the 20th century comic book authors such as Andrija Maurović and Đorđe Lobačev published a number of science fiction works, and since the 1980s comic book artists like Željko Pahek, Igor Kordej and Zoran Janjetov became internationally well known.[208]
Australia[edit]
Main article: Science fiction in Australia
American David G. Hartwell noted there is "nothing essentially Australian about Australian science-fiction." A number of Australian science-fiction (and fantasy and horror) writers are in fact international English language writers, and their work is published worldwide. This is further explainable by the fact that the Australian inner market is small (with Australian population being around 24 million), and sales abroad are crucial to most Australian writers.[209]
Canada[edit]
Main article: Canadian science fiction
In Canadian Francophone province Québec, Élisabeth Vonarburg and other authors developed a tradition of French-Canadian SF, related to the European French literature. The Prix Boreal was established in 1979 to honor Canadian science fiction works in French. The Prix Aurora Awards (briefly preceded by the Casper Award) were founded in 1980 to recognize and promote the best works of Canadian science fiction in both French and English. Also, due to Canada's bilingualism and the US publishing almost exclusively in English, translation of science fiction prose into French thrives and runs nearly parallel upon a book's publishing in the original English. A sizeable market also exists within Québec for European-written Francophone science fiction literature.
Latin America[edit]
See also: Brazilian science fiction
Although there is still some controversy as to when science fiction began in Latin America, the earliest works date from the late 19th century. All published in 1875, O Doutor Benignus by the Portuguese Brazilian Augusto Emílio Zaluar, El Maravilloso Viaje del Sr. Nic-Nac by the Argentinian Eduardo Holmberg, and Historia de un Muerto by the Cuban Francisco Calcagno are three of the earliest novels which appeared in the region.[210]
Up to the 1960s, science fiction was the work of isolated writers who did not identify themselves with the genre, but rather used its elements to criticize society, promote their own agendas or tap into the public's interest in pseudo-sciences. It received a boost of respectability after authors such as Horacio Quiroga and Jorge Luis Borges used its elements in their writings. This, in turn, led to the permanent emergence of science fiction in the 1960s and mid-1970s, notably in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, and Cuba. Magic realism enjoyed parallel growth in Latin America, with a strong regional emphasis on using the form to comment on social issues, similar to social science fiction and speculative fiction in the English world.
Economic turmoil and the suspicious eye of the dictatorial regimes in place reduced the genre's dynamism for the following decade. In the mid-1980s, it became increasingly popular once more. Although led by Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, Latin America now hosts dedicated communities and writers with an increasing use of regional elements to set them apart from English-language science-fiction.[211]
See also[edit]


Science fiction portal




Outline of science fiction
Fantastic art
List of science fiction authors
List of science fiction films
List of science fiction novels
List of science fiction television programs
List of science fiction themes
List of science fiction and fantasy artists
List of science fiction universes
List of comic science fiction
Non-Aristotelian logic—use in science fiction
Science fiction libraries and museums
Sense of wonder
Skiffy
Timeline of science fiction
Transhumanism (a school of thought profoundly inspired by SF)
Technology in science fiction
Weapons in science fiction
Robots in science fiction
Political ideas in science fiction
Religious ideas in science fiction


References[edit]


^ Marg Gilks; Paula Fleming & Moira Allen (2003). "Science Fiction: The Literature of Ideas". WritingWorld.com. 
^

Wolfe, Gary K. "American Science Fiction–Classic Novels of the 1950s: An Introduction". loa.org. Literary Classics of the United States. Archived from the original on 24 July 2012. 
"Media and Imagination: A Short History of American Science Fiction". Web.mit.edu. Retrieved 17 December 2015. 
Misa (25 March 2013). "Does the Science in Science Fiction Matter?". Misa Buckley. Retrieved 17 December 2015. 


^ Originally published in the April 1926 issue of Amazing Stories
^ Quoted in [1993] in: Stableford, Brian; Clute, John; Nicholls, Peter (1993). "Definitions of SF". In Clute, John; Nicholls, Peter. Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. London: Orbit/Little, Brown and Company. pp. 311–314. ISBN 1-85723-124-4. 
^ James Blish, More Issues at Hand, Advent: Publishers, 1970. Pg. 99. Also in Jesse Sheidlower, "Dictionary citations for the term «hard science fiction»". Jessesword.com. Last modified 6 July 2008.
^ Rod Serling (9 March 1962). The Twilight Zone, "The Fugitive". 
^ Asimov, "How Easy to See the Future!", Natural History, 1975
^ Heinlein, Robert A.; Cyril Kornbluth; Alfred Bester; Robert Bloch (1959). The Science Fiction Novel: Imagination and Social Criticism. University of Chicago: Advent Publishers. 
^ del Rey, Lester (1980). The World of Science Fiction 1926–1976. Garland Publishing. 
^ Knight, Damon Francis (1967). In Search of Wonder: Essays on Modern Science Fiction. Advent Publishing, Inc. p. xiii. ISBN 0-911682-31-7. 
^ Glassy, Mark C. (2001). The Biology of Science Fiction Cinema. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland. ISBN 0-7864-0998-3. 
^ Del Rey, Lester (1979). The World of Science Fiction: 1926–1976. Ballantine Books. p. 5. ISBN 0-345-25452-X. 
^ Pohl, Frederik (August 1966). "The Game". Editorial. Galaxy Science Fiction. p. 4. 
^ Sterling, Bruce. "Science fiction" in Encyclopædia Britannica 2008 [1]
^ Card, Orson Scott (1990). How to Write Science Fiction and Fantasy. Writer's Digest Books. p. 17. ISBN 0-89879-416-1. 
^ Hartwell, David G. (1996). Age of Wonders: Exploring the World of Science Fiction. Tor Books. pp. 109–131. ISBN 0-312-86235-0. 
^ H. G. Stratmann. Using Medicine in Science Fiction: The SF Writer’s Guide to Human Biology. Springer, 2015. p. 227. ISBN 9783319160153. 
^

Fredericks, S.C.: "Lucian's True History as SF", Science Fiction Studies, Vol. 3, No. 1 (March 1976), pp. 49–60
Georgiadou, Aristoula & Larmour, David H.J.: "Lucian's Science Fiction Novel True Histories. Interpretation and Commentary", Mnemosyne Supplement 179, Leiden 1998, ISBN 90-04-10667-7, Introduction
Grewell, Greg: "Colonizing the Universe: Science Fictions Then, Now, and in the (Imagined) Future", Rocky Mountain Review of Language and Literature, Vol. 55, No. 2 (2001), pp. 25–47 (30f.)
Gunn, James E., The New Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, Viking, 1988, ISBN 978-0-670-81041-3, p. 249, calls it "Proto-Science Fiction."
Swanson, Roy Arthur: "The True, the False, and the Truly False: Lucian's Philosophical Science Fiction", Science Fiction Studies, Vol. 3, No. 3 (Nov. 1976), pp. 227–239


^ Irwin, Robert (2003). The Arabian Nights: A Companion. Tauris Parke Paperbacks. pp. 209–13. ISBN 1-86064-983-1. 
^ a b Richardson, Matthew (2001). The Halstead Treasury of Ancient Science Fiction. Rushcutters Bay, New South Wales: Halstead Press. ISBN 1-875684-64-6.  (cf. "Once Upon a Time". Emerald City (85). September 2002. Retrieved 17 September 2008. )
^ Dr. Abu Shadi Al-Roubi (1982), "Ibn al-Nafis as a philosopher", Symposium on Ibn al-Nafis, Second International Conference on Islamic Medicine: Islamic Medical Organization, Kuwait (cf. Ibnul-Nafees As a Philosopher, Encyclopedia of Islamic World [2])
^ Creator and presenter: Carl Sagan (12 October 1980). "The Harmony of the Worlds". Cosmos: A Personal Voyage. PBS. 
^

White, William (September 2009). "Science, Factions, and the Persistent Specter of War: Margaret Cavendish's Blazing World". Intersect: The Stanford Journal of Science, Technology and Society. 2 (1): 40–51. Retrieved 7 March 2014. 
Murphy, Michael (2011). A Description of the Blazing World. Broadview Press. ISBN 978-1-77048-035-3. 
"Margaret Cavendish's The Blazing World (1666)". Skulls in the Stars. 2 January 2011. Retrieved 17 December 2015. 
Robin Anne Reid (2009). Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy: Overviews. ABC-CLIO. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-313-33591-4. 


^ a b "Science Fiction". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^

Khanna, Lee Cullen. "The Subject of Utopia: Margaret Cavendish and Her Blazing-World." Utopian and Science Fiction by Women: World of Difference. Syracuse: Syracuse UP, 1994. 15–34.


^

"Carl Sagan on Johannes Kepler's persecution". YouTube. Retrieved 24 July 2010. 
Asimov, Isaac (1977). The Beginning and the End. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-13088-2. 


^

Clute, John & Nicholls, Peter (1993). "Mary W. Shelley". Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Orbit/Time Warner Book Group UK. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
Wingrove, Aldriss (2001). Billion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction (1973) Revised and expanded as Trillion Year Spree (with David Wingrove)(1986). New York: House of Stratus. ISBN 978-0-7551-0068-2. 


^ Tresch, John (2002). "Extra! Extra! Poe invents science fiction". In Hayes, Kevin J. The Cambridge Companion to Edgar Allan Poe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 113–132. ISBN 978-0-521-79326-1.
^ Poe, Edgar Allan. The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Volume 1, "The Unparalleled Adventures of One Hans Pfaal". Archived from the original on 27 June 2006. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ "Science Fiction". Encarta Online Encyclopedia. Microsoft. 2006. Archived from the original on 1 November 2009. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ John L. Flynn (2005). "War of the Worlds: From Wells to Spielberg". p.5. Galactic Books
^ a b c Taormina, Agatha (19 January 2005). "A History of Science Fiction". Northern Virginia Community College. Retrieved 16 January 2007. [permanent dead link]
^ Resnick, Mike (1997). "The Literature of Fandom". Mimosa (#21). Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ Roberts, Adam (2000). Science Fiction. New York: Routledge. pp. 85–90. ISBN 0-415-19204-8. 
^ "SF TIMELINE 1960–1970". Magic Dragon Multimedia. 24 December 2003. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ Browning, Tonya (1993). "A brief historical survey of women writers of science fiction". University of Texas in Austin. Archived from the original on 8 December 2006. Retrieved 19 January 2007. 
^ Hayward, Philip (1993). Future Visions: New Technologies of the Screen. British Film Institute. pp. 180–204. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ Nazarian, Vera (21 May 2005). "Intriguing Links to Fabulous People and Places.." Retrieved 30 January 2007. 
^ "Shards of Honor". NESFA Press. 10 May 2004. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ Vernor Vinge, The Coming Technological Singularity, Vision-21: Interdisciplinary Science & Engineering in the Era of CyberSpace, NASA Conference Publication CP-10129, [3], 30–31 March 1993, accessdate=7 August 2007
^ a b Dixon, Wheeler Winston; Foster, Gwendolyn Audrey (2008), A Short History of Film, Rutgers University Press, p. 12, ISBN 978-0-8135-4475-5 
^ Schneider, Steven Jay (1 October 2012), 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die 2012, Octopus Publishing Group, p. 20, ISBN 978-1-84403-733-9 
^ Kawin, Bruce F. (January 1992), How Movies Work, University of California Press, p. 51, ISBN 978-0-520-07696-9 
^ SciFi Film History - Metropolis (1927) – Although the first science fiction film is generally agreed to be Georges Méliès' A Trip To The Moon (1902), Metropolis (1926) is the first feature length outing of the genre. (scififilmhistory.com, retrieved 15 May 2013)
^ "The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema". empireonline.com. Archived from the original on 23 November 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2016. 
^ "The Top 100 Silent Era Films". silentera.com. Archived from the original on 23 August 2000. Retrieved 17 February 2016. 
^ "The Top 50 Greatest Films of All Time". Sight & Sound September 2012 issue. British Film Institute. 1 August 2012. Retrieved 19 December 2012. 
^ a b Science Fiction Film: A Critical Introduction, Keith M. Johnston, Berg, May 9, 2013, pages 24-25. examples are the ones given by this book
^ "Introduction to Kaiju [in Japanese]". dic-pixiv. Retrieved 2017-03-09. 
^ "A Study of Chinese monster culture - Mysterious animals that proliferates in present age media [in Japanese]". Hokkai-Gakuen University. Retrieved 2017-03-09. 
^ Kazan, Casey (July 10, 2009). "Ridley Scott: "After 2001 -A Space Odyssey, Science Fiction is Dead"". Dailygalaxy.com. Retrieved August 22, 2010. 
^ In Focus on the Science Fiction Film, edited by William Johnson. Englewood Cliff, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1972.
^ DeMet, George D. "2001: A Space Odyssey Internet Resource Archive: The Search for Meaning in 2001". Palantir.net (originally an undergrad honors thesis). Retrieved August 22, 2010. 
^ "This Day in Science Fiction History — 2001: A Space Odyssey | Discover Magazine". Blogs.discovermagazine.com. Retrieved August 22, 2010. 
^ James Ryan. "When did Star Wars become known as A New Hope? - In A Far Away Galaxy". 
^ ScreenPrism. "Why was "Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope" originally released under another title - ScreenPrism". 
^ "Star Wars – Box Office History". The Numbers. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ "Movie Franchises". The Numbers. Retrieved January 3, 2013. 
^ "The Fifth Element (1997) - Trailers, Reviews, Synopsis, Showtimes and Cast". AllMovie. 7 May 1997. Retrieved 31 January 2013. 
^ Science Fiction TV, J. P. Telotte, Routledge, Mar 26, 2014, pages 112, 179
^ Telotte, J. P. (2008). The essential science fiction television reader. University Press of Kentucky. p. 210. ISBN 0-8131-2492-1. 
^ Suzanne Williams-Rautiolla (2005-04-02). "Captain Video and His Video Rangers". The Museum of Broadcast Communications. Retrieved 2007-01-17. 
^ "The Twilight Zone [TV Series] [1959-1964]". Allmovie. Retrieved November 19, 2012.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Stanyard, Stewart T. (2007). Dimensions Behind the Twilight Zone : A Backstage Tribute to Television's Groundbreaking Series ([Online-Ausg.] ed.). Toronto: ECW press. p. 18. ISBN 1550227440. 
^ "TV Guide Names Top 50 Shows". CBS News. CBS Interactive. April 26, 2002. Retrieved April 13, 2016. 
^ "101 Best Written TV Series List". Retrieved April 13, 2016. 
^ O'Reilly, Terry (May 24, 1014). "21st Century Brands". Under the Influence. Season 3. Episode 21. Transcript of the original source. Event occurs at time 2:07. CBC Radio One. Retrieved June 7, 2014. The series had lots of interesting devices that marveled us back in the 60s. In episode one, we see wife Jane doing exercises in front of a flatscreen television. In another episode, we see George Jetson reading the newspaper on a screen. Can anyone say computer? In another, Boss Spacely tells George to fix something called a "computer virus." Everyone on the show uses video chat, foreshadowing Skype and Face Time. There is a robot vacuum cleaner, foretelling the 2002 arrival of the iRobot Roomba vacuum. There was also a tanning bed used in an episode, a product that wasn't introduced to North America until 1979. And while flying space cars that have yet to land in our lives, the Jetsons show had moving sidewalks like we now have in airports, treadmills that didn't hit the consumer market until 1969, and they had a repairman who had a piece of technology called... Mac. 
^ "The end of Olde Englande: A lament for Blighty". The Economist. 14 September 2006. Retrieved 18 September 2006. 
"ICONS. A Portrait of England". Archived from the original on 3 November 2007. Retrieved 10 November 2007. 
^ Moran, Caitlin (30 June 2007). "Doctor Who is simply masterful". The Times. London. Retrieved 1 July 2007. [Doctor Who] is as thrilling and as loved as Jolene, or bread and cheese, or honeysuckle, or Friday. It's quintessential to being British. 
^ Roddenberry, Gene (March 11, 1964). Star Trek Pitch, first draft. Accessed at LeeThomson.myzen.co.uk.
^ "STARTREK.COM: Universe Timeline". Startrek.com. Archived from the original on 3 July 2009. Retrieved 14 July 2009. 
^ Okada, Michael; Okadu, Denise (November 1, 1996). Star Trek Chronology: The History of the Future. ISBN 0-671-53610-9. Retrieved August 12, 2012. 
^ British Science Fiction Television: A Hitchhiker's Guide, John R. Cook, Peter Wright, I.B.Tauris, Jan 6, 2006, page 9
^ "Special Collectors' Issue: 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time". TV Guide (June 28 – July 4). 1997.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Gowran, Clay. "Nielsen Ratings Are Dim on New Shows." Chicago Tribune. Oct. 11, 1966: B10.
^ Gould, Jack. "How Does Your Favorite Rate? Maybe Higher Than You Think." New York Times. Oct. 16, 1966: 129.
^

Richardson, David (July 1997). "Dead Man Walking". Cult Times. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
Nazarro, Joe. "The Dream Given Form". TV Zone Special (#30). 


^ "Worldwide Press Office - Red Dwarf on DVD". BBC. Retrieved 28 November 2009. 
^ "Red Dwarf XII". Retrieved 21 August 2017. 
^ Sumner, Darren (10 May 2011). "Smallville bows this week — with Stargate's world record". GateWorld. Retrieved 23 February 2014. 
^ "Forrest J Ackerman, 92; Coined the Term 'Sci-Fi'". Washingtonpost.com. Retrieved 17 December 2015. 
^

Whittier, Terry (1987). Neo-Fan's Guidebook. 
Scalzi, John (2005). The Rough Guide to Sci-Fi Movies. 
Ellison, Harlan (1998). "Harlan Ellison's responses to online fan questions at ParCon". Retrieved 26 April 2006. 


^ Clute, John (1993). ""Sci fi" (article by Peter Nicholls)". In Nicholls, Peter. Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Orbit/Time Warner Book Group UK. 
^ Clute, John (1993). ""SF" (article by Peter Nicholls)". In Nicholls, Peter. Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Orbit/Time Warner Book Group UK. 
^ Astounding Wonder: Imagining Science and Science Fiction in Interwar America, John Cheng, University of Pennsylvania Press, Mar 19, 2012 pages 1-12.
^ Schwartz, Sheila (1971). "Science Fiction: Bridge between the Two Cultures". The English Journal. Retrieved 26 March 2007. 
^ The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders, Volume 2, Gary Westfahl, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2005
^ National Science Foundation survey: Science and Technology: Public Attitudes and Public Understanding. Science Fiction and Pseudoscience.
^ Bainbridge, William Sims (1982). "The Impact of Science Fiction on Attitudes Toward Technology". In Emme, Eugene Morlock. Science fiction and space futures: past and present. Univelt. ISBN 978-0-87703-173-4. 
^ Hartwell, David. Age of Wonders (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1985, page 42)
^ Asimov, Isaac. ‘Forward 1 – The Second Revolution’ in Ellison, Harlan (ed.). Dangerous Visions (London: Victor Gollancz, 1987)
^ Nicholls, Peter (1995). Clute, John; Nicholls, Peter, eds. The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. St. Martin's Griffin. ISBN 978-0-312-13486-0. 
^ Wolfe, Gary K. (1986). Critical terms for science fiction and fantasy: a glossary and guide to scholarship. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-22981-7. 
^ "hard science fiction n". Science fiction citations. Jesse's word. 2005-07-25. Retrieved 2007-10-07. Earliest cite: P. Schuyler Miller in Astounding Science Fiction ... he called A Fall of Moondust "hard" science fiction 
^ Hartwell, David G.; Cramer, Kathryn (2003). "Introduction: New People, New Places, New Politics". The Hard SF Renaissance: An Anthology. Tom Doherty Associates. ISBN 978-1-4299-7517-9. 
^ Westfahl, Gary (1996). "Introduction". Cosmic Engineers: A Study of Hard Science Fiction. Greenwood Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-313-29727-4. hard science fiction ... the term was first used by P. Schuyler Miller in 1957 
^ "soft science fiction n". Science fiction citations. Jesse's word. 2005-07-25. Retrieved 2007-10-07. Soft science fiction, probably a back-formation from Hard Science Fiction )
^ Westfahl, Gary (June 9, 2008). "Hard Science Fiction". In Seed, David. A Companion to Science Fiction. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 195–8. ISBN 978-0-470-79701-3. 
^

Fraknoi, Andrew (11 February 2003). "Teaching Astronomy with Science Fiction: A Resource Guide". Astronomy Education Review. National Optical Astronomy Observatory. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
Scientist science fiction authors Archived 22 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine.


^ Hartwell, David G. (August 1996). Age of Wonders. Tor Books. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ Maas, Wendy (July 2004). Ray Bradbury: Master of Science Fiction and Fantasy. Enslow Publishers. 
^ a b c McGuirk, Carol (1992). "The 'New' Romancers". In Slusser, George Edgar; Shippey, T. A. Fiction 2000. University of Georgia Press. pp. 109–125. ISBN 9780820314495. 
^ Caroti, Simone (2011). The Generation Starship in Science Fiction. McFarland. p. 156. ISBN 9780786485765. 
^

Encyclopædia Britannica. Science fiction
Howell, Yvonne (1994). Apocalyptic Realism: The Science Fiction of Arkady and Boris Strugatsky. Peter Lang. ISBN 0-8204-1962-1. 


^ Stableford, Brian (2006). Science Fact and Science Fiction: An Encyclopedia. Routledge. p. 186. 
^ a b "Perry Rhodan 35th anniversary" (Press release). Perry-Rhodan-USA.com. 8 September 1996. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 26 January 2009. 
^ "Apocalyptic Literature". Bloomsbury Publishing Ltd. 1993. 
^ Pilkington, Ace G. (2017). Science Fiction and Futurism: Their Terms and Ideas. McFarland. p. 137. 
^ Frank Artzenius & Tim Maudlin (17 February 2000). "Time Travel and Modern Physics". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
^ Jenkins, Henry (23 July 1999). "Joe Haldeman, 1943-". Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
^ "Website Interview with Toni Weisskopf on SF Canada". Baen Books. 12 September 2005. Archived from the original on 2 February 2007. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
^

Ruth La Ferla "Steampunk Moves Between 2 Worlds" Newsweek, 8 May 2008
Peter Bebergal "The age of steampunk Nostalgia meets the future, joined carefully with brass screws" Boston Globe, 26 August 2007
Brian Braiker "Steampunking Technology A subculture hand-tools today's gadgets with Victorian style." The New York Times, 31 October 2007


^ Aja Romano (2013-10-08). "Dieselpunk for beginners: Welcome to a world where the '40s never ended". The Daily Dot. Retrieved 2014-04-04. 
^ a b 'Piecraft'; Ottens, Nick (July 2008), "Discovering Dieselpunk" (PDF), The Gatehouse Gazette (Issue 1): 3, retrieved 2010-05-23 
^ Larry Amyett (October 24, 2013). "What's in a Name?". The Gatehouse. Retrieved June 25, 2015. 
^ Stableford, Brian (2006). Science Fact and Science Fiction: An Encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis Group LLC. p. 113. 
^ It was later refined by William Gibson's book, Neuromancer which is credited with envisioning cyberspace.Bethke, Bruce. "Foreword to "Cyberpunk," a short story by Bruce Bethke". Infinity Plus. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ O'Ehley, James (July 1997). "SCI-FI MOVIE PAGE PICK: BLADE RUNNER — THE DIRECTOR'S CUT". Sci-Fi Movie Page. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
^ "Science Fiction Citations". Retrieved 8 January 2007. 
^ "Aeon Magazine Writer's Guidelines". Aeon Magazine. 26 April 2006. Archived from the original on 15 January 2007. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
^ "Anne McCaffrey". tor.com. 16 August 1999. Archived from the original on 9 November 2006. Retrieved 24 January 2007. 
^ a b "Information About SFWA". Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, Inc. Archived from the original on 24 December 2005. Retrieved 16 January 2006. 
^

Peggy Rae Sapienza & Judy Kindell (23 March 2006). "Student Science Fiction and Fantasy Contest". L.A.con IV. Archived from the original on 28 January 2007. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
Steven H Silver (29 September 2000). "Program notes". Chicon 2000. Archived from the original on 10 December 2000. Retrieved 16 January 2001. 
Berg, Carol. "Links, "Conventions and Writers' Workshops"". Retrieved 16 January 2001. 


^ "The Hugo Awards By Category". World Science Fiction Society. 26 July 2006. Retrieved 16 January 2006. 
^ The American Heritage College Dictionary (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1993), 494.
^ Robert B. Marks (May 1997). "On Incorporating Mythology into Fantasy, or How to Write Mythical Fantasy in 752 Easy Steps". Story and Myth. Archived from the original on 19 June 2007. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
^ Jameson, Fredric (2007). Archaeologies of the Future: This Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions. London and New York: Verso. pp. 58–59. 
^ Elkins, Charles (November 1980). "Recent Bibliographies of Science Fiction and Fantasy". Science Fiction Studies. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
^ David Carroll & Kyla Ward (May 1993). "The Horror Timeline, "Part I: Pre-20th Century"". Burnt Toast (#13). Retrieved 16 January 2001. 
^ The Science of Fiction and the Fiction of Science: Collected Essays on SF Storytelling and the Gnostic Imagination. McFarland. 2009. pp. 41, 42. 
^ Austin, Chad. "Horror Films Still Scaring – and Delighting – Audiences". North Carolina State University News. Archived from the original on 8 January 2007. Retrieved 16 January 2006. 
^

Adam-Troy Castro (2006). "Off the Shelf: In the Presence of Mine Enemies (book review)". Sci Fi Weekly . Archived from the original on 3 June 2008. Retrieved 26 November 2008. 
Hall, Melissa Mia (7 April 2008). "Master of Alternate History". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on 18 May 2008. Retrieved 26 November 2008. 


^ "Utopian ideas hidden inside Dystopian sf". False Positives. November 2006. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
^ Glenn, Joshua (22 December 2000). "Philip K. Dick (1928–1982)". Hermenaut (#13). Archived from the original on 31 October 2006. Retrieved 16 January 2007. 
^ McBride, Jim (November 1997). "Spotlight On... Robert J. Sawyer". Fingerprints. Crime Writes of Canada (November 1997). Retrieved 8 January 2007. 
^ Lovekin, Kris (April 2000). "Reading Ahead". Fiat Lux. University of California, Riverside. 
^ Bennett, An Introduction, ix–xi, 120–21; Schor, Introduction to Cambridge Companion, 1–5; Seymour, 548–61.
^ Le Guin, Ursula K. (1976) "Science Fiction and Mrs Brown," in The Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction, Perennial HarperCollins, Revised edition 1993; in Science Fiction at Large (ed. Peter Nicholls), Gollancz, London, 1976; in Explorations of the Marvellous (ed. Peter Nicholls), Fontana, London, 1978; in Speculations on Speculation. Theories of Science Fiction (eds. James Gunn and Matthew Candelaria), The Scarecrow Press, Inc. Maryland, 2005.
^ Shippey, Tom (1991) Fictional Space. Essays on Contemporary Science Fiction, page 2, Humanities Press International, Inc., NJ
^ Suvin, Darko (1979) Metamorphoses of Science Fiction: On the Poetics and History of a Literary Genre, New Haven, pp. 63-84.
^ Card, O.:Ender's Game, Introduction. Macmillan, 2006
^ Benford, Gregory (1998) "Meaning-Stuffed Dreams:Thomas Disch and the future of SF", New York Review of Science Fiction, September, Number 121, Vol. 11, No. 1
^ Lethem, Jonathan (1998), "Close Encounters: The Squandered Promise of Science Fiction", Village Voice, June. Also reprinted in a slightly expanded version under the title "Why Can't We All Live Together?: A Vision of Genre Paradise Lost" in the New York Review of Science Fiction, September 1998, Number 121, Vol 11, No. 1.
^ Van Gelder, Gordon (1998) "Editorial," Fantasy and Science Fiction, October/November v95 #4/5 #567
^ Barnett, David. "Gaiman's choice: shouldn't good writing tell a story too?," The Guardian, London, 23 June 2010,
^ Barnett, David. "Science fiction: the genre that dare not speak its name," The Guardian, London, 28 January 2009.
^ Gross, Terry (February 18, 2010). "James Cameron: Pushing the limits of imagination". National Public Radio. Retrieved February 27, 2010. 
^ Science Fiction Film, Television, and Adaptation: Across the Screens, Jay Telotte, Gerald Duchovnay, Routledge, Aug 2, 2011
^ Androids, Humanoids, and Other Science Fiction Monsters: Science and Soul in Science Fiction Films, Front Cover, Per Schelde, NYU Press, 1994, pages 1-10
^ Elyce Rae Helford, in Westfahl, Gary. The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Greenwood Press, 2005: 289-290.
^ Raymond, Eric. "A Political History of SF". Retrieved 2007-12-04. 
^ Glass, Rodge (May 31, 2013). "Global Warning: The Rise of 'Cli-fi'" retrieved March 3, 2016
^ Bloom, Dan (10 March 2015). "'Cli-Fi' Reaches into Literature Classrooms Worldwide". Inter Press Service News Agency. Retrieved 23 March 2015. 
^ PÉREZ-PEÑA, RICHARD. "College Classes Use Arts to Brace for Climate Change". New York Times (April 1, 2014 pg A12). Retrieved 31 March 2015. 
^ Tuhus-Dubrow, Rebecca (Summer 2013). "Cli-Fi: Birth of a Genre". Dissent. Retrieved 23 March 2015. 
^ The Animal Fable in Science Fiction and Fantasy, Bruce Shaw, McFarland, 2010, page 19
^ "Comedy Science Fiction". Sfbook.com. Retrieved 2016-03-02. 
^ von Thorn, Alexander (August 2002). "Aurora Award acceptance speech". Calgary, Alberta. 
^ Wertham, Fredric (1973). The World of Fanzines. Carbondale & Evanston: Southern Illinois University Press. 
^ "Fancyclopedia I: C — Cosmic Circle". fanac.org. 12 August 1999. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ Crisp, Julie (10 July 2013). "SEXISM IN GENRE PUBLISHING: A PUBLISHER'S PERSPECTIVE". Tor Books. Retrieved 29 April 2015.  (See full statistics)
^ McCown, Alex (6 April 2015). "This year's Hugo Award nominees are a messy political controversy". The A.V. Club. The Onion. Retrieved 11 April 2015. 
^ Lawrence Watt-Evans (15 March 1988). "What Are Science Fiction Conventions Like?". Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ a b Glyer, Mike (November 1998). "Is Your Club Dead Yet?". File 770 ( – Scholar search)|format= requires |url= (help) (127). 
^ Hansen, Rob (13 August 2003). "British Fanzine Bibliography". Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ a b "Hugo Awards by Category". World Science Fiction Society. 26 July 2006. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ Lynch, Keith (14 July 1994). "History of the Net is Important". Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2003. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ Jean Déjeux, Mohammed Dib, CELFAN Editions, 1987 (p. 15).
^

"Lizelle Bisschoff on Superpower: Africa in Science Fiction — Arnolfini". Arnolfini.org.uk. Retrieved 17 December 2015. 
"First science fiction novel in Shona". Nehanda Radio. 7 June 2011. Retrieved 17 December 2015. 


^ Black to the Future: Interviews with Samuel R. Delany, Greg Tate and Tricia Rose
^ ""Racism and Science Fiction" by Samuel R. Delany". The New York Review of Science Fiction. Retrieved 11 March 2017. 
^ "Cazando el Snark: siguiendo el rastro de la cf en la India ← Literatura Prospectiva". Literaturaprospectiva.com. Retrieved 17 December 2015. 
^ Jung Yeo-ul, 2009, Review of U, Robot in List vol. 4. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 12 December 2013. Retrieved 4 November 2013. 
^ Cho Sung-myeon, 2013, "Chronicling Korean Science Fiction," List vol. 20, "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 4 November 2013. 
^

다른 기사 보기 (3 January 2016). "한국 BEST SF작가 10인, 김보영(1)" (in Korean). Sciencetimes.co.kr. Retrieved 7 January 2016. 
다른 기사 보기 (3 January 2016). "한국 BEST SF작가 10인, 배명훈(1)" (in Korean). Sciencetimes.co.kr. Retrieved 7 January 2016. 
다른 기사 보기 (3 January 2016). "온라인 웹진 [거울]의 동인 작가들(3)" (in Korean). Sciencetimes.co.kr. Retrieved 7 January 2016. 


^ a b c Shin Junebong, 2009, "A Rush of Science Fiction Novels," List vol. 6, "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 12 December 2013. Retrieved 4 November 2013. 
^ Bok Dohoon, 2013, "Science Fiction in Korea," List vol. 20, "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 12 December 2013. Retrieved 4 November 2013. 
^ Sci-Fi - Fiche technique;
^

Iannuzzi, Giulia. "Italian Science Fiction 101" (PDF). SFRA Review. SFRA. Retrieved 7 June 2016. 
Iannuzzi, Giulia. "Paths of Anglo-American Science Fiction in Italy during the Fifties: The Translation Phenomenon, towards Assimilation and Re-use". Academia. La Torre di Babele (MUP). Retrieved 7 June 2016. 


^ Iannuzzi and Pagetti. "Italy". SFE - The Encyclopaedia of Science Fiction. Gollancz. Retrieved 7 June 2016. 
^ Iannuzzi, Giulia (2014). Fantascienza italiana. Riviste, autori, dibattiti dagli anni Cinquanta agli anni Settanta. Milan: Mimesis. ISBN 9788857521503. 
^ Iannuzzi, Giulia. "Aldani, Lino". SFE - The Encyclopaedia of Science Fiction. Gollancz. Retrieved 7 June 2016. 
^ Saiber, Arielle (2011). "Flying Saucers Would Never Land in Lucca: The Fiction of Italian Science Fiction". 
^ "German SF" by Franz Rottensteiner, in: Neil Barron. ed. Anatomy of Wonder. Third Edition. New York: Bowker, 1987. pp.379-404.
^

"The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema | 12. Metropolis". Empire. 
"100 Greatest Films of the Silent Era". Silent Era. Retrieved 27 October 2011. 
https://books.google.com/books/about/Roger_Ebert_s_Movie_home_companion.html?id=clLhkwBlA_8C; Metropolis; at p. 209


^ Fetzer, Leland (1982). Pre-Revolutionary Russian science fiction: an anthology (seven utopias and a dream). Ardis; the University of Michigan. 
^ McGuire, Patrick L. (1985). Red stars: political aspects of Soviet science fiction. Issue 7 of Studies in speculative fiction. UMI Research Press. The Soviet Union has more professional science fiction writers than any country in the world except the United States and possibly Britain, and many of these writers are talented. 
^ a b Stableford, Brian (2004). Historical Dictionary of Science Fiction Literature. Scarecrow Press. 
^

McGuire, Patrick L. (1985). Red stars: political aspects of Soviet science fiction. Issue 7 of Studies in speculative fiction. UMI Research Press. 
The Quietus Cosmic Communism: Soviet Science Fiction on Film
Andrei Lubensky.  Works related to A Short History of Russian "Fantastica" at Wikisource


^ Encyclopædia Britannica. Science fiction
^ Russia-IC: Kir Bulychov
^ The Guardian: Rockets from Russia: great Eastern Bloc science-fiction films
^ Oldie, H.L.; Dyachenko, Marina and Sergey; Valentinov, Andrey (2005). Пять авторов в поисках ответа (послесловие к роману "Пентакль") [Five authors in search for answers (an afterword to Pentacle)] (in Russian). Moscow: Eksmo. ISBN 5-699-09313-3. Украиноязычная фантастика переживает сейчас не лучшие дни. ... Если же говорить о фантастике, написанной гражданами Украины в целом, независимо от языка (в основном, естественно, на русском), — то здесь картина куда более радужная. В Украине сейчас работают более тридцати активно издающихся писателей-фантастов, у кого регулярно выходят книги (в основном, в России), кто пользуется заслуженной любовью читателей; многие из них являются лауреатами ряда престижных литературных премий, в том числе и международных.

Speculative fiction in Ukrainian is living through a hard time today... Speaking of fiction written by Ukrainian citizens, regardless of language (primarily Russian, of course), there's a brighter picture. More than 30 fantasy and science fiction writers are active here, their books are regularly published (in Russia, mostly), they enjoy the readers' love they deserve; many are recipients of prestigious literary awards, including international. 
^ "Género literario: ciencia ficción española". Enforex (in Spanish). Retrieved 6 February 2016. 
^ Ayala, Mª de los Ángeles (26 October 1996). "La obra narrativa de Enrique Gaspar: El Anacronópete (1887)". Biblioteca Virrtual Miguel de Cervantes (in Spanish). Retrieved 7 February 2016. 
^ Uribe, Augusto. "Una temporada en el más bello de los planetas. La primera novela española de ciencia ficción: Un viaje a Saturno en el siglo [XIX]". Viajes espaciales en globo del siglo XIX. 
^ a b c d e f g Díez, Julián; Moreno, Fernando Ángel (2014). "Introducción". Historia y antología de la ciencia ficción española (in Spanish) (1 ed.). Cátedra. ISBN 978-84-376-3337-4. 
^ Uribe, Augusto. "Los Hombres artificiales de Pujulà". La web de Augusto Uribe (in Spanish). Retrieved 7 February 2016. 
^ a b "Spain". TheEncyclopedia of Science Fiction. 21 July 2016. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ Canalda, José Carlos. "La gran historia de las novelas de a duro". Página personal de José Carlos Canalda (in Spanish). Retrieved 13 February 2016. 
^ "Science Fiction Awards". Eurocon 78: Bruxelles/Brussel - Belgium. European Science Fiction Society. Retrieved 17 September 2012. 
^ Merelo Solá, Alfonso (2009). La radionovela de ciencia ficción española: «Historias para imaginar». Quaderns de Filologia. Estudis literaris. (in Spanish). XIV. pp. 139–154. Retrieved 13 February 2016. 
^ Gómez-Jurado, Juan (8 November 2015). "La nueva ciencia ficción española" (in Spanish). Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ Jiménez, Jesús (18 February 2012). "La ciencia ficción, un género tan raro en el cine español como estimulante". rtve. Retrieved 13 February 2016. 
^ Merelo, Alfonso (14 December 2004). "El cine de ciencia ficción en españa: Una aproximación". Ciencia-ficcion.com (in Spanish). Retrieved 13 February 2016. 
^ Zoran Radisavljević, "Roman koji nema pretka", Politika.rs
^ Živković, Zoran (1990). Enciklopedija naučne fantastike. Belgrade: Prosveta. pp. 317–322, 325–327. 
^

David G. Hartwell, Damien Broderick (ed.), Centaurus: The best of Australian science fiction, Damien Broderick, Introduction, p.10-21 Tor Books, 1999m ISBN 0-312-86556-2
David G. Hartwell, Damien Broderick (ed.), Centaurus: The best of Australian science fiction, David. G. Hartwell, The other editor's introduction, ibid., pp. 22-25, Tor Books, 1999, ISBN 0-312-86556-2


^ Causo, Roberto de Sousa. "Balanço 2009: Primeiros romances de ficção científica". Terra Magazine. Retrieved 15 October 2011. 
^ Bell, Andrea (1999), "Science Fiction in Latin America: Reawakenings", Science Fiction Studies, November, Number 26, No. 3, pp. 441-46.


Sources[edit]


Aldiss, Brian. Billion Year Spree: The True History of Science Fiction, 1973.
Aldiss, Brian, and Wingrove, David. Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction, revised and updated edition, 1986.
Amis, Kingsley. New Maps of Hell: A Survey of Science Fiction, 1958.
Barron, Neil, ed. Anatomy of Wonder: A Critical Guide to Science Fiction (5th ed.). Westport, Conn.: Libraries Unlimited, 2004. ISBN 1-59158-171-0.
Broderick, Damien. Reading by Starlight: Postmodern Science Fiction. London: Routledge, 1995. Print.
Clute, John Science Fiction: The Illustrated Encyclopedia. London: Dorling Kindersley, 1995. ISBN 0-7513-0202-3.
Clute, John and Peter Nicholls, eds., The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. St Albans, Herts, UK: Granada Publishing, 1979. ISBN 0-586-05380-8.
Clute, John and Peter Nicholls, eds., The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. New York: St Martin's Press, 1995. ISBN 0-312-13486-X.
Disch, Thomas M. The Dreams Our Stuff Is Made Of. New York: The Free Press, 1998. ISBN 978-0-684-82405-5.
Jameson, Fredric. Archaeologies of the Future: This Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions. London and New York: Verso, 2005.
Milner, Andrew. Locating Science Fiction. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2012.
Raja, Masood Ashraf, Jason W. Ellis and Swaralipi Nandi. eds., The Postnational Fantasy: Essays on Postcolonialism, Cosmopolitics and Science Fiction. McFarland 2011. ISBN 978-0-7864-6141-7.
Reginald, Robert. Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature, 1975–1991. Detroit, MI/Washington, D.C./London: Gale Research, 1992. ISBN 0-8103-1825-3.
Scholes, Robert E.; Rabkin, Eric S. (1977). Science fiction: history, science, vision. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-502174-6. 
Suvin, Darko. Metamorphoses of Science Fiction: on the Poetics and History of a Literary Genre. New Haven : Yale University Press, 1979.
Weldes, Jutta, ed. To Seek Out New Worlds: Exploring Links between Science Fiction and World Politics. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. ISBN 0-312-29557-X.
Westfahl, Gary, ed. The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders (three volumes). Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2005.
Wolfe, Gary K. Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy: A Glossary and Guide to Scholarship. New York: Greenwood Press, 1986. ISBN 0-313-22981-3.


External links[edit]


Library resources about
Science fiction





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





Find more aboutScience fictionat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Science Fiction (Bookshelf) at Project Gutenberg
SF Hub—resources for science-fiction research, created by the University of Liverpool Library
Science fiction fanzines (current and historical) online
SFWA "Suggested Reading" list
Science Fiction Museum & Hall of Fame
Science Fiction Research Association
A selection of articles written by Mike Ashley, Iain Sinclair and others, exploring 19th-century visions of the future. from the British Library’s Discovering Literature website.







v
t
e


Speculative fiction



Science fiction




Media



Anime and Manga
Comics
Films

list


Magazines
Novels

list


Television

list


Video games





Creators



Artists

list


Authors
Editors





Studies



Awards
Definitions
History
Journalsm





Subgenres



Alternate history
Apocalyptic/post-apocalyptic
Climate fiction
Comic/comedy
Cyberpunk (derivatives)
Dying Earth
Feminist
Future history
Hard
Military
Science fantasy
Soft
Space opera





Themes



Aliens
AI
Frankenstein
Parallel universes
Planets
Time travel
Utopia/dystopia





Subculture



Community
Gathering

list


Organizations
by nationality











Fantasy
(Category)




Media



Anime
Art

Fantastic


Comics

Webcomics


Fantasy film
Literature
Magazines
Television

List







Creators



Artists
Authors





Studies



High fantasy (Tolkienology)
History
Sources





Subgenres



Bangsian
Comic
Contemporary
Dark
Dying Earth
Fairytale
Folklore Mythology (based)
Gaslamp
Hard
Heroic
High
Historical
Lost World
Low
Medieval
Romantic
Sword and sorcery
Urban





Tropes
(Category)



Fantasy races
Fantasy worlds
Legendary creatures
Magic (fantasy)
Magician (fantasy)
Norse mythology

Magic item
Quest


Occult detective








Horror




Media



Comics
Films

list


Magazines
Television programs
Video Games





Subgenres



Body
Goosebumps
Lovecraftian
Mass hysteria
Psychological
Splatterpunk
Queer
Urban legend





Tropes



Gargoyle
Vampires

List


Werewolves








General



Authors of color
Gender
Sexuality

Homosexuality
Reproduction and pregnancy


Women





Related genres



Fantastique
Magic realism
Slipstream
Techno-thriller






 Speculative fiction portal










v
t
e


Science fiction



Outline



Authors
Definitions

Hard
Soft


History
Timeline
The Golden Age
New Wave





Subgenres



Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic
Biopunk
Climate fiction
Comedy

Sitcoms


Cyberpunk

Derivatives


Dieselpunk
Dying Earth
Gothic
Military
Mundane
Planetary romance
Science fiction Western
Scientific romance
Social
Space opera
Space Western
Steampunk





Culture







Conventions
Fandom
Fanzines
Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Libraries and museums
Science Fiction Museum
Studies
Women in SF
Worldcon





Region



Australian
Bengali
Brazilian
Canadian
Chilean
Chinese
Croatian
Czech
Estonian
French
Japanese
Norwegian
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Serbian
Spanish





Awards




Multimedia



Aurora
Chandler
Dragon
Hugo
Seiun
Spectrum





Filmic



Jules Verne
Saturn





Literary/Art/Audio



Aurealis
BSFA
Campbell
Campbell Memorial
Clarke
Compton Crook
Dick
Ditmar
Endeavor
Gaughan
Geffen
Golden Duck
Grand Master
Harland
Heinlein
Illustrators of the Future
Kitschies
Kurd-Laßwitz-Preis
Lambda
Locus
Nautilus
Nebula
Norton
Parsec
Prometheus
Rhysling
SFERA
Sidewise
Skylark
Sturgeon
Tähtivaeltaja Award
Tähtifantasia Award
TBD
Tiptree
Tour-Apollo
Translation
Urania
Vogel
Writers of the Future
Zajdel











Media




Literature



Comics
Magazines
Novels
Publishers
Short stories





Stage



Opera
Theatre





Film



Film history
Films
India





Television



TV shows
Australasian
British
Canadian
European
Japanese Anime
Japanese Live-action
U.S.








Themes




Applied



Astroengineering
AI takeover
Artificial intelligence
Megastructure

Space stations and habitats


Mind uploading
Nanotechnology
Prosthetics
Robots
Organ transplantation
Self-replicating machines
Simulated consciousness
Simulated reality
Space warfare
Terraforming





Formal



Fermi paradox
Grandfather paradox
Time travel





Life



Biological warfare
Extraterrestrials

List


Genetic engineering
Gender
Group mind
Sex and sexuality





Physical



Faster-than-light

Heim theory
Hyperdrive
Hyperspace
Jump drive
Warp drive
Einstein–Rosen bridge


Earth
The multiverse
Parallel universes
Planets





Social



Ancient astronauts
Alien invasion
Alien language
Black
Cyborgs
Evil corporation
Feminist
First contact
Frankenstein complex
Galactic empire
LGBT
Libertarian
Political ideas
Religious ideas
Sci horror
Transhumanism
Uplifting
World government
Xenoarchaeology








Related
topics



Alternate history
Fantasy
Science fantasy
Spy-Fi
Fictional technology
Future
Future history
Horror
Magic realism
Mecha
Rubber science
Science, technology and society
Speculative fiction
Superhero
Supernatural
Weird
Techno-thriller
Technology and society
Utopian and dystopian fiction








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Narrative



Character



Antagonist
Antihero
Archenemy
Character arc
Characterization
Deuteragonist
False protagonist
Focal character
Foil
Protagonist
Stock character
Supporting character
Tritagonist
Narrator
Tragic hero





Plot



Action
Backstory
Cliché
Climax
Cliffhanger
Conflict
Deus ex machina
Dialogue
Dramatic structure
Exposition
Eucatastrophe
Foreshadowing
Flashback
Flashforward
Frame story
In medias res
Pace
Plot device
Plot twist
Poetic justice
Reveal
Self-fulfilling prophecy
Subplot
Trope
Kishōtenketsu





Setting



Backstory
Utopia
Dystopia
Alternate history
Fictional location

city
country
universe







Theme



Leitmotif
Metaphor
Moral
Motif
Irony





Style



Allegory
Bathos
Diction
Figure of speech
Imagery
Narrative techniques
Narration
Stylistic device
Suspension of disbelief
Symbolism
Tone
Mode
Mood





Structure



Linear narrative
Nonlinear narrative

films
television series


Types of fiction with multiple endings





Form



Epic
Fable
Fabliau
Fairy tale
Folktale
Flash fiction
Legend
Novella
Novel
Parable
Play
Poem
Screenplay
Short story





Genre



Action fiction
Adventure
Comic
Crime
Docufiction
Epistolary
Erotic
Fiction
Fantasy
Gothic
Historical
Horror
Magic realism
Mystery
Nautical
Paranoid
Philosophical
Picaresque
Political
Psychological
Romance
Saga
Satire
Science
Speculative
Superhero
Thriller
Urban
Western
List of writing genres





Narration



First-person
Multiple narrators
Stream of consciousness
Stream of unconsciousness
Unreliable





Tense



Past
Present
Future





Related



Audience
Author
Creative nonfiction
Fiction writing
Literary theory
Literary science
Narratology
Monomyth
Rhetoric
Screenwriting
Storytelling
Tellability






Literature portal







Authority control



LCCN: sh85118629
GND: 4054021-2
BNF: cb119332311 (data)
HDS: 31212











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_fiction&oldid=818507386"					Categories: Science fiction genresScience fictionSpeculative fictionHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 errors: datesPages using citations with accessdate and no URLWebarchive template wayback linksPages using citations with format and no URLCS1 Korean-language sources (ko)CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru)CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Use dmy dates from November 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from August 2013Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers