"Highland Line" redirects here. For the railway lines, see Highland Main Line and West Highland Line.


Highlands
A' Ghàidhealtachd  (Scottish Gaelic)
Hielans  (Scots)



Lowland–Highland divide



Demonym(s)
Highlander


Time zone
GMT/BST


The Highlands (Scots: the Hielands; Scottish Gaelic: A' Ghàidhealtachd, "the place of the Gaels") are a historic region of Scotland.[1] Culturally, the Highlands and the Lowlands diverged from the later Middle Ages into the modern period, when Lowland Scots replaced Scottish Gaelic throughout most of the Lowlands. The term is also used for the area north and west of the Highland Boundary Fault, although the exact boundaries are not clearly defined, particularly to the east. The Great Glen divides the Grampian Mountains to the southeast from the Northwest Highlands. The Scottish Gaelic name of A' Ghàidhealtachd literally means "the place of the Gaels" and traditionally, from a Gaelic-speaking point of view, includes both the Western Isles and the Highlands.
The area is very sparsely populated, with many mountain ranges dominating the region, and includes the highest mountain in the British Isles, Ben Nevis. Before the 19th century the Highlands was home to a much larger population, but due to a combination of factors including the outlawing of the traditional Highland way of life following the Jacobite Rising of 1745, the infamous Highland Clearances, and mass migration to urban areas during the Industrial Revolution, the area is now one of the most sparsely populated in Europe. At 9.1 per km2 in 2012,[2] the population density in the Highlands and Islands is less than one seventh of Scotland's as a whole,[2] comparable with that of Bolivia, Chad and Russia.[3][4]
The Highland Council is the administrative body for much of the Highlands, with its administrative centre at Inverness. However, the Highlands also includes parts of the council areas of Aberdeenshire, Angus, Argyll and Bute, Moray, North Ayrshire, Perth and Kinross, Stirling and West Dunbartonshire.
The Scottish highlands is the only area in the British Isles to have the taiga biome as it features concentrated populations of Scots pine forest: see Caledonian Forest.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Culture
1.2 Economy
1.3 Religion


2 Historical geography

2.1 Highland Council area
2.2 Highlands and Islands
2.3 Historical crossings
2.4 Courier delivery


3 Geology
4 Places of interest
5 Gallery
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



History[edit]
Culture[edit]




The main geographical divisions of Scotland






Battle of Alma, Sutherland Highlanders


Between the 15th century and the 20th century, the area differed from most of the Lowlands in terms of language. In Scottish Gaelic, the region is known as the Gàidhealtachd,[5] because it was traditionally the Gaelic-speaking part of Scotland, although the language is now largely confined to the Outer Hebrides. The terms are sometimes used interchangeably but have different meanings in their respective languages. Scottish English (in its Highland form) is the predominant language of the area today, though Highland English has been influenced by Gaelic speech to a significant extent.[6] Historically, the "Highland line" distinguished the two Scottish cultures. While the Highland line broadly followed the geography of the Grampians in the south, it continued in the north, cutting off the north-eastern areas, that is Caithness, Orkney and Shetland, from the more Gaelic Highlands and Hebrides.[7][8]
In the aftermath of the Jacobite risings, the British government enacted a series of laws to try to speed up the destruction of the clan system, including bans on the bearing of arms and the wearing of tartan, and limitations on the activities of the Scottish Episcopal Church. Most of this legislation was repealed by the end of the 18th century as the Jacobite threat subsided. There was soon a rehabilitation of Highland culture. Tartan was adopted for Highland regiments in the British Army, which poor Highlanders joined in large numbers in the era of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1790–1815). Tartan had largely been abandoned by the ordinary people of the region, but in the 1820s, tartan and the kilt were adopted by members of the social elite, not just in Scotland, but across Europe.[9][10] The international craze for tartan, and for idealising a romanticised Highlands, was set off by the Ossian cycle,[11][12] and further popularised by the works of Walter Scott. His "staging" of the visit of King George IV to Scotland in 1822 and the king's wearing of tartan resulted in a massive upsurge in demand for kilts and tartans that could not be met by the Scottish woollen industry. Individual clan tartans were largely designated in this period and they became a major symbol of Scottish identity.[13] This "Highlandism", by which all of Scotland was identified with the culture of the Highlands, was cemented by Queen Victoria's interest in the country, her adoption of Balmoral as a major royal retreat, and her interest in "tartenry".[10]
Economy[edit]
The Highlands before 1800 were very poor and traditional, and were not much affected by the uplift of the Scottish Enlightenment or the Industrial Revolution that was sweeping the Lowlands of Scotland. The period of the Napoleonic wars brought prosperity, optimism, and economic growth to the Highlands. The economy grew thanks to wages paid in industries such as kelping (in which kelp was burned for the useful chemicals obtained from the ashes), fisheries, and weaving, as well as large-scale infrastructure spending such as the Caledonian Canal project.[14] On the East Coast, farmlands were improved, and high prices for cattle brought money to the area. Service in the Army was also attractive to young men from the Highlands, who sent pay home and retired there with their army pensions.[15] This prosperity ended after 1815, and long-term negative factors began to undermine the economic position of the poor tenant farmers, who typically rented a few acres, and were known as crofters. Landowners were increasingly market-oriented in the century after 1750, and this tended to dissolve the traditional social and economic structure of the North-West Highlands and the Hebrides, causing great disruption for the crofters. The Highland Clearances and the end of the township system followed changes in land ownership and tenancy and the replacement of cattle by sheep.[16] The Great Irish Famine of the 1840s was caused by a plant disease that reached the Highlands in 1846, causing great distress. Many Highlanders emigrated in a complex form of chain migration. Clan leaders would designate which young people should emigrate, where to, and in which order. The first arrivals would prepare the way for their kinsmen who continued to arrive in the chain migration.[17]
The unequal concentration of land ownership remained an emotional and controversial subject, of enormous importance to the Highland economy, and eventually became a cornerstone of liberal radicalism. The poor crofters were politically powerless, and many of them turned to religion. They embraced the popularly oriented, fervently evangelical Presbyterian revival after 1800.[18] Most joined the breakaway "Free Church" after 1843. This evangelical movement was led by lay preachers who themselves came from the lower strata, and whose preaching was implicitly critical of the established order. The religious change energised the crofters and separated them from the landlords; it helped prepare them for their successful and violent challenge to the landlords in the 1880s through the Highland Land League.[19] Violence erupted, starting on the Isle of Skye, when Highland landlords cleared their lands for sheep and deer parks. It was quietened when the government stepped in, passing the Crofters' Holdings (Scotland) Act, 1886 to reduce rents, guarantee fixity of tenure, and break up large estates to provide crofts for the homeless.[20] This contrasted with the Irish Land War under way at the same time, where the Irish were intensely politicised through roots in Irish nationalism, while political dimensions were limited. In 1885 three Independent Crofter candidates were elected to Parliament, which listened to their pleas. The results included explicit security for the Scottish smallholders; the legal right to bequeath tenancies to descendants; and the creation of a Crofting Commission. The Crofters as a political movement faded away by 1892, and the Liberal Party gained their votes.[21]
Religion[edit]




Loch Long


The Scottish Reformation achieved partial success in the Highlands. Roman Catholicism remained strong in some areas, owing to remote locations and the efforts of Franciscan missionaries from Ireland, who regularly came to celebrate Mass. Although the presence of Roman Catholicism has faded, there remain significant Catholic strongholds within the Highlands and Islands such as Moidart and Morar on the mainland and South Uist and Barra in the southern Outer Hebrides. The remoteness of the region and the lack of a Gaelic-speaking clergy undermined the missionary efforts of the established church. The later 18th century saw somewhat greater success, owing to the efforts of the SSPCK missionaries and to the disruption of traditional society after the Battle of Culloden in 1746. In the 19th century, the evangelical Free Churches, which were more accepting of Gaelic language and culture, grew rapidly, appealing much more strongly than did the established church.[22]
For the most part, however, the Highlands are considered predominantly Protestant, loyal to the Church of Scotland. In contrast to the Catholic southern islands, the northern Outer Hebrides islands (Lewis, Harris and North Uist) have an exceptionally high proportion of their population belonging to the Protestant Free Church of Scotland or the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland. The Outer Hebrides have been described as the last bastion of Calvinism in Britain[23] and the Sabbath remains widely observed. Inverness and the surrounding area has a majority Protestant population, with most locals belonging to either The Kirk or the Free Church of Scotland. The church maintains a noticeable presence within the area, with church attendance notably higher than in other Scottish cities. Religion continues to play an important role in Highland culture, with Sabbath observance still widely practised, particularly in the Hebrides.[24]
Historical geography[edit]




Inverness, the administrative centre and traditional capital of the Highlands






Ben Nevis from the path to the CIC Hut alongside the Allt a' Mhuilinn


In traditional Scottish geography, the Highlands refers to that part of Scotland north-west of the Highland Boundary Fault, which crosses mainland Scotland in a near-straight line from Helensburgh to Stonehaven. However the flat coastal lands that occupy parts of the counties of Nairnshire, Morayshire, Banffshire and Aberdeenshire are often excluded as they do not share the distinctive geographical and cultural features of the rest of the Highlands. The north-east of Caithness, as well as Orkney and Shetland, are also often excluded from the Highlands, although the Hebrides are usually included. The Highland area, as so defined, differed from the Lowlands in language and tradition, having preserved Gaelic speech and customs centuries after the anglicisation of the latter; this led to a growing perception of a divide, with the cultural distinction between Highlander and Lowlander first noted towards the end of the 14th century. In Aberdeenshire, the boundary between the Highlands and the Lowlands is not well defined. There is a stone beside the A93 road near the village of Dinnet on Royal Deeside which states 'You are now in the Highlands', although there are areas of Highland character to the east of this point.
A much wider definition of the Highlands is that used by the Scotch Whisky industry. Highland Single Malts are produced at distilleries north of an imaginary line between Dundee and Greenock,[25] thus including all of Aberdeenshire and Angus.
Inverness is traditionally regarded as the capital of the Highlands,[26] although less so in the Highland parts of Aberdeenshire, Angus, Perthshire and Stirlingshire which look more to Aberdeen, Perth, Dundee and Stirling as their commercial centres. Under some of the wider definitions in use, Aberdeen could be considered the largest city in the Highlands, although it does not share the recent Gaelic cultural history typical of the Highlands proper.
Highland Council area[edit]
The Highland Council area, created as one of the local government regions of Scotland, has been a unitary council area since 1996. The council area excludes a large area of the southern and eastern Highlands, and the Western Isles, but includes Caithness. Highlands is sometimes used, however, as a name for the council area, as in Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service. Northern, as in Northern Constabulary, is also used to refer to the area covered by the fire and rescue service. This area consists of the Highland council area and the island council areas of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles.
Highland Council signs in the Pass of Drumochter, between Glen Garry and Dalwhinnie, say "Welcome to the Highlands".
Highlands and Islands[edit]




Isle of Skye


Much of the Highlands area overlaps the Highlands and Islands area. An electoral region called Highlands and Islands is used in elections to the Scottish Parliament: this area includes Orkney and Shetland, as well as the Highland Council local government area, the Western Isles and most of the Argyll and Bute and Moray local government areas. Highlands and Islands has, however, different meanings in different contexts. It means Highland (the local government area), Orkney, Shetland, and the Western Isles in Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service. Northern, as in Northern Constabulary, refers to the same area as that covered by the fire and rescue service.
Historical crossings[edit]
There have been trackways from the Lowlands to the Highlands since prehistoric times. Many traverse the Mounth, a spur of mountainous land that extends from the higher inland range to the North Sea slightly north of Stonehaven. The most well-known and historically important trackways are the Causey Mounth, Elsick Mounth,[27] Cryne Corse Mounth and Cairnamounth.[28]
Courier delivery[edit]
Although most of the Highlands is geographically on the British mainland, it is somewhat less accessible than the rest of Britain; thus most UK couriers categorise it separately, alongside Northern Ireland, the Isle of Man, and other offshore islands. They thus charge additional fees for delivery to the Highlands, or exclude the area entirely. Whilst the physical remoteness from the largest population centres inevitably leads to higher transit cost, there is confusion and consternation over the scale of the fees charged and the effectiveness of their communication,[29] and the use of the word Mainland in their justification. Since the charges are often based on postcode areas, many far less remote areas, including some which are traditionally considered part of the lowlands, are also subject to these charges.[29] Royal Mail is the only delivery network bound by a Universal Service Obligation to charge a uniform tariff across the UK. This, however, applies only to mail items and not larger packages which are dealt with by its Parcelforce division.
Geology[edit]




Liathach seen from Beinn Eighe. With the Munro "Top" of Stuc a' Choire Dhuibh Bhig 915 m (3,001 ft) in the foreground and the two Munro summits in the background.






The main ridge of the Cuillin


The Highlands lie to the north and west of the Highland Boundary Fault, which runs from Arran to Stonehaven. This part of Scotland is largely composed of ancient rocks from the Cambrian and Precambrian periods which were uplifted during the later Caledonian Orogeny. Smaller formations of Lewisian gneiss in the northwest are up to 3 billion years old. The overlying rocks of the Torridon Sandstone form mountains in the Torridon Hills such as Liathach and Beinn Eighe in Wester Ross.
These foundations are interspersed with many igneous intrusions of a more recent age, the remnants of which have formed mountain massifs such as the Cairngorms and the Cuillin of Skye. A significant exception to the above are the fossil-bearing beds of Old Red Sandstone found principally along the Moray Firth coast and partially down the Highland Boundary Fault. The Jurassic beds found in isolated locations on Skye and Applecross reflect the complex underlying geology. They are the original source of much North Sea oil. The Great Glen is formed along a transform fault which divides the Grampian Mountains to the southeast from the Northwest Highlands.[30][31]
The entire region was covered by ice sheets during the Pleistocene ice ages, save perhaps for a few nunataks. The complex geomorphology includes incised valleys and lochs carved by the action of mountain streams and ice, and a topography of irregularly distributed mountains whose summits have similar heights above sea-level, but whose bases depend upon the amount of denudation to which the plateau has been subjected in various places.
Places of interest[edit]


A83 road, Rest & Be Thankful stretch
An Teallach
Aonach Mòr (Nevis Range ski centre)
Arrochar Alps
Balmoral Castle
Balquhidder
Battlefield of Culloden
Beinn Alligin
Beinn Eighe
Ben Cruachan hydro-electric power station
Ben Lomond
Ben Macdui (Scotland's (and Great Britain's) second highest mountain)
Ben Nevis (Scotland's (and Great Britain's) highest mountain)
Cairngorm National Park
Cairngorm Ski centre near Aviemore
Cairngorm Mountains
Caledonian Canal
Cape Wrath
Carrick Castle
Castle Stalker
Castle Tioram
Chanonry Point
Conic Hill
Dunadd
Duart Castle
Durness
Eilean Donan
Fingal's Cave (Staffa)
Fort George
Glen Coe
Glen Etive
Glen Kinglas
Glen Lyon
Glen Orchy
Glenshee Ski Centre
Glen Shiel
Glen Spean
Glenfinnan (and its railway station and viaduct)
Grampian Mountains
Hebrides
Highland Folk Museum- The first open-air museum in the UK.
Highland Wildlife Park
Inveraray Castle
Inveraray Jail
Inverewe Garden
Iona Abbey
Isle of Staffa
Kilchurn Castle
Kilmartin Glen
Liathach
Lecht Ski Centre
Loch Alsh
Loch Ard
Loch Awe
Loch Earn
Loch Etive
Loch Fyne Whisky distillery
Loch Fyne
Loch Goil
Loch Katrine
Loch Leven
Loch Linnhe
Loch Lochy
Loch Lomond
Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park
Loch Lubnaig
Loch Maree
Loch Morar
Loch Morlich
Loch Ness
Loch Nevis
Loch Rannoch
Loch Tay
Lochranza
Luss
Meall a' Bhuiridh (Glencoe Ski Centre)
Muchalls Castle
Oban Sealife centre at Loch Crean
Rannoch Moor
Red Cuillin
Carron River
River Spey
River Tay
Ross and Cromarty
Smoo Cave
Stob Coire a' Chàirn
Stac Polly
Strathspey Railway
Sutherland
Tor Castle
Torridon Hills
West Highland Line (The most scenic railway in Britain)
West Highland Way (Long distance footpath)
Wester Ross
Western Isles


Gallery[edit]







The Glenfinnan Viaduct from below.









The Saddle









Loch Scavaig, Isle of Skye









Inverness









The islands of Loch Maree









The interior of Smoo Cave, Sutherland









Cape Wrath Lighthouse in the far NW of the Highlands









Blaven









Gair Loch









The Kyle of Durness









The Quirang, Isle of Skye









Two hinds in the Highlands









Loch an Lòin




See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Highlands.



Fauna of Scotland
Highland 2007
Highland Land League
Mountains and hills of Scotland
List of fauna of the Scottish Highlands
List of towns and villages in the Scottish Highlands
James Hunter (historian) wrote several books related to the Scottish Highlands.

References[edit]



^ "Highlands | region, Scotland, United Kingdom". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-05-10. 
^ a b "Highland profile — key facts and figures". The Highland Council. Retrieved 2 June 2014. 
^ List of sovereign states and dependent territories by population density
^ "Global Health Facts : Demography & Population : Population Density (Population Per Square Kilometer)". The Henry J Kaiser Family Foundation. Retrieved 2 June 2014. 
^ Martin Ball; James Fife (1993). The Celtic Languages. Routledge. p. 136. ISBN 9780415010351. 
^ Charles Jones (1997). The Edinburgh History of the Scots Language. Edinburgh University Press. pp. 566–567. ISBN 978-0748607549. 
^ "The Highland Line". Sue & Marilyn. Retrieved 8 March 2013. 
^ "Historical Geography of the Clans of Scotland". Electricscotland.com. Retrieved 8 March 2013. 
^ John Lenox Roberts (2002). The Jacobite Wars: Scotland and the Military Campaigns of 1715 and 1745. Polygon at Edinburgh. pp. 193–195. ISBN 9781902930299. 
^ a b Marco Sievers (2007). The Highland Myth as an Invented Tradition of 18th and 19th Century and Its Significance for the Image of Scotland. GRIN Verlag. pp. 22–25. ISBN 9783638816519. 
^ Deidre Dawson; Pierre Morère (2004). Scotland and France in the Enlightenment. Bucknell University Press. pp. 75–76. ISBN 0838755267. 
^ William Ferguson (1998). The Identity of the Scottish Nation: An Historic Quest. Edinburgh University Press. p. 227. ISBN 0748610715. 
^ Norman C Milne (2010). Scottish Culture and Traditions. Paragon Publishing. p. 138. ISBN 1899820795. 
^ "Highlands Highlights in the Heart of Scotland by Rick Steves". www.ricksteves.com. Retrieved 2017-05-10. 
^ Malcolm Gray (1957). The Highland economy, 1750-1850. Greenwood Press. ISBN 9780837185361. 
^ "The Scottish Highlands". Scotland Info Guide. 2015-02-27. Retrieved 2017-05-10. 
^ Amanda Epperson (Oct 2009). "'It would be my earnest desire that you all would come': Networks, the Migration Process and Highland Emigration". Scottish Historical Review. 88 (2): 313–31. doi:10.3366/E0036924109000882. 
^ Thomas Martin Devine (1999). "Chapter 18". The Scottish Nation. Penguin Books. ISBN 0670888117. 
^ James Hunter (1974). "The Emergence of the Crofting Community: The Religious Contribution 1798–1843". Scottish Studies. 18: 95–116. 
^ Ian Bradley (Dec 1987). "'Having and Holding' - The Highland Land War of the 1880s". History Today. 37 (12): 23–28. Retrieved 8 March 2013. 
^ Ewen A. Cameron (June 2005). "Communication or Separation? Reactions to Irish Land Agitation and Legislation in the Highlands of Scotland, c. 1870–1910". English Historical Review. 120 (487): 633–66. doi:10.1093/ehr/cei124. 
^ George Robb (1990). "Popular Religion and the Christianisation of the Highlands in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries". Journal of Religious History. 16 (1): 18–34. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9809.1990.tb00647.x. 
^ Gerard Seenan (10 April 2006). "Fury at ferry crossing on Sabbath". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 March 2013. 
^ Cook, James (29 March 2011). "Battle looms in Outer Hebrides over Sabbath opening". BBC News. Retrieved 3 June 2014. 
^ "Whisky Regions & Tours". Scotch Whisky Association. Retrieved 8 March 2013. 
^ "Inverness: Capital of the Scottish Highlands". Internet Guide to Scotland. Retrieved 8 March 2013. 
^ C Michael Hogan (22 November 2007). "Elsick Mounth - Ancient Trackway in Scotland in Aberdeenshire". The Megalithic Portal. Retrieved 8 March 2013. 
^ W. Douglas Simpson (10 December 1928). "The Early Castles of Mar" (PDF). Proceedings of the Society. Retrieved 8 March 2013. [dead link]
^ a b "3,000 angry Scots respond to CAB survey on rural delivery charges". 2012 The Scottish Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux - Citizens Advice Scotland (Scottish charity SC016637). 25 January 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2013. 
^ John Keay, Julia Keay (1994). Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland. HarperCollins. ISBN 9780007103539. 
^ William Hutchison Murray (1973). The islands of Western Scotland: the Inner and Outer Hebrides. Eyre Methuen. 



Further reading[edit]

Baxter, Colin, and C. J. Tabraham. The Scottish Highlands (2008), heavily illustrated
Gray, Malcolm. The Highland Economy, 1750–1850 (Edinburgh, 1957)
Humphreys, Rob, and Donald Reid. The Rough Guide to Scottish Highlands and Islands (3rd ed. 2004)
Keay, J. and J. Keay. Collins Encyclopaedia of Scotland (1994)
Kermack, William Ramsay. The Scottish Highlands: a short history, c. 300-1746 (1957)
Lister, John Anthony. The Scottish Highlands (1978)

External links[edit]

Am Baile – Highland History & Culture in English and Gaelic
Community portal site – EU and local authority supported
Walking guide
National Library of Scotland: SCOTTISH SCREEN ARCHIVE (selection of archive films relating to the Scottish Highlands)
Lairds of Battle - Warfare in the Highlands in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
Garnett, Thomas (1800) Observations on a tour through the Highlands and part of the western isles and Scotland, particularly Staffa and Icolmkill, in two volumes - from the Linda Hall Library







v
t
e


Scotland articles






List of topics





History



Timeline
Prehistoric
Roman times
Middle Ages
Early Middle Ages
Kingdom
High Middle Ages
Davidian Revolution
Wars of Independence
Late Middle Ages
Renaissance
Early modern
Reformation
Colonisation of the Americas
Glorious Revolution
1707 Acts of Union
Jacobitism
Enlightenment
Lowland Clearances
Highland Clearances
Industrial Revolution
Romanticism
Modern








Geography







Anglo-Scottish border
Central Belt
Climate
Fauna
Flora
Geology
Highlands
Islands
Lochs
Lowlands
Mountains and hills
Waterfalls








Politics




Government




Politics



Devolution
Elections
First Minister
Government
Human rights

LGBT rights


Independence
Local government
Military
Monarchs
Parliament
Political parties
Republicanism
Scotland Office
Secretary of State
Nationalism
Unionism





Law



Advocate General
Courts
Crown Office
Lord Advocate
Lord President
Procurator fiscal
Solicitor General
Sheriff principal
College of Justice
Udal law











Economy







Agriculture
Bank of Scotland
Charities
Companies
Fishing
Harris Tweed
Housing
Media
North Sea oil
Power stations
Renewable energy
Royal Bank of Scotland
Tourism
Transport
Whisky
Silicon Glen
Unemployment








Society








Culture



Architecture
Art
Clans
Cuisine
Education
Hogmanay
Identity
Inventions and discoveries
Literature
Museums
Music
Oldest buildings
Performing arts
Prostitution
Royal National Mòd
Sport
Surnames
Symbols

anthem
coat of arms
flags
Tartan
unicorn


World Heritage Sites





Demographics




Languages



Highland English
Scottish English
Scottish Gaelic
Scots
British Sign Language





People (list)



Actors
Artists
Inventors
Musicians
Scientists
Writers








Religion



Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism
Christianity

Christmas
Church of Scotland

General Assembly
Moderators


Roman Catholicism
Scottish Episcopal Church
Baptist Union


Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Sikhism















Outline



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Scottish clans




List of tartans



Clans with chiefs



Agnew
Anstruther
Arbuthnott
Arthur
Bannerman
Barclay
Borthwick
Boyd
Boyle
Brodie
Broun
Bruce
Buchan
Burnett
Cameron
Campbell
Carmichael
Carnegie
Cathcart
Charteris
Chattan
Chisholm
Cochrane
Colquhoun
Colville
Cranstoun
Crichton
Cumming (Comyn)
Cunningham
Darroch
Davidson
Dewar
Drummond
Dunbar
Dundas
Durie
Elliot
Elphinstone
Erskine
Farquharson
Fergusson
Forbes
Forsyth
Fraser
Fraser of Lovat
Gordon
Graham
Grant
Gregor
Grierson
Gunn
Guthrie
Haig
Haldane
Hamilton
Hannay
Hay
Henderson
Home
Hope
Hunter
Irvine
Jardine
Johnstone
Keith
Kennedy
Kerr
Kincaid
Lamont
Leask
Lennox
Leslie
Lindsay
Lockhart
Lumsden
Lyon
MacAlister
MacBean
MacDonald
Macdonald of Clanranald
MacDonald of Keppoch
Macdonald of Sleat
MacDonell of Glengarry
MacDougall
Macdowall
MacIntyre
Mackay
Mackenzie
Mackinnon
Mackintosh
Maclachlan
Maclaine of Lochbuie
MacLaren
MacLea (Livingstone)
Maclean
MacLennan
MacLeod
MacLeod of Lewis
MacMillan
Macnab
Macnaghten
MacNeacail
MacNeil
Macpherson
MacTavish
MacThomas
Maitland
Makgill
Malcolm (MacCallum)
Mar
Marjoribanks
Matheson
Menzies
Moffat
Moncreiffe
Montgomery
Morrison
Munro
Murray
Napier
Nesbitt
Nicolson
Ogilvy
Oliphant
Primrose
Ramsay
Rattray
Riddell
Robertson
Rollo
Rose
Ross
Ruthven
Sandilands
Scott
Scrymgeour
Sempill
Shaw
Sinclair
Skene
Stirling
Strange
Stuart of Bute
Sutherland
Swinton
Trotter
Urquhart
Wallace
Wedderburn
Wemyss
Wood





Armigerous clans



Abercromby
Abernethy
Adair
Adam
Aikenhead
Ainslie
Aiton
Allardice
Anderson
Armstrong
Arnott
Auchinleck
Baillie
Baird
Balfour
Bannatyne
Baxter
Bell
Belshes
Bethune
Beveridge
Binning
Bissett
Blackadder
Blackstock
Blair
Blane
Blyth
Boswell
Brisbane
Buchanan
Butter
Byres
Cairns
Calder
Caldwell
Callender
Campbell of Breadalbane
Campbell of Cawdor
Carruthers
Cheyne
Chalmers
Clelland
Clephane
Cockburn
Congilton
Craig
Crawford
Crosbie
Dalmahoy
Dalrymple
Dalzell
Dennistoun
Don
Douglas
Duncan
Dunlop
Edmonstone
Fairlie
Falconer
Fenton
Fleming
Fletcher
Forrester
Fotheringham
Fullarton
Galbraith
Galloway
Gardyne
Gartshore
Gayre
Ged
Gibsone
Gladstains
Glas
Glen
Glendinning
Gray
Haliburton
Halkerston
Halket
Hepburn
Heron
Herries
Hogg
Hopkirk
Horsburgh
Houston
Hutton
Inglis
Innes
Kelly
Kinloch
Kinnaird
Kinnear
Kinninmont
Kirkcaldy
Kirkpatrick
Laing
Lammie
Langlands
Learmonth
Little
Logan
Logie
Lundin
Lyle
MacAlpin(e)
MacAulay
Macbrayne
MacDuff
MacEwen
MacFarlane
Macfie
MacGillivray
MacInnes
MacIver
Mackie
MacLellan
Macquarrie
Macqueen
Macrae
Masterton
Maule
Maxton
Maxwell
McCorquodale
McCulloch
McKerrell
Meldrum
Melville
Mercer
Middleton
Moncur
Monteith
Monypenny
Mouat
Moubray
Mow
Muir
Nairn
Nevoy
Newlands
Newton
Norvel
Ochterlony
Orrock
Paisley
Paterson
Pennycook
Pentland
Peter
Pitblado
Pitcairn
Pollock
Polwarth
Porterfield
Preston
Pringle
Purves
Rait
Ralston
Renton
Roberton
Rossie
Russell
Rutherford
Schaw
Seton
Skirving
Somerville
Spalding
Spens
Spottiswood
Stewart
Stewart of Appin
Stirling
Strachan
Straiton
Sydserf
Symmers
Tailyour
Tait
Tennant
Troup
Turnbull
Tweedie
Udny
Vans
Walkinshaw
Wardlaw
Watson
Wauchope
Weir
Whitefoord
Whitelaw
Wishart
Young





Culture and society



Scotland
Lord Lyon
Court of the Lord Lyon
Clan chief
Septs
Clan badge
Clan crest
Clan battles
Tartan
Bagpipes
Clearances
Kilt
Manrent
The Highlands
Battle of Culloden
Highland games
Border Reivers
Lowland Scots language
Scottish Gaelic language
Scottish heraldry
Scottish surnames
Shennachie
Independent Highland Companies
Sgian-dubh






Coordinates: 57°07′N 4°43′W﻿ / ﻿57.12°N 4.71°W﻿ / 57.12; -4.71



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 236365448
GND: 4072495-5








Scotland portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scottish_Highlands&oldid=815226087"					Categories: Highlands and Islands of ScotlandGeography of ScotlandMountains and hills of ScotlandRegions of ScotlandPhysiographic provincesNatural regionsHighland Boundary FaultHighlandsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Use British English from August 2011Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language textArticles containing Scots-language textUse dmy dates from August 2011Coordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers