This article is about shelled gastropods that live in saltwater. For the fish which are also sometimes known as " snails", see Snailfish.







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (November 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)







A species of sea snail in its natural habitat: two individuals of the wentletrap Epidendrium billeeanum with a mass of egg capsules in situ on their food source, a red cup coral.


Sea snail is a common name for snails that normally live in saltwater, in other words marine gastropods. The taxonomic class Gastropoda also includes snails that live in other habitats, such as land snails and freshwater snails. Many species of sea snails are edible and exploited as food sources by humans.
Sea snails are marine gastropods with shells. Those marine gastropods with no shells, or only internal shells, are variously known by other common names, including sea slug, sea hare, nudibranch, etc. The diversity within sea snails is enormous. Many very different clades of gastropods are either dominated by, or consist exclusively of, sea snails. Because of this great variability, generalization about the feeding, reproduction, habitat, or other traits of sea snails is not possible. Instead, individual clades, families, genera, or species must be assessed.



Contents


1 Shells
2 Anatomy
3 Human uses
4 Use by other animals
5 Definition
6 Taxonomy

6.1 2005 taxonomy


7 See also
8 References



Shells[edit]




The shell of Syrinx aruanus can be up to 91 cm long.


The shells of most species of sea snails are spirally coiled. Some, though, have conical shells, and these are often referred to by the common name of limpets. In one unusual family (Juliidae), the shell of the snail has become two hinged plates closely resembling those of a bivalve; this family is sometimes called the "bivalved gastropods".
Their shells are found in a variety of shapes and sizes, but are normally very small. Those of living species of sea snails range in size from Syrinx aruanus, the largest living shelled gastropod species at 91 cm, to minute species whose shells are less than 1 mm at adult size. Because the shells of sea snails are strong and durable in many cases, as a group they are well represented in the fossil record.
Anatomy[edit]
Sea snails are a very large group of animals and a very diverse one. Most snails that live in saltwater respire using a gill or gills, a few species, though, have a lung, are intertidal, and are active only at low tide when they can move around in the air. These air-breathing species include false limpets in the family Siphonariidae and another group of false limpets in the family Trimusculidae.
Many, but not all sea snails have an operculum.
Human uses[edit]
A number of species of sea snails are used by humans for food, including abalone, conch, limpets, whelks (such as the North American Busycon species and the North Atlantic Buccinum undatum) and periwinkles including Littorina littorea.
The shells of sea snails are often found by humans as seashells commonly wash up on beaches. Because the shells of many sea snails are attractive and durable, they have been used by humans to make necklaces and other jewelry from prehistoric times to the current day.
The shells of a few species of large sea snails within the Vetigastropoda have a thick layer of nacre and have been used as a source of mother of pearl. Historically, the button industry relied on these species for a number of years.
Use by other animals[edit]
The shells of sea snails are used for protection by many kinds of hermit crabs. A hermit crab carries the shell by grasping the central columella of the shell using claspers on the tip of its abdomen.
Definition[edit]
Determining whether some gastropods should be called sea snails is not always easy. Some species that live in brackish water (such as certain neritids) can be listed as either freshwater snails or marine snails, and some species that live at or just above the high tide level (for example species in the genus Truncatella) are sometimes considered to be sea snails and sometimes listed as land snails.
Taxonomy[edit]
2005 taxonomy[edit]
The following cladogram is an overview of the main clades of living gastropods based on the taxonomy of Bouchet & Rocroi (2005),[1] with taxa that contain saltwater or brackish water species marked in boldface (some of the highlighted taxa consist entirely of marine species, but some of them also contain freshwater or land species.)


Play media


A 50-second video of snails (most likely Natica chemnitzi and Cerithium stercusmuscaram) feeding on the sea floor in the Gulf of California, Puerto Peñasco, Mexico.






A hermit crab occupying a shell of Acanthina punctulata has been disturbed, and has retracted into the shell, using its claws to bar the entrance in the same way the snail used its operculum.



Clade Patellogastropoda
Clade Vetigastropoda
Clade Cocculiniformia
Clade Neritimorpha

Clade Cycloneritimorpha


Clade Caenogastropoda

Informal group Architaenioglossa
Clade Sorbeoconcha
Clade Hypsogastropoda

Clade Littorinimorpha
Informal group Ptenoglossa
Clade Neogastropoda




Clade Heterobranchia

Informal group Lower Heterobranchia
Informal group Opisthobranchia

Clade Cephalaspidea
Clade Thecosomata
Clade Gymnosomata
Clade Aplysiomorpha
Group Acochlidiacea
Clade Sacoglossa
Group Cylindrobullida
Clade Umbraculida
Clade Nudipleura

Clade Pleurobranchomorpha
Clade Nudibranchia

Clade Euctenidiacea
Clade Dexiarchia

Clade Pseudoeuctenidiacea
Clade Cladobranchia

Clade Euarminida
Clade Dendronotida
Clade Aeolidida










Informal group Pulmonata

Informal group Basommatophora
Clade Eupulmonata

Clade Systellommatophora
Clade Stylommatophora

Clade Elasmognatha
Clade Orthurethra
Informal group Sigmurethra









See also[edit]

Freshwater snail
Terrestrial molluscs
Land snail
Sea slug
Slug

References[edit]



^ Bouchet P.; Rocroi J.-P.; Frýda J.; Hausdorf B.; Ponder W.; Valdés Á. & Warén A. (2005). "Classification and nomenclator of gastropod families". Malacologia: International Journal of Malacology. Hackenheim, Germany: ConchBooks. 47 (1-2): 1–397. ISBN 3-925919-72-4. ISSN 0076-2997. 








						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sea_snail&oldid=817845171"					Categories: Sea snailsMollusc common namesHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2013All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles needing additional references from November 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles containing video clips