For other uses of "Sea level", see Sea level (disambiguation).




This marker indicating sea level is situated between Jerusalem and the Dead Sea.


Mean sea level (MSL) (often shortened to sea level) is an average level of the surface of one or more of Earth's oceans from which heights such as elevations may be measured. MSL is a type of vertical datum – a standardised geodetic reference point – that is used, for example, as a chart datum in cartography and marine navigation, or, in aviation, as the standard sea level at which atmospheric pressure is measured to calibrate altitude and, consequently, aircraft flight levels. A common and relatively straightforward mean sea-level standard is the midpoint between a mean low and mean high tide at a particular location.[1]
Sea levels can be affected by many factors and are known to have varied greatly over geological time scales. The careful measurement of variations in MSL can offer insights into ongoing climate change, and sea level rise has been widely quoted as evidence of ongoing global warming.[2]
The term above sea level generally refers to above mean sea level (AMSL).



Contents


1 Measurement

1.1 Height above mean sea level

1.1.1 Difficulties in use




2 Dry land
3 Change

3.1 Local and eustatic
3.2 Short term and periodic changes
3.3 Recent changes


4 Aviation
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Measurement[edit]




Sea level measurements from 23 long tide gauge records in geologically stable environments show a rise of around 200 millimetres (7.9 in) during the 20th century (2 mm/year).


Precise determination of a "mean sea level" is difficult to achieve because of the many factors that affect sea level.[3] Sea level varies quite a lot on several scales of time and space. This is because the sea is in constant motion, affected by the tides, wind, atmospheric pressure, local gravitational differences, temperature, salinity and so forth. The easiest way this may be calculated is by selecting a location and calculating the mean sea level at that point and use it as a datum. For example, a period of 19 years of hourly level observations may be averaged and used to determine the mean sea level at some measurement point.
To an operator of a tide gauge, MSL means the "still water level"—the level of the sea with motions such as wind waves averaged out—averaged over a period of time such that changes in sea level, e.g., due to the tides, also get averaged out. One measures the values of MSL in respect to the land. Hence a change in MSL can result from a real change in sea level, or from a change in the height of the land on which the tide gauge operates.
In the UK, the Ordnance Datum (the 0 metres height on UK maps) is the mean sea level measured at Newlyn in Cornwall between 1915 and 1921. Prior to 1921, the datum was MSL at the Victoria Dock, Liverpool.
In Hong Kong, "mPD" is a surveying term meaning "metres above Principal Datum" and refers to height of 1.230m below the average sea level.
In France, the Marégraphe in Marseilles measures continuously the sea level since 1883 and offers the longest collapsed data about the sea level. It is used for a part of continental Europe and main part of Africa as official sea level. Elsewhere in Europe vertical elevation references (European Vertical Reference System) are made to the Amsterdam Peil elevation, which dates back to the 1690s.
Satellite altimeters have been making precise measurements of sea level[4] since the launch of TOPEX/Poseidon in 1992. A joint mission of NASA and CNES, TOPEX/Poseidon was followed by Jason-1 in 2001 and the Ocean Surface Topography Mission on the Jason-2 satellite in 2008.
 Height above mean sea level[edit]
Main article: Elevation
Height above mean sea level (AMSL) is the elevation (on the ground) or altitude (in the air) of an object, relative to the average sea level datum. It is also used in aviation, where some heights are recorded and reported with respect to mean sea level (MSL) (contrast with flight level), and in the atmospheric sciences, and land surveying. An alternative is to base height measurements on an ellipsoid of the entire Earth, which is what systems such as GPS do. In aviation, the ellipsoid known as World Geodetic System 84 is increasingly used to define heights; however, differences up to 100 metres (328 feet) exist between this ellipsoid height and mean tidal height. The alternative is to use a geoid-based vertical datum such as NAVD88.
When referring to geographic features such as mountains on a topographic map, variations in elevation are shown by contour lines. The elevation of a mountain denotes the highest point or summit and is typically illustrated as a small circle on a topographic map with the AMSL height shown in metres, feet or both.
In the rare case that a location is below sea level, the elevation AMSL is negative. For one such case, see Amsterdam Airport Schiphol.
Difficulties in use[edit]






Ocean
Reference ellipsoid
Local plumb line
Continent
Geoid





To extend this definition far from the sea means comparing the local height of the mean sea surface with a "level" reference surface, or geodetic datum, called the geoid. In a state of rest or absence of external forces, the mean sea level would coincide with this geoid surface, being an equipotential surface of the Earth's gravitational field. In reality, due to currents, air pressure variations, temperature and salinity variations, etc., this does not occur, not even as a long-term average. The location-dependent, but persistent in time, separation between mean sea level and the geoid is referred to as (stationary) ocean surface topography. It varies globally in a range of ± 2 m.
Historically, adjustments were made to sea-level measurements to take into account the effects of the 235 lunar month Metonic cycle and the 223-month eclipse cycle on the tides.[5]
Dry land[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Sea level sign seen on cliff (circled in red) at Badwater Basin, Death Valley National Park


Several terms are used to describe the changing relationships between sea level and dry land. When the term "relative" is used, it means change relative to a fixed point in the sediment pile. The term "eustatic" refers to global changes in sea level relative to a fixed point, such as the centre of the earth, for example as a result of melting ice-caps. The term "steric" refers to global changes in sea level due to thermal expansion and salinity variations. The term "isostatic" refers to changes in the level of the land relative to a fixed point in the earth, possibly due to thermal buoyancy or tectonic effects; it implies no change in the volume of water in the oceans. The melting of glaciers at the end of ice ages is one example of eustatic sea level rise. The subsidence of land due to the withdrawal of groundwater is an isostatic cause of relative sea level rise. Paleoclimatologists can track sea level by examining the rocks deposited along coasts that are very tectonically stable, like the east coast of North America. Areas like volcanic islands are experiencing relative sea level rise as a result of isostatic cooling of the rock which causes the land to sink.
On other planets that lack a liquid ocean, planetologists can calculate a "mean altitude" by averaging the heights of all points on the surface. This altitude, sometimes referred to as a "sea level", serves equivalently as a reference for the height of planetary features.
 Change[edit]
Not to be confused with Past sea level, Current sea-level rise, Future sea level, or Sea level rise.
Local and eustatic[edit]




Water cycles between ocean, atmosphere and glaciers


Local mean sea level (LMSL) is defined as the height of the sea with respect to a land benchmark, averaged over a period of time (such as a month or a year) long enough that fluctuations caused by waves and tides are smoothed out. One must adjust perceived changes in LMSL to account for vertical movements of the land, which can be of the same order (mm/yr) as sea level changes. Some land movements occur because of isostatic adjustment of the mantle to the melting of ice sheets at the end of the last ice age. The weight of the ice sheet depresses the underlying land, and when the ice melts away the land slowly rebounds. Changes in ground-based ice volume also affect local and regional sea levels by the readjustment of the geoid and true polar wander. Atmospheric pressure, ocean currents and local ocean temperature changes can affect LMSL as well.
Eustatic change (as opposed to local change) results in an alteration to the global sea levels due to changes in either the volume of water in the world's oceans or net changes in the volume of the ocean basins.[6]
Short term and periodic changes[edit]




Melting glaciers can cause a change in sea level


There are many factors which can produce short-term (a few minutes to 14 months) changes in sea level. Two major mechanisms are causing sea level to rise. First, shrinking land ice, such as mountain glaciers and polar ice sheets, is releasing water into the oceans. Second, as ocean temperatures rise, the warmer water expands.[7]


Periodic sea level changes


Diurnal and semidiurnal astronomical tides
12–24 h P
0.2–10+ m


Long-period tides
 
 


Rotational variations (Chandler wobble)
14-month P


Meteorological and oceanographic fluctuations


Atmospheric pressure
Hours to months
−0.7 to 1.3 m


Winds (storm surges)
1–5 days
Up to 5 m


Evaporation and precipitation (may also follow long-term pattern)
Days to weeks
 


Ocean surface topography (changes in water density and currents)
Days to weeks
Up to 1 m


El Niño/southern oscillation
6 mo every 5–10 yr
Up to 0.6 m


Seasonal variations


Seasonal water balance among oceans (Atlantic, Pacific, Indian)
 
 


Seasonal variations in slope of water surface
 
 


River runoff/floods
2 months
1 m


Seasonal water density changes (temperature and salinity)
6 months
0.2 m


Seiches


Seiches (standing waves)
Minutes to hours
Up to 2 m


Earthquakes


Tsunamis (generate catastrophic long-period waves)
Hours
Up to 10 m


Abrupt change in land level
Minutes
Up to 10 m


Recent changes[edit]
Main article: Current sea level rise
Further information: Global warming, Ocean heat content, and Effects of global warming on oceans
For at least the last 100 years, sea level has been rising at an average rate of about 1.8 mm (0.1 in) per year.[8] Most of this rise can be attributed to the increase in temperature of the sea and the resulting slight thermal expansion of the upper 500 metres (1,640 feet) of sea water. Additional contributions, as much as one-quarter of the total, come from water sources on land, such as melting snow and glaciers and extraction of groundwater for irrigation and other agricultural and human uses.[9]
Aviation[edit]
Main article: Altitude in aviation
Pilots can estimate height above sea level with an altimeter set to a defined barometric pressure. Generally, the pressure used to set the altimeter is the barometric pressure that would exist at MSL in the region being flown over. This pressure is referred to as either QNH or "altimeter" and is transmitted to the pilot by radio from air traffic control (ATC) or an automatic terminal information service (ATIS). Since the terrain elevation is also referenced to MSL, the pilot can estimate height above ground by subtracting the terrain altitude from the altimeter reading. Aviation charts are divided into boxes and the maximum terrain altitude from MSL in each box is clearly indicated. Once above the transition altitude, the altimeter is set to the international standard atmosphere (ISA) pressure at MSL which is 1013.25 hPa or 29.92 inHg.[10]
See also[edit]


Above ground level
Before Present
Chart datum
Extreme points of Earth
Geopotential height
Height above average terrain
List of places on land with elevations below sea level
Marine terrace
Meltwater pulse 1A
Metres above the Adriatic
Normaal Amsterdams Peil
Normal height
Normalhöhennull
Normalnull
North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System
Ordnance datum (UK)
Orthometric height
Vertical datum
World Geodetic System


References[edit]


^ What is "Mean Sea Level"? (Proudman Oceanographic Laboratory).
^ Solomon et al., Technical Summary, Section 3.4 Consistency Among Observations in IPCC AR4 WG1 2007; Hegerl et al., Executive summary, Section 1.3: Consistency of changes in physical and biological systems with warming in IPCC AR4 SYR 2007.
^ US National Research Council, Bulletin of the National Research Council 1932 page 270
^ "Evaluating models of sea state bias in satellite altimetry". Journal of Geophysical Research. NASA. 99 (C6): 12581. 1994. Bibcode:1994JGR....9912581G. doi:10.1029/94JC00478. Roman Glazman Greysukh, A. M., Zlotnicki, V.
^ "Stonehenge pt 3". www.celticnz.co.nz. Retrieved 2017-02-18. 
^ "Eustatic sea level". Oilfield Glossary. Schlumberger Limited. Retrieved 10 June 2011. 
^ "Global Warming Effects on Sea Level". www.climatehotmap.org. Retrieved 2016-12-02. 
^ Bruce C. Douglas (1997). "Global Sea Rise: A Redetermination". Surveys in Geophysics. 18 (2/3): 279–292. Bibcode:1997SGeo...18..279D. doi:10.1023/A:1006544227856. 
^ Bindoff, N.L.; Willebrand, J.; Artale, V.; Cazenave, A.; Gregory, J.; Gulev, S.; Hanawa, K.; Le Quéré, C.; Levitus, S.; Nojiri, Y.; Shum, C.K.; Talley, L.D.; Unnikrishnan, A. (2007). "Observations: Oceanic Climate Change and Sea Level" (PDF). In Solomon, S.; Qin, D.; Manning, M.; Chen, Z.; Marquis, M.; Averyt, K.B.; Tignor, M.; Miller, H.L. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. 
^ US Federal Aviation Administration, Code of Federal Regulations Sec. 91.121


External links[edit]



The Wikibook Historical Geology has a page on the topic of: Sea level variations





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sea level.



Sea Level Rise:Understanding the past – Improving projections for the future
Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level
Global sea level change: Determination and interpretation
Environment Protection Agency Sea level rise reports
Properties of isostasy and eustasy
Measuring Sea Level from Space
Rising Tide Video: Scripps Institution of Oceanography
Sea Levels Online: National Ocean Service (CO-OPS)
Système d'Observation du Niveau des Eaux Littorales (SONEL)
Sea level rise – How much and how fast will sea level rise over the coming centuries?







v
t
e


Physical oceanography



Waves



Airy wave theory
Ballantine scale
Benjamin–Feir instability
Boussinesq approximation
Breaking wave
Clapotis
Cnoidal wave
Cross sea
Dispersion
Edge wave
Equatorial waves
Fetch
Gravity wave
Green's law
Infragravity wave
Internal wave
Iribarren number
Kelvin wave
Kinematic wave
Longshore drift
Luke's variational principle
Mild-slope equation
Radiation stress
Rogue wave
Rossby wave
Rossby-gravity waves
Sea state
Seiche
Significant wave height
Soliton
Stokes boundary layer
Stokes drift
Stokes wave
Swell
Trochoidal wave
Tsunami

megatsunami


Undertow
Ursell number
Wave action
Wave base
Wave height
Wave power
Wave radar
Wave setup
Wave shoaling
Wave turbulence
Wave–current interaction
Waves and shallow water

one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations
shallow water equations


Wind wave

model
















Circulation



Atmospheric circulation
Baroclinity
Boundary current
Coriolis force
Coriolis–Stokes force
Craik–Leibovich vortex force
Downwelling
Eddy
Ekman layer
Ekman spiral
Ekman transport
El Niño–Southern Oscillation
General circulation model
Geostrophic current
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project
Gulf Stream
Halothermal circulation
Humboldt Current
Hydrothermal circulation
Langmuir circulation
Longshore drift
Loop Current
Modular Ocean Model
Ocean dynamics
Ocean gyre
Princeton Ocean Model
Rip current
Subsurface currents
Sverdrup balance
Thermohaline circulation

shutdown


Upwelling
Whirlpool
World Ocean Circulation Experiment





Tides



Amphidromic point
Earth tide
Head of tide
Internal tide
Lunitidal interval
Perigean spring tide
Rip tide
Rule of twelfths
Slack water
Tidal bore
Tidal force
Tidal power
Tidal race
Tidal range
Tidal resonance
Tide gauge
Tideline





Landforms



Abyssal fan
Abyssal plain
Atoll
Bathymetric chart
Coastal geography
Cold seep
Continental margin
Continental rise
Continental shelf
Contourite
Guyot
Hydrography
Oceanic basin
Oceanic plateau
Oceanic trench
Passive margin
Seabed
Seamount
Submarine canyon
Submarine volcano





Plate
tectonics



Convergent boundary
Divergent boundary
Fracture zone
Hydrothermal vent
Marine geology
Mid-ocean ridge
Mohorovičić discontinuity
Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis
Oceanic crust
Outer trench swell
Ridge push
Seafloor spreading
Slab pull
Slab suction
Slab window
Subduction
Transform fault
Volcanic arc





Ocean zones



Benthic
Deep ocean water
Deep sea
Littoral
Mesopelagic
Oceanic
Pelagic
Photic
Surf
Swash





Sea level



Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis
Future sea level
Global Sea Level Observing System
North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System
Sea-level curve
Sea level rise
World Geodetic System





Acoustics



Deep scattering layer
Hydroacoustics
Ocean acoustic tomography
Sofar bomb
SOFAR channel
Underwater acoustics





Satellites



Jason-1
Jason-2 (Ocean Surface Topography Mission)
Jason-3





Related



Argo
Benthic lander
Color of water
DSV Alvin
Marginal sea
Marine energy
Marine pollution
Mooring
National Oceanographic Data Center
Ocean
Ocean exploration
Ocean observations
Ocean reanalysis
Ocean surface topography
Ocean thermal energy conversion
Oceanography
Pelagic sediment
Sea surface microlayer
Sea surface temperature
Seawater
Science On a Sphere
Thermocline
Underwater glider
Water column
World Ocean Atlas








 Category
 Commons











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sea_level&oldid=813069776"					Categories: Sea levelGeodesyPhysical oceanographyOceanographical terminologyHidden categories: Use dmy dates from September 2017Articles needing additional references from August 2015All articles needing additional references