"Boer War" redirects here. For other uses, see Boer War (disambiguation).






The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (March 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)








Second Boer War


Part of the Boer Wars



Boer militia at the Battle of Spion Kop





Date
11 October 1899 – 31 May 1902 (1899-10-11 – 1902-05-31)
(2 years, 7 months, 2 weeks and 6 days)


Location
Southern Africa (present-day South Africa and Swaziland)[2]


Result

British victory[3][4]

Treaty of Vereeniging




Territorial
changes
British administration over The Orange Free State and the Transvaal in accordance with the Treaty of Vereeniging





Belligerents




 United Kingdom

 Cape Colony
 Natal Colony
 Rhodesia[a]


 Canada
 India
 New Zealand

 Australia

 New South Wales (1899–1901)
 Western Australia (1899–1901)
 Tasmania (1899–1901)
 South Australia (1899–1901)
 Victoria (1899–1901)
 Queensland (1899–1901)
 Australia (from 1901)


 British Ceylon

 Orange Free State
 South African Republic
 Cape Boers

Foreign volunteers[b]




Commanders and leaders


 Lord Salisbury
 Joseph Chamberlain
 Lord Milner
 Lord Roberts
 Sir Redvers Buller
 Lord Kitchener
 Sir Wilfrid Laurier
 Sir Edmund Barton
 Paul Kruger
 Louis Botha
 Schalk W. Burger
 Koos de la Rey
 Martinus Steyn
 Christiaan de Wet
 Piet Cronjé (POW)
 Piet Joubert


Strength


British Regulars:
347,000
Colonial Forces:
103,000–153,000
Black South African Auxillaries:
100,000[5]
Boer Commandos:
Transvaal Boers
25,000
Free State Boers
15,000
Cape Boers
Black Boer Auxillaries:
10,000[5]
Foreign Volunteers:
5,400+[6]


Casualties and losses


Military casualties:
22,092 dead[c] 14,658 died of disease; 75,430 returned home sick or wounded [8]
934 missing[citation needed]
22,828 wounded.[citation needed]

Military casualties:
6,189 dead [d]24,000 Boer prisoners sent overseas;
[6]
21,256 bitter-enders surrendered at the end of the war.[10]
Civilian casualties: 46,370, of which 26,370 were Boer women and children who died in concentration camps, along with another 20, 000+ black Africans of the 115,000 interned in separate concentration camps.[citation needed]












v
t
e


Second Boer War






Kraaipan
Kimberley
Talana Hill
Elandslaagte
1st Ladysmith
2nd Ladysmith
Belmont
Modder River
Stormberg
Magersfontein
Colenso
Spion Kop
Vaal Krantz
Paardeberg

Bloody Sunday


Tugela Heights
3rd Ladysmith
Poplar Grove
Driefontein
Sanna's Post
Boshof
Mafeking
Diamond Hill
Witpoort
1st Elands River
Bergendal
Bothaville
Leliefontein
Nooitgedacht
Groenkloof
Modderfontein
Blood River Poort
Bakenlaagte
Groenkop
Tweebosch
Rooiwal












v
t
e


Scramble for Africa






Boer War (1880)
Tunisia (1881)
Sudan (1881)
Egypt (1882)
Wassoulou (1883)
Eritrea (1887)
Dahomey (1890)
Mashonaland (1890)
Dahomey (1892)
Matabeleland (1893)
Wassoulou (1894)
Ashanti (1895)
Ethiopia (1895)
Matabeleland (1896)
Zanzibar (1896)
Benin (1897)
Wassoulou (1898)
Chad (1898) (Kousséri)
Fashoda (1898)
South Africa (1899)
Namibia (1904)
Tanganyika (1905)
Morocco (1905)
South Africa (1906)
Ouaddai (1909)
Morocco (1911)
Morocco (1911)
Tripolitania (1911)
South Africa (1914)









The Second Boer War (11 October 1899 – 31 May 1902) was fought between the British Empire and two Boer states, the South African Republic (Republic of Transvaal) and the Orange Free State, over the Empire's influence in South Africa. It is also known variously as the Boer War, Anglo-Boer War, South African War or Anglo-Boer South African War. Initial Boer attacks were successful, and though British reinforcements later reversed these, the war continued for years with Boer guerrilla warfare, until harsh British counter-measures brought them to terms.
The war started with the British overconfident and under-prepared.[11] The Boers were very well armed and struck first, besieging Ladysmith, Kimberley, and Mafeking in early 1900, and winning important battles at Colenso, Magersfontein and Stormberg. Staggered, the British brought in large numbers of soldiers and fought back. General Redvers Buller was replaced by Lord Roberts and Lord Kitchener. They relieved the three besieged cities, and invaded the two Boer republics in late 1900. The onward marches of the British Army were so overwhelming that the Boers did not fight staged battles in defence of their homeland. The British quickly seized control of all of the Orange Free State and Transvaal, as the civilian leadership went into hiding or exile. In conventional terms, the war was over. The British officially annexed the two countries in 1900, and called a "khaki election" to give the government another six years of power in London.[citation needed] British military efforts were aided by Cape Colony, the Colony of Natal and some native African allies, and further supported by volunteers from the British Empire, including Southern Africa, the Australian colonies, Canada, India and New Zealand. All other nations were neutral, but public opinion in them was largely hostile to the British.[citation needed] Inside the UK and its Empire there also was significant opposition to the Second Boer War.
The Boers refused to surrender. They reverted to guerrilla warfare under new generals Louis Botha, Jan Smuts, Christiaan de Wet and Koos de la Rey. Two more years of surprise attacks and quick escapes followed. As guerrillas without uniforms, the Boer fighters easily blended into the farmlands, which provided hiding places, supplies, and horses. The UK's solution was to set up complex nets of block houses, strong points, and barbed wire fences, partitioning off the entire conquered territory. The civilian farmers were relocated into concentration camps, where very large proportions died of disease,[citation needed] especially the children, who mostly lacked immunities. Then British mounted infantry units systematically tracked down the highly mobile Boer guerrilla units. The battles at this stage were small operations with few combat casualties (most of the dead were victims of disease). The war ended in surrender and British terms with the Treaty of Vereeniging in May 1902. The British successfully won over the Boer leaders, who now gave full support to the new political system. Both former republics were incorporated into the Union of South Africa in 1910, which Boers controlled.



Contents


1 Name
2 Origins
3 Phases
4 Background

4.1 Jameson Raid
4.2 Escalation and war

4.2.1 Arming the Boers
4.2.2 British case for war
4.2.3 Negotiations fail




5 First phase: The Boer offensive (October–December 1899)

5.1 Boer organisation and skills
5.2 Boers besiege Ladysmith, Mafeking and Kimberley
5.3 First British relief attempts


6 Second phase: The British offensive of January to September 1900

6.1 POWs sent overseas
6.2 Oath of neutrality


7 Third phase: Guerrilla war (September 1900 – May 1902)

7.1 British response
7.2 Peace committees
7.3 Joiners
7.4 Orange Free State
7.5 Western Transvaal
7.6 Eastern Transvaal
7.7 Cape Colony


8 Nonwhite roles
9 Concentration camps (1900–1902)

9.1 Public opinion and political opposition
9.2 The Fawcett Commission
9.3 Kitchener's policy and the post-war debate


10 The end of the war

10.1 Cost of the war


11 Aftermath and analysis

11.1 Union of South Africa
11.2 Effect of the war on domestic British politics
11.3 Horses


12 Imperial involvement

12.1 Australia
12.2 Canada
12.3 New Zealand
12.4 South Africa


13 Notable people involved in the Boer War

13.1 Victoria Cross recipients


14 Final overview

14.1 Did the British deliberate on the use of encampments?


15 Commemorations
16 See also
17 Notes
18 References
19 Further reading
20 External links



Name[edit]
The conflict is commonly referred to as the Boer War, since the First Boer War (December 1880 to March 1881) is much less well known. "Boer" is the common term for Afrikaans-speaking white South Africans descended from the Dutch East India Company's original settlers at the Cape of Good Hope. It is also known as the (Second) Anglo-Boer War among some South Africans. In Afrikaans it may be called the Anglo-Boereoorlog ("Anglo-Boer War"), Tweede Boereoorlog ("Second Boer War"), Tweede Vryheidsoorlog ("Second Freedom War", i.e., a war of liberation) or Engelse oorlog ("English War").[12] In South Africa it is officially called the South African War.[13]
Origins[edit]




SS Cornwall – First Queensland contingent departing Brisbane for the Second Boer War


The complex origins of the war resulted from more than a century of conflict between the Boers and Britain, but of particular immediate importance was the question as to who would control and benefit most from the very lucrative Witwatersrand gold mines.[14] During the Napoleonic Wars, a British military expedition landed in the Cape Colony and defeated the defending Dutch forces at the Battle of Blaauwberg (1806).[15] After the war, Britain formally acquired the colony (1814), and encouraged immigration by British settlers who were largely at odds with the Dutch settlers. Many Boers who were dissatisfied with aspects of British administration, in particular with Britain's abolition of slavery on 1 December 1834,[16] elected to migrate away from British rule in what became known as the Great Trek.[15]
The Trekkers initially followed the eastern coast towards Natal and then, after Britain annexed Natal in 1843, journeyed northwards towards the interior. There they established two independent Boer republics: the South African Republic (1852; also known as the Transvaal Republic) and the Orange Free State (1854). Britain recognised the two Boer republics in 1852 and 1854, but attempted British annexation of the Transvaal in 1877 led to the First Boer War in 1880–81. After Britain suffered defeats, particularly at the Battle of Majuba Hill (1881), the independence of the two republics was restored subject to certain conditions; relations, however, remained uneasy.
In 1866 diamonds were discovered at Kimberley, prompting a diamond rush and a massive influx of foreigners to the borders of the Orange Free State. Then in 1886, gold was discovered in the Witwatersrand area of the South African Republic. Gold made the Transvaal the richest nation in southern Africa; however, the country had neither the manpower nor the industrial base to develop the resource on its own. As a result, the Transvaal reluctantly acquiesced to the immigration of uitlanders (foreigners), mainly English speaking men from Britain, who came to the Boer region in search of fortune and employment. This resulted in the number of uitlanders in the Transvaal potentially exceeding the number of Boers, and precipitated confrontations between the earlier-arrived Boer settlers and the newer, non-Boer arrivals.
Britain's expansionist ideas (notably propagated by Cecil Rhodes) as well as disputes over uitlander political and economic rights resulted in the failed Jameson Raid of 1895. Dr. Leander Starr Jameson, who led the raid, intended to encourage an uprising of the uitlanders in Johannesburg. However, the uitlanders did not take up arms in support, and Transvaal government forces surrounded the column and captured Jameson's men before they could reach Johannesburg.[17]
As tensions escalated, political manoeuvrings and negotiations attempted to reach compromise on the issues of the rights of the uitlanders within the South African Republic, control of the gold mining industry, and Britain's desire to incorporate the Transvaal and the Orange Free State into a federation under British control. Given the British origins of the majority of uitlanders and the ongoing influx of new uitlanders into Johannesburg, the Boers recognised that granting full voting rights to the uitlanders would eventually result in the loss of ethnic Boer control in the South African Republic.
The June 1899 negotiations in Bloemfontein failed, and in September 1899 British Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain demanded full voting rights and representation for the uitlanders residing in the Transvaal. Paul Kruger, the President of the South African Republic, issued an ultimatum on 9 October 1899, giving the British government 48 hours to withdraw all their troops from the borders of both the Transvaal and the Orange Free State, albeit Kruger had ordered Commandos to the Natal border in early September and Britain only had troops in garrison towns far from the border,[citation needed] failing which the Transvaal, allied to the Orange Free State, would declare war on the British government. The British government rejected the South African Republic's ultimatum, resulting in the South African Republic and Orange Free State declaring war on Britain.[citation needed]
Phases[edit]
The war had three phases. In the first phase, the Boers mounted preemptive strikes into British-held territory in Natal and the Cape Colony, besieging the British garrisons of Ladysmith, Mafeking and Kimberley. The Boers then won a series of tactical victories at Colenso, Magersfontein and Spionkop.
In the second phase, after the introduction of greatly increased British troop numbers under the command of Lord Roberts, the British launched another offensive in 1900 to relieve the sieges, this time achieving success. After Natal and the Cape Colony were secure, Britain was able to invade the Transvaal, and the republic's capital, Pretoria, was ultimately captured in June 1900.
In the third and final phase, beginning in March 1900, the Boers launched a protracted hard-fought guerrilla war against the British forces, lasting a further two years, during which the Boers raided targets such as British troop columns, telegraph sites, railways and storage depots. In an effort to cut off supplies to the raiders, the British, now under the leadership of Lord Kitchener, responded with a scorched earth policy of destroying Boer farms and moving civilians into concentration camps.[18]
Some parts of the British press and British government expected the campaign to be over within months, and the protracted war gradually became less popular, especially after revelations about the conditions in the concentration camps (where as many as 26,000 Afrikaner women and children died of disease and malnutrition). The Boer forces finally surrendered on Saturday, 31 May 1902, with 54 of the 60 delegates from the Transvaal and Orange Free State voting to accept the terms of the peace treaty.[19] This was known as the Treaty of Vereeniging, and under its provisions, the two republics were absorbed into the British Empire, with the promise of self-government in the future. This promise was fulfilled with the creation of the Union of South Africa in 1910.
The war had a lasting effect on the region and on British domestic politics. For Britain, the Second Boer War was the longest, the most expensive (£200 million, almost £22 billion at 2015 prices), and the bloodiest conflict between 1815 and 1914,[20] lasting three months longer and resulting in higher British casualties than the Crimean War (1853–56), although more soldiers died from disease in the Crimean War.
Background[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Extent of the British Empire in 1898, prior to the outbreak of the Second Boer War


The southern part of the African continent was dominated in the 19th century by a set of struggles to create within it a single unified state. While the Berlin Conference of 1884–5 sought to draw boundaries between the European powers' African possessions, it also set the stage for further scrambles. Britain attempted to annexe first the South African Republic in 1880, and then, in 1899, both the South African Republic and the Orange Free State. In 1868, Britain annexed Basutoland in the Drakensberg Mountains following an appeal from Moshesh, the leader of a mixed group of African refugees from the Zulu wars, who sought British protection against the Boers.
In the 1880s, Bechuanaland (modern Botswana, located north of the Orange River) became the object of a dispute between the Germans to the west, the Boers to the east, and Britain's Cape Colony to the south. Although Bechuanaland had no economic value, the "Missionaries Road" passed through it towards territory farther north. After the Germans annexed Damaraland and Namaqualand (modern Namibia) in 1884, Britain annexed Bechuanaland in 1885.
In the First Boer War of 1880–81 the Boers of the Transvaal Republic had proved skilful fighters in resisting the Britain's attempt at annexation, causing a series of British defeats. The British government of William Ewart Gladstone had been unwilling to become mired in a distant war, requiring substantial troop reinforcement and expense, for what was at the time perceived to be a minimal return. An armistice followed, ending the war, and subsequently a peace treaty was signed with the Transvaal President Paul Kruger.




The geography of the region; the South African Republic/Transvaal (green), with the Orange Free State (orange), the British Cape Colony (blue) and the Natal (red)


In 1886, a big gold field was discovered at an outcrop on a large ridge some 69 km (43 mi) south of the Boer capital at Pretoria, it reignited British imperial interests. The ridge, known locally as the "Witwatersrand" (white water ridge, a watershed) contained the world's largest deposit of gold-bearing ore. With the 1886 discovery of gold in the Transvaal, a gold rush brought thousands of British and other prospectors and settlers from across the globe and over the border from the Cape Colony (under British control since 1806).
The city of Johannesburg sprang up as a shanty town nearly overnight as the uitlanders (foreigners, white outsiders) poured in and settled around the mines. The influx was such that the uitlanders quickly outnumbered the Boers in Johannesburg and along the Rand, although they remained a minority in the Transvaal. The Boers, nervous and resentful of the uitlanders' growing presence, sought to contain their influence through requiring lengthy residential qualifying periods before voting rights could be obtained, by imposing taxes on the gold industry and by introducing controls through licensing, tariffs and administrative requirements. Among the issues giving rise to tension between the Transvaal government on the one hand and the uitlanders and British interests on the other, were

Established uitlanders, including the mining magnates, wanted political, social, and economic control over their lives. These rights included a stable constitution, a fair franchise law, an independent judiciary and a better educational system. The Boers, for their part, recognised that the more concessions they made to the uitlanders the greater the likelihood – with approximately 30,000 white male Boer voters and potentially 60,000 white male uitlanders – that their independent control of the Transvaal would be lost and the territory absorbed into the British Empire.
The uitlanders resented the taxes levied by the Transvaal government, particularly when this money was not spent on Johannesburg or uitlander interests, but diverted to projects elsewhere in the Transvaal. For example, as the gold-bearing ore sloped away from the outcrop underground to the south, more and more blasting was necessary for extraction, and mines consumed vast quantities of explosives. A box of dynamite costing five pounds included five shillings tax. Not only was this tax perceived as exorbitant, but British interests were offended when President Paul Kruger gave monopoly rights for the manufacture of the explosive to a non-British branch of the Nobel company, which infuriated Britain.[21] The so-called "dynamite monopoly" became a casus belli.

British imperial interests were alarmed when in 1894–95 Kruger proposed building a railway through Portuguese East Africa to Delagoa Bay, bypassing British controlled ports in Natal and Cape Town and avoiding British tariffs.[22] At the time the Prime Minister of the Cape Colony was Cecil Rhodes, a man driven by a vision of a British controlled Africa extending from Cape to Cairo. Certain self-appointed uitlanders representatives and British mine owners became increasingly angered and frustrated by their dealings with the Transvaal government. A Reform Committee (Transvaal) was formed to represent the uitlanders.
Jameson Raid[edit]
Main article: Jameson Raid




A sketch showing the arrest of Jameson after the failed raid, in 1896


In 1895, a plan was hatched with the connivance of the Cape Prime Minister Cecil Rhodes and Johannesburg gold magnate Alfred Beit to take Johannesburg, ending the control of the Transvaal government. A column of 600 armed men (mainly made up of his Rhodesian and Bechuanaland policemen) was led by Dr. Leander Starr Jameson (the Administrator in Rhodesia of the British South Africa Company (or Chartered Company) of which Cecil Rhodes was the chairman) over the border from Bechuanaland towards Johannesburg. The column was equipped with Maxim machine guns and some artillery pieces.
The plan was to make a three-day dash to Johannesburg before the Boer commandos could mobilise and trigger an uprising by the primarily British expatriate workers (uitlanders) organised by the Reform Committee. The Transvaal authorities had advance warning of the Jameson Raid and tracked it from the moment it crossed the border. Four days later, the weary and dispirited column was surrounded near Krugersdorp within sight of Johannesburg. After a brief skirmish in which the column lost 65 killed and wounded—while the Boers lost but one man—Jameson's men surrendered and were arrested by the Boers.[17]
The botched raid resulted in repercussions throughout southern Africa and in Europe. In Rhodesia, the departure of so many policemen enabled the Matabele and Mashona peoples to rise up against the Chartered Company, and the rebellion, known as the Second Matabele War, was suppressed only at great cost.
A few days after the raid, the German Kaiser sent the Kruger telegram congratulating President Kruger and the government of the South African Republic on their success. When the text of this telegram was disclosed in the British press, it generated a storm of anti-German feeling. In the baggage of the raiding column, to the great embarrassment of Britain, the Boers found telegrams from Cecil Rhodes and the other plotters in Johannesburg. Joseph Chamberlain, the British Colonial Secretary, quickly moved to condemn the raid, despite having approved Rhodes' plans to send armed assistance in the case of a Johannesburg uprising. Rhodes was severely censured at the Cape inquiry and the London parliamentary inquiry and forced to resign as Prime Minister of the Cape and as Chairman of the Chartered Company, for having sponsored the failed coup d'état.
The Boer government handed their prisoners over to the British for trial. Jameson was tried in England for leading the raid where the British press and London society inflamed by anti-Boer and anti-German feeling and in a frenzy of jingoism, lionised Jameson and treated him as a hero. Although sentenced to 15 months imprisonment (which he served in Holloway), Jameson was later rewarded by being named Prime Minister of the Cape Colony (1904–08) and ultimately anointed as one of the founders of the Union of South Africa. For conspiring with Jameson, the uitlander members of the Reform Committee (Transvaal) were tried in the Transvaal courts and found guilty of high treason. The four leaders were sentenced to death by hanging but this sentence was next day commuted to 15 years' imprisonment. In June 1896, the other members of the Committee were released on payment of £2,000 each in fines, all of which were paid by Cecil Rhodes. One Reform Committee member, Frederick Gray, had committed suicide while in Pretoria gaol, on 16 May, and his death was a factor in softening the Transvaal government's attitude to the remaining prisoners.
Jan C. Smuts wrote in 1906,

The Jameson Raid was the real declaration of war ... And that is so in spite of the four years of truce that followed ... [the] aggressors consolidated their alliance ... the defenders on the other hand silently and grimly prepared for the inevitable".[23]

Escalation and war[edit]




Paul Kruger, leader of the South African Republic (Transvaal)


The Jameson Raid alienated many Cape Afrikaners from Britain and united the Transvaal Boers behind President Kruger and his government. It also had the effect of drawing the Transvaal and the Orange Free State (led by President Martinus Theunis Steyn) together in opposition to perceived British imperialism. In 1897, a military pact was concluded between the two republics.
Arming the Boers[edit]
President Paul Kruger re-equipped the Transvaal army, importing 37,000 of the latest Mauser Model 1895 rifles, and some 40 to 50 million rounds of ammunition.[24] The best modern European artillery was also purchased. By October 1899 the Transvaal State Artillery had 73 heavy guns, including four 155 mm Creusot fortress guns and 25 37 mm Maxim Nordenfeldt guns.[25] The Transvaal army had been transformed; approximately 25,000 men equipped with modern rifles and artillery could mobilise within two weeks. President Kruger's victory in the Jameson Raid incident did nothing to resolve the fundamental problem of finding a formula to conciliate the uitlanders, without surrendering the independence of the Transvaal.
British case for war[edit]
The failure to gain improved rights for uitlanders became a pretext for war and a justification for a big military buildup in Cape Colony. The case for war was developed and espoused as far away as the Australian colonies.[26][full citation needed] The Cape Colony Governor, Sir Alfred Milner, Cape Prime Minister Cecil Rhodes, the Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain and mining syndicate owners (Randlords, nicknamed the gold bugs), such as Alfred Beit, Barney Barnato and Lionel Phillips favoured annexation of the Boer republics. Confident that the Boers would be quickly defeated, they planned and organised a short war, citing the uitlanders' grievances as the motivation for the conflict.
The influence of the war party with the British government was limited. Lord Salisbury, the Prime Minister, despised jingoism and jingoists.[citation needed] He also distrusted the abilities of the British Army. Yet he led Britain into war because he believed the British government had an obligation to British South Africans, because he thought that the Transvaal, the Orange Free State and the Cape Boers aspired to a Dutch South Africa and that the achievement of such a state would damage British imperial prestige and because of the Boers treatment of black South Africans (Salisbury had referred to the London Convention of 1884, after the British defeat, as an agreement 'really in the interest of slavery').[27][28] Salisbury was not alone in this concern over the treatment of black South Africans; Roger Casement, already well on the way to becoming an Irish Nationalist, was nevertheless happy to gather intelligence for the British against the Boers because of their cruelty to Africans.[29]
Given this sense of caution among members of the British cabinet and of the army, it is even harder to understand why the British government went against the advice of its generals (such as Wolseley) to send substantial reinforcements to South Africa before war broke out. Lansdowne, Secretary of State for War, did not believe the Boers were preparing for war and also believed that if Britain were to send large numbers of troops, it would strike too aggressive a posture and so prevent a negotiated settlement being reached or even encourage a Boer attack.[30]
Negotiations fail[edit]
President Steyn of the Orange Free State invited Milner and Kruger to attend a conference in Bloemfontein. The conference started on 30 May 1899 but negotiations quickly broke down, despite Kruger's offer of concessions. In September 1899, Chamberlain sent an ultimatum demanding full equality for British citizens resident in Transvaal. Kruger, seeing that war was inevitable, simultaneously issued his own ultimatum prior to receiving Chamberlain's. This gave Britain 48 hours to withdraw all their troops from the border of Transvaal or the Transvaal, allied with the Orange Free State, would declare war.
News of the ultimatum reached London on the day it expired. Outrage and laughter were the main responses. The editor of the Times laughed out loud when he read it, saying 'an official document is seldom amusing and useful yet this was both'. The Times denounced the ultimatum as an 'extravagant farce' and The Globe denounced this 'trumpery little state'. Most editorials were similar to the Daily Telegraph, which declared: 'of course there can only be one answer to this grotesque challenge. Kruger has asked for war and war he must have!'
Such views were far from those of the British government and from those in the army. To most sensible observers, army reform had been a matter of pressing concern from the 1870s, constantly put off because the British public did not want the expense of a larger, more professional army and because a large home army was not politically welcome. Lord Salisbury, the Prime Minister, then had to explain to a surprised Queen Victoria that 'We have no army capable of meeting even a second-class Continental Power'.[31]
When war with the Boer Republics was imminent in September 1899, a Field Force, referred to as the Army Corps (sometimes 1st Army Corps) was mobilised and sent to Cape Town. It was "about the equivalent of the I Army Corps of the existing mobilization scheme" and was placed under the command of Gen Sir Redvers Buller, GOC in C of Aldershot Command.[32] In South Africa the corps never operated as such and the 1st, 2nd and 3rd divisions were widely dispersed.
First phase: The Boer offensive (October–December 1899)[edit]
Boer organisation and skills[edit]
War was declared on 11 October 1899 with a Boer offensive into the British-held Natal and Cape Colony areas. The Boers had about 33,000 soldiers, and decisively outnumbered the British, who could move only 13,000 troops to the front line.[33] The Boers had no problems with mobilisation, since the fiercely independent Boers had no regular army units, apart from the Staatsartillerie (Afrikaans for 'States Artillery') of both republics. As with the First Boer War, since most of the Boers were members of civilian militias, none had adopted uniforms or insignia. Only the members of the Staatsartillerie wore light green uniforms.




Boers in a trench at Mafeking, 1899


When danger loomed, all the burgers (citizens) in a district would form a military unit called a commando and would elect officers. A full-time official titled a Veldkornet maintained muster rolls, but had no disciplinary powers. Each man brought his own weapon, usually a hunting rifle, and his own horse. Those who could not afford a gun were given one by the authorities.[25] The Presidents of the Transvaal and Orange Free State simply signed decrees to concentrate within a week and the Commandos could muster between 30,000–40,000 men.[34] The average Boer nevertheless was not thirsty for war. Many did not look forward to fighting against fellow Christians and, by and large, fellow Christian Protestants. Many may have had an overly optimistic sense of what the war would involve, imagining that victory could be won as easily as in the First South African War.[35] Many, including many generals, also had a sense that their cause was holy and just, and blessed by God.[36]
It rapidly became clear that the Boer forces presented the British forces with a severe tactical challenge. What the Boers presented was a mobile and innovative approach to warfare, drawing on their experiences from the First Boer War. The average Boers who made up their Commandos were farmers who had spent almost all their working life in the saddle, both as farmers and hunters. They depended on the pot, horse and rifle; they were also skilled stalkers and marksmen. As hunters they had learned to fire from cover; from a prone position and to make the first shot count, knowing that if they missed, the game would either be long gone or could charge and potentially kill them.
At community gatherings, target shooting was a major sport; they practised shooting at targets such as hens' eggs perched on posts 100 metres (110 yd) away. They made expert mounted infantry, using every scrap of cover, from which they could pour in a destructive fire using modern, smokeless, Mauser rifles. In preparation for hostilities, the Boers had acquired around one hundred of the latest Krupp field guns, all horse-drawn and dispersed among the various Kommando groups and several Le Creusot "Long Tom" siege guns. The Boers' skill in adapting themselves to become first-rate artillerymen shows them to have been a versatile adversary.[37] The Transvaal also had an intelligence service that stretched across South Africa and of whose extent and efficiency the British were as yet unaware.[38]
Boers besiege Ladysmith, Mafeking and Kimberley[edit]
The Boers struck first on 12 October at the Battle of Kraaipan, an attack that heralded the invasion of the Cape Colony and Colony of Natal between October 1899 and January 1900. With speed and surprise, the Boer drove quickly towards the British garrison at Ladysmith and the smaller ones at Mafeking and Kimberley. The quick Boer mobilisation resulted in early military successes against scattered British forces. Sir George Stuart White, commanding the British division at Ladysmith, had unwisely allowed Major-General Penn Symons to throw a brigade forward to the coal-mining town of Dundee (also reported as Glencoe), which was surrounded by hills. This became the site of the first engagement of the war, the Battle of Talana Hill. Boer guns began shelling the British camp from the summit of Talana Hill at dawn on 20 October. Penn Symons immediately counter-attacked: his infantry drove the Boers from the hill, for the loss of 446 British casualties, including Penn Symons.
Another Boer force occupied Elandslaagte, which lay between Ladysmith and Dundee. The British under Major General John French and Colonel Ian Hamilton attacked to clear the line of communications to Dundee. The resulting Battle of Elandslaagte was a clear-cut British tactical victory, but Sir George White feared that more Boers were about to attack his main position and so ordered a chaotic retreat from Elandslaagte, throwing away any advantage gained. The detachment from Dundee was compelled to make an exhausting cross-country retreat to rejoin White's main force. As Boers surrounded Ladysmith and opened fire on the town with siege guns, White ordered a major sortie against their artillery positions. The result was a disaster, with 140 men killed and over 1,000 captured. The Siege of Ladysmith began, and was to last several months.
Meanwhile, to the north-west at Mafeking, on the border with Transvaal, Colonel Robert Baden-Powell had raised two regiments of local forces amounting to about 1,200 men in order to attack and create diversions if things further south went amiss. Mafeking, being a railway junction, provided good supply facilities and was the obvious place for Baden-Powell to fortify in readiness for such attacks. However, instead of being the aggressor Baden-Powell and Mafeking were forced to defend when 6,000 Boer, commanded by Piet Cronje, attempted a determined assault on the town. But this quickly subsided into a desultory affair with the Boers prepared to starve the stronghold into submission, and so, on 13 October, began the 217-day Siege of Mafeking.
Lastly, over 360 kilometres (220 mi) to the south of Mafeking lay the diamond mining city of Kimberley, which was also subjected to a siege. Although not militarily significant, it nonetheless represented an enclave of British imperialism on the borders of the Orange Free State and was hence an important Boer objective. From early November about 7,500 Boer began their siege, again content to starve the town into submission. Despite Boer shelling, the 40,000 inhabitants, of which only 5,000 were armed, were under little threat as the town was well-stocked with provisions. The garrison was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Robert Kekewich, although Cecil Rhodes was also a prominent figure in the town's defences.
Siege life took its toll on both the defending soldiers and the civilians in the cities of Mafeking, Ladysmith, and Kimberley as food began to grow scarce after a few weeks. In Mafeking, Sol Plaatje wrote, "I saw horseflesh for the first time being treated as a human foodstuff." The cities under siege also dealt with constant artillery bombardment, making the streets a dangerous place. Near the end of the siege of Kimberley, it was expected that the Boers would intensify their bombardment, so Rhodes displayed a notice encouraging people to go down into shafts of the Kimberley Mine for protection. The townspeople panicked, and people surged into the mine-shafts constantly for a 12-hour period. Although the bombardment never came, this did nothing to diminish the anxious civilians distress. The most well-heeled of the townspeople, such as Cecil Rhodes, sheltered in the Sanatorium, site of the present-day McGregor Museum; the poorer residents, notably the black population, did not have any shelter from the shelling.
In retrospect, the Boer decision to commit themselves to sieges (Sitzkrieg) was a mistake and one of the best illustrations of the Boers' lack of strategic vision. Historically, it had little in its favour. Of the seven sieges in the First Boer War, the Boers had won none. More importantly, it handed the initiative back to the British and allowed them time to recover, which they then did. Generally speaking, throughout the campaign, the Boers were too defensive and passive, wasting the opportunities they had for victory. Yet that passiveness also testified to the fact that they had no desire to conquer British territory, but only to preserve their ability to rule in their own territory.[39]
First British relief attempts[edit]




General Redvers Henry Buller launched an offensive against the Boers in the early phases of the war but after several defeats, culminating at the Battle of Colenso, he was replaced by Earl Roberts


It was at this point that General Sir Redvers Henry Buller, a much respected commander, arrived in South Africa with British reinforcements (including an army corps of three divisions). Buller originally intended an offensive straight up the railway line leading from Cape Town through Bloemfontein to Pretoria. Finding on arrival that the British troops already in South Africa were under siege, he split his army corps into detachments to relieve the besieged garrisons. One division, led by Lieutenant General Lord Methuen, was to follow the Western Railway to the north and relieve Kimberley and Mafeking. A smaller force of about 3,000 led by Major General William Gatacre, was to push north toward the railway junction at Stormberg, to secure the Cape Midlands district from Boer raids and local rebellions by Boer inhabitants and Buller led the major part of the army corps to relieve Ladysmith to the east.
The initial results of this offensive were mixed, with Methuen winning several bloody skirmishes in the Battle of Belmont on 23 November, the Battle of Graspan on 25 November, and at a larger engagement, the Battle of Modder River on 28 November resulting in British losses of 71 dead and over 400 wounded. British commanders had trained on the lessons of the Crimean War and were adept at battalion and regimental set pieces with columns manoeuvring in jungles, deserts and mountainous regions. What British generals failed to comprehend was the impact of destructive fire from trench positions and the mobility of cavalry raids. The British troops went to war with what would prove to be antiquated tactics and in some cases antiquated weapons against the mobile Boer forces with the destructive fire of their modern Mausers, the latest Krupp field guns and their novel tactics.[40]
The middle of December was disastrous for the British Army. In a period known as Black Week (10–15 December 1899), the British suffered defeats on each of the three fronts. On 10 December, General Gatacre tried to recapture Stormberg railway junction about 80 kilometres (50 mi) south of the Orange River. Gatacre's attack was marked by administrative and tactical blunders and the Battle of Stormberg ended in a British defeat, with 135 killed and wounded and two guns and over 600 troops captured.
At the Battle of Magersfontein on 11 December, Methuen's 14,000 British troops attempted to capture a Boer position in a dawn attack to relieve Kimberley. This too turned into a disaster when the Highland Brigade became pinned down by accurate Boer fire. After suffering from intense heat and thirst for nine hours, they eventually broke in ill-disciplined retreat. The Boer commanders, Koos de la Rey and Piet Cronjé, had ordered trenches to be dug in an unconventional place to fool the British and to give their riflemen a greater firing range. The plan worked and this tactic helped write the doctrine of the supremacy of the defensive position, using modern small arms and trench fortifications.[41][citation needed] The British lost 120 killed and 690 wounded and were prevented from relieving Kimberley and Mafeking. A British soldier said of the defeat

Such was the day for our regiment
Dread the revenge we will take.
Dearly we paid for the blunder –
A drawing-room General's mistake.
Why weren't we told of the trenches?
Why weren't we told of the wire?
Why were we marched up in column,
May Tommy Atkins enquire ...
— Private Smith[42]

The nadir of Black Week was the Battle of Colenso on 15 December, where 21,000 British troops commanded by Buller attempted to cross the Tugela River to relieve Ladysmith, where 8,000 Transvaal Boers under the command of Louis Botha, were awaiting them. Through a combination of artillery and accurate rifle fire and a better use of the ground, the Boers repelled all British attempts to cross the river. After his first attacks failed, Buller broke off the battle and ordered a retreat, abandoning many wounded men, several isolated units and ten field guns to be captured by Botha's men. Buller's forces lost 145 men killed and 1,200 missing or wounded and the Boers suffered only 40 casualties, including 8 killed.[43]
Second phase: The British offensive of January to September 1900[edit]




British casualties lie dead on the battlefield after the Battle of Spion Kop, 24 January 1900


The British government took these defeats badly and with the sieges still continuing was compelled to send two more divisions plus large numbers of colonial volunteers. By January 1900 this would become the largest force Britain had ever sent overseas, amounting to some 180,000 men with further reinforcements being sought.
While watching for these reinforcements, Buller made another bid to relieve Ladysmith by crossing the Tugela west of Colenso. Buller's subordinate, Major General Charles Warren, successfully crossed the river, but was then faced with a fresh defensive position centred on a prominent hill known as Spion Kop. In the resulting Battle of Spion Kop, British troops captured the summit by surprise during the early hours of 24 January 1900, but as the early morning fog lifted they realised too late that they were overlooked by Boer gun emplacements on the surrounding hills. The rest of the day resulted in a disaster caused by poor communication between Buller and his commanders. Between them they issued contradictory orders, on the one hand ordering men off the hill, while other officers ordered fresh reinforcements to defend it. The result was 350 men killed and nearly 1,000 wounded and a retreat across the Tugela River into British territory. There were nearly 300 Boer casualties.
Buller attacked Louis Botha again on 5 February at Vaal Krantz and was again defeated. Buller withdrew early when it appeared that the British would be isolated in an exposed bridgehead across the Tugela, for which he was nicknamed "Sir Reverse" by some of his officers.




Boer General Piet De Wet, 1900


By taking command in person in Natal, Buller had allowed the overall direction of the war to drift. Because of concerns about his performance and negative reports from the field, he was replaced as Commander in Chief by Field Marshal Lord Roberts. Roberts quickly assembled an entirely new team for headquarters staff and he chose military men from far and wide: Lord Kitchener (Chief of Staff) from the Sudan; Frederick Russell Burnham (Chief of Scouts), the American scout, from the Klondike; David Henderson from the Staff College; Neville Bowles Chamberlain from Afghanistan; and William Nicholson (Military Secretary) from Calcutta[44] Like Buller, Roberts first intended to attack directly along the Cape Town – Pretoria railway but, again like Buller, was forced to relieve the beleaguered garrisons. Leaving Buller in command in Natal, Roberts massed his main force near the Orange River and along the Western Railway behind Methuen's force at the Modder River, and prepared to make a wide outflanking move to relieve Kimberley.




Siege of Ladysmith


Except in Natal, the war had stagnated. Other than a single attempt to storm Ladysmith, the Boers made no attempt to capture the besieged towns. In the Cape Midlands, the Boers did not exploit the British defeat at Stormberg, and were prevented from capturing the railway junction at Colesberg. In the dry summer, the grazing on the veld became parched, weakening the Boers' horses and draught oxen, and many Boer families joined their menfolk in the siege lines and laagers (encampments), fatally encumbering Cronje's army.
Roberts launched his main attack on 10 February 1900 and although hampered by a long supply route, managed to outflank the Boers defending Magersfontein. On 14 February, a cavalry division under Major General John French launched a major attack to relieve Kimberley. Although encountering severe fire, a massed cavalry charge split the Boer defences on 15 February, opening the way for French to enter Kimberley that evening, ending its 124 days' siege.
Meanwhile, Roberts pursued Piet Cronje's 7,000-strong force, which had abandoned Magersfontein to head for Bloemfontein. General French's cavalry was ordered to assist in the pursuit by embarking on an epic 50 km (31 mi) drive towards Paardeberg where Cronje was attempting to cross the Modder River. At the Battle of Paardeberg from 18 to 27 February, Roberts then surrounded General Piet Cronje's retreating Boer army. On 17 February, a pincer movement involving both French's cavalry and the main British force attempted to take the entrenched position, but the frontal attacks were uncoordinated and so were easily repulsed by the Boers. Finally, Roberts resorted to bombarding Cronje into submission, but it took a further ten precious days and with the British troops using the polluted Modder River as water supply, resulted in a typhoid epidemic killing many troops. General Cronje was forced to surrender at Surrender Hill with 4,000 men.




The Relief of Ladysmith. Sir George Stuart White greets Major Hubert Gough on 28 February. Painting by John Henry Frederick Bacon (1868–1914)


In Natal, the Battle of the Tugela Heights, which started on 14 February was Buller's fourth attempt to relieve Ladysmith. The losses Buller's troops had sustained convinced Buller to adopt Boer tactics "in the firing line – to advance in small rushes, covered by rifle fire from behind; to use the tactical support of artillery; and above all, to use the ground, making rock and earth work for them as it did for the enemy." Despite reinforcements his progress was painfully slow against stiff opposition. However, on 26 February, after much deliberation, Buller used all his forces in one all-out attack for the first time and at last succeeded in forcing a crossing of the Tugela to defeat Botha's outnumbered forces north of Colenso. After a siege lasting 118 days, the Relief of Ladysmith was effected, the day after Cronje surrendered, but at a total cost of 7,000 British casualties. Buller's troops marched into Ladysmith on 28 February.[45]
After a succession of defeats, the Boers realised that against such overwhelming numbers of troops, they had little chance of defeating the British and so became demoralised. Roberts then advanced into the Orange Free State from the west, putting the Boers to flight at the Battle of Poplar Grove and capturing Bloemfontein, the capital, unopposed on 13 March with the Boer defenders escaping and scattering. Meanwhile, he detached a small force to relieve Baden-Powell, and the Relief of Mafeking on 18 May 1900 provoked riotous celebrations in Britain coining the Edwardian phrase mafficking. On 28 May, the Orange Free State was annexed and renamed the Orange River Colony.
After being forced to delay for several weeks at Bloemfontein by a shortage of supplies, an outbreak of enteric (typhoid) fever caused by poor hygiene, drinking bad drinking water at Paardeburg and, appalling medical care, Roberts finally resumed his advance.[46] He was forced to halt again at Kroonstad for 10 days, due once again to the collapse of his medical and supply systems, but finally captured Johannesburg on 31 May and the capital of the Transvaal, Pretoria, on 5 June. The first into Pretoria was Lt. William Watson of the New South Wales Mounted Rifles, who persuaded the Boers to surrender the capital.[47][full citation needed] Before the war, the Boers had constructed several forts south of Pretoria, but the artillery had been removed from the forts for use in the field, and in the event they abandoned Pretoria without a fight. Having won the principal cities, Roberts declared the war over on 3 September 1900; and the South African Republic was formally annexed.
British observers believed the war to be all but over after the capture of the two capital cities. However, the Boers had earlier met at the temporary new capital of the Orange Free State, Kroonstad, and planned a guerrilla campaign to hit the British supply and communication lines. The first engagement of this new form of warfare was at Sanna's Post on 31 March where 1,500 Boers under the command of Christiaan De Wet attacked Bloemfontein's waterworks about 37 kilometres (23 mi) east of the city, and ambushed a heavily escorted convoy, which caused 155 British casualties and the capture of seven guns, 117 wagons, and 428 British troops.[48][full citation needed]




General Piet Cronjé as a prisoner of war in Saint Helena, 1900–02. He was captured, with 4000 men, after the loss of the Battle of Paardeberg.


After the fall of Pretoria, one of the last formal battles was at Diamond Hill on 11–12 June, where Roberts attempted to drive the remnants of the Boer field army beyond striking distance of Pretoria. Although Roberts drove the Boers from the hill, the Boer commander, Louis Botha, did not regard it as a defeat, for he inflicted more casualties on the British (totalling 162 men) while suffering around 50 casualties.
The set-piece period of the war now largely gave way to a mobile guerrilla war, but one final operation remained. President Kruger and what remained of the Transvaal government had retreated to eastern Transvaal. Roberts, joined by troops from Natal under Buller, advanced against them, and broke their last defensive position at Bergendal on 26 August. As Roberts and Buller followed up along the railway line to Komatipoort, Kruger sought asylum in Portuguese East Africa (modern Mozambique). Some dispirited Boers did likewise, and the British gathered up much war material. However, the core of the Boer fighters under Botha easily broke back through the Drakensberg Mountains into the Transvaal highveld after riding north through the bushveld. Under the new conditions of the war, heavy equipment was no use to them, and therefore no great loss.
As Roberts's army occupied Pretoria, the Boer fighters in the Orange Free State had been driven into a fertile area known as the Brandwater Basin in the north east of the Republic. This offered only temporary sanctuary, as the mountain passes leading to it could be occupied by the British, trapping the Boers. A force under General Archibald Hunter set out from Bloemfontein to achieve this in July 1900. The hard core of the Free State Boers under Christiaan De Wet, accompanied by President Steyn, left the basin early. Those remaining fell into confusion and most failed to break out before Hunter trapped them. 4,500 Boers surrendered and much equipment was captured but as with Roberts's drive against Kruger at the same time, these losses were of relatively little consequence, as the hardcore of the Boer armies and their most determined and active leaders remained at large.
From the Basin, Christiaan De Wet headed west. Although hounded by British columns, he succeeded in crossing the Vaal into western Transvaal, to allow Steyn to travel to meet their leaders. There was much sympathy for the Boers on mainland Europe and in October, President Kruger and members of the Transvaal government left Portuguese East Africa on the Dutch warship De Gelderland, sent by the Queen of the Netherlands Wilhelmina. Paul Kruger's wife, however, was too ill to travel and remained in South Africa where she died on 20 July 1901 without seeing her husband again. President Kruger first went to Marseille and then on to The Netherlands where he stayed for a while before moving finally to Clarens, Switzerland, where he died in exile on 14 July 1904.
POWs sent overseas[edit]
The first sizeable batch of Boer prisoners of war taken by the British consisted of those captured at the Battle of Elandslaagte on 21 October 1899. At first, many were put on ships, but as numbers grew, the British decided they did not want them kept locally. The capture of 400 POWs in February 1900 was a key event, which made the British realise they could not accommodate all POWs in South Africa.[49] The British feared they could be freed by sympathetic locals. Moreover, they already had trouble supplying their own troops in South Africa, and did not want the added burden of sending supplies for the POWs. Britain therefore chose to send many POWs overseas.




A Transit camp for Prisoners of War near Cape Town during the war. Prisoners were then transferred for internment in other parts of the British Empire.


The first overseas (off African mainland) camps were opened in Saint Helena, which ultimately received about 5,000 POWs.[50] About 5,000 POWs were sent to Ceylon.[51] Other POWs were sent to Bermuda and India. No evidence exists of Boer POWs being sent to the Dominions of the British Empire such as Australia, Canada or New Zealand.[49]
In all, about 26,000 POWs were sent overseas.[52]
Oath of neutrality[edit]
On 15 March 1900 Lord Roberts issued a proclamation in terms of which an amnesty would be granted to all burghers, except leaders, who took an oath of neutrality and returned quietly to their homes.[53] It is estimated that between 12,000 and 14,000 burghers took this oath between March and June 1900.[54]
Third phase: Guerrilla war (September 1900 – May 1902)[edit]




Kitchener succeeded Roberts in November 1900 and launched anti-guerrilla campaigns; 1898 photograph in 1910 magazine


By September 1900, the British were nominally in control of both Republics, with the exception of the northern part of Transvaal. However, they soon discovered that they only controlled the territory their columns physically occupied. Despite the loss of their two capital cities and half of their army, the Boer commanders adopted guerrilla warfare tactics, primarily conducting raids against railways, resource and supply targets, all aimed at disrupting the operational capacity of the British Army. They avoided pitched battles and casualties were light.
Each Boer commando unit was sent to the district from which its members had been recruited, which meant that they could rely on local support and personal knowledge of the terrain and the towns within the district thereby enabling them to live off the land. Their orders were simply to act against the British whenever possible. Their tactics were to strike fast and hard causing as much damage to the enemy as possible, and then to withdraw and vanish before enemy reinforcements could arrive. The vast distances of the Republics allowed the Boer commandos considerable freedom to move about and made it nearly impossible for the 250,000 British troops to control the territory effectively using columns alone. As soon as a British column left a town or district, British control of that area faded away.




A surviving blockhouse in South Africa. Blockhouses were constructed by the British to secure supply routes from Boer raids during the war.


The Boer commandos were especially effective during the initial guerrilla phase of the war because Roberts had assumed that the war would end with the capture of the Boer capitals and the dispersal of the main Boer armies. Many British troops were therefore redeployed out of the area, and had been replaced by lower-quality contingents of Imperial Yeomanry and locally raised irregular corps.
From late May 1900, the first successes of the Boer guerrilla strategy were at Lindley (where 500 Yeomanry surrendered), and at Heilbron (where a large convoy and its escort were captured) and other skirmishes resulting in 1,500 British casualties in less than ten days. In December 1900, De la Rey and Christiaan Beyers attacked and mauled a British brigade at Nooitgedacht. As a result of these and other Boer successes, the British, led by Lord Kitchener, mounted three extensive searches for De Wet, but without success. However, the very nature of the Boer guerrilla war was sporadic, poorly planned, and had little overall long-term objective, with the exception to simply harass the British. This led to a disorganised pattern of scattered engagements throughout the region.
British response[edit]
The British were forced to quickly revise their tactics. They concentrated on restricting the freedom of movement of the Boer commandos and depriving them of local support. The railway lines had provided vital lines of communication and supply, and as the British had advanced across South Africa, they had used armoured trains and had established fortified blockhouses at key points.[55] They now built additional blockhouses (each housing 6–8 soldiers) and fortified these to protect supply routes against Boer raiders. Eventually some 8,000 such blockhouses were built across the two South African republics, radiating from the larger towns along principal routes. Each blockhouse cost between £800 to £1,000 and took about three months to build. However, they proved very effective. Not one bridge where one of these blockhouses was sited and manned was blown.[55]
The blockhouse system required an enormous number of troops to garrison. Well over 50,000 British troops, or 50 battalions, were involved in blockhouse duty, greater than the approximately 30,000 Boers in the field during the guerrilla phase. In addition, up to 16,000 Africans were used both as armed guards and to patrol the line at night.[55] The Army linked the blockhouses with barbed wire fences to parcel up the wide veld into smaller areas. "New Model" drives were mounted under which a continuous line of troops could sweep an area of veld bounded by blockhouse lines, unlike the earlier inefficient scouring of the countryside by scattered columns.




One British response to the guerrilla war was a 'scorched earth' policy to deny the guerrillas supplies and refuge. In this image Boer civilians watch their house as it is burned.


The British also implemented a "scorched earth" policy under which they targeted everything within the controlled areas that could give sustenance to the Boer guerrillas with a view to making it harder for the Boers to survive. As British troops swept the countryside, they systematically destroyed crops, burned homesteads and farms, poisoned wells, and interned Boer and African women, children and workers in concentration camps. Finally, the British also established their own mounted raiding columns in support of the sweeper columns. These were used to rapidly follow and relentlessly harass the Boers with a view to delaying them and cutting off escape, while the sweeper units caught up. Many of the 90 or so mobile columns formed by the British to participate in such drives were a mixture of British and colonial troops, but they also had a large minority of armed Africans. The total number of armed Africans serving with these columns has been estimated at approximately 20,000.
The British Army also made use of Boer auxiliaries who had been persuaded to change sides and enlist as "National Scouts". Serving under the command of General Andries Cronje, the National Scouts were despised as hensoppers (collaborators) but came to number a fifth of the fighting Afrikaners by the end of the War.[56]
The British utilised armoured trains throughout the War to deliver rapid reaction forces much more quickly to incidents (such as Boer attacks on blockhouses and columns) or to drop them off ahead of retreating Boer columns.
Peace committees[edit]
Among those burgers who had stopped fighting, it was decided to form peace committees to persuade those who were still fighting to desist. In December 1900 Lord Kitchener gave permission that a central Burgher Peace Committee be inaugurated in Pretoria. By the end of 1900 some thirty envoys were sent out to the various districts to form local peace committees to persuade burghers to give up the fight. Previous leaders of the Boers, like Generals Piet de Wet and Andries Cronjé were involved in the organisation. Meyer de Kock was the only emissary of a peace committee to be convicted of high treason and executed by firing squad.[57]
Joiners[edit]
Some burghers joined the British in their fight against the Boers. By the end of hostilities in May 1902, there were no fewer than 5,464 burghers working for the British.[58]
Orange Free State[edit]




Christiaan De Wet was the most formidable leader of the Boer guerrillas. He successfully evaded capture on numerous occasions and was later involved in the negotiations for a peace settlement.


After having conferred with the Transvaal leaders, De Wet returned to the Orange Free State, where he inspired a series of successful attacks and raids from the hitherto quiet western part of the country, though he suffered a rare defeat at Bothaville in November 1900. Many Boers who had earlier returned to their farms, sometimes giving formal parole to the British, took up arms again. In late January 1901, De Wet led a renewed invasion of Cape Colony. This was less successful, because there was no general uprising among the Cape Boers, and De Wet's men were hampered by bad weather and relentlessly pursued by British forces. They narrowly escaped across the Orange River.
From then until the final days of the war, De Wet remained comparatively quiet, partly because the Orange Free State was effectively left desolate by British sweeps. In late 1901, De Wet overran an isolated British detachment at Groenkop, inflicting heavy casualties. This prompted Kitchener to launch the first of the "New Model" drives against him. De Wet escaped the first such drive, but lost 300 of his fighters. This was a severe loss, and a portent of further attrition, although the subsequent attempts to round up De Wet were badly handled, and De Wet's forces avoided capture.
Western Transvaal[edit]
The Boer commandos in the Western Transvaal were very active after September 1901. Several battles of importance were fought here between September 1901 and March 1902. At Moedwil on 30 September 1901 and again at Driefontein on 24 October, General Koos De La Rey's forces attacked the British, but were forced to withdraw after the British offered strong resistance.
A time of relative quiet descended thereafter on the western Transvaal. February 1902 saw the next major battle in that region. On 25 February, Koos De La Rey attacked a British column under Lieutenant-Colonel S. B. von Donop at Ysterspruit near Wolmaransstad. De La Rey succeeded in capturing many men and a large amount of ammunition. The Boer attacks prompted Lord Methuen, the British second-in-command after Lord Kitchener, to move his column from Vryburg to Klerksdorp to deal with De La Rey. On the morning of 7 March 1902, the Boers attacked the rear guard of Methuen's moving column at Tweebosch. Confusion reigned in British ranks and Methuen was wounded and captured by the Boers.
The Boer victories in the west led to stronger action by the British. In the second half of March 1902, large British reinforcements were sent to the Western Transvaal under the direction of Ian Hamilton. The opportunity the British were waiting for arose on 11 April 1902 at Rooiwal, where a commando led by General Jan Kemp and Commandant Potgieter attacked a superior force under Kekewich. The British soldiers were well positioned on the hillside and inflicted severe casualties on the Boers charging on horseback over a large distance, beating them back. This was the end of the war in the Western Transvaal and also the last major battle of the war.
Eastern Transvaal[edit]




Boer commando


Two Boer forces fought in this area, one under Botha in the south east and a second under Ben Viljoen in the north east around Lydenburg. Botha's forces were particularly active, raiding railways and British supply convoys, and even mounting a renewed invasion of Natal in September 1901. After defeating British mounted infantry in the Battle of Blood River Poort near Dundee, Botha was forced to withdraw by heavy rains that made movement difficult and crippled his horses. Back on the Transvaal territory around his home district of Vryheid, Botha attacked a British raiding column at Bakenlaagte, using an effective mounted charge. One of the most active British units was effectively destroyed in this engagement. This made Botha's forces the target of increasingly large and ruthless drives by British forces, in which the British made particular use of native scouts and informers. Eventually, Botha had to abandon the high veld and retreat to a narrow enclave bordering Swaziland.
To the north, Ben Viljoen grew steadily less active. His forces mounted comparatively few attacks and as a result, the Boer enclave around Lydenburg was largely unmolested. Viljoen was eventually captured.
Cape Colony[edit]
In parts of Cape Colony, particularly the Cape Midlands district where Boers formed a majority of the white inhabitants, the British had always feared a general uprising against them. In fact, no such uprising took place, even in the early days of the war when Boer armies had advanced across the Orange. The cautious conduct of some of the elderly Orange Free State generals had been one factor that discouraged the Cape Boers from siding with the Boer republics. Nevertheless, there was widespread pro-Boer sympathy. Some of the Cape Dutch volunteered to help the British, but a much larger number volunteered to help the other side. The political factor was more important than the military: the Cape Dutch controlled the provincial legislature. Milner said 90 percent favoured the rebels.[59]
After he escaped across the Orange in March 1901, De Wet had left forces under Cape rebels Kritzinger and Scheepers to maintain a guerrilla campaign in the Cape Midlands. The campaign here was one of the least chivalrous of the war, with intimidation by both sides of each other's civilian sympathizers. In one of many skirmishes, Commandant Lotter's small commando was tracked down by a much-superior British column and wiped out at Groenkloof. Several captured rebels, including Lotter and Scheepers, who was captured when he fell ill with appendicitis, were executed by the British for treason or for capital crimes such as the murder of prisoners or of unarmed civilians. Some of the executions took place in public, to deter further disaffection. Since the Cape Colony was Imperial territory, its authorities forbade the British Army to burn farms or to force Boers into concentration camps.
Fresh Boer forces under Jan Christiaan Smuts, joined by the surviving rebels under Kritzinger, made another attack on the Cape in September 1901. They suffered severe hardships and were hard pressed by British columns, but eventually rescued themselves by routing some of their pursuers at the Battle of Elands River and capturing their equipment. From then until the end of the war, Smuts increased his forces from among Cape rebels until they numbered 3,000. However, no general uprising took place, and the situation in the Cape remained stalemated.
In January 1902, Boer leader Manie Maritz was implicated in the Leliefontein massacre in the far Northern Cape.
Nonwhite roles[edit]
The policy on both sides was to minimise the role of nonwhites but the need for manpower continuously stretched those resolves. At the battle of Spion Kop in Ladysmith, MK Gandhi with 300 freeburger Indians and 800 Indentured Indian labourers started the Ambulance Corps. These Indian stretcher bearers saved British lives. But for the opposition side the war raged across their farms and their homes were destroyed, many Africans became refugees and they, like the Boers, moved to the towns where the British hastily created internment camps. Subsequently, the "Scorched Earth" policy was ruthlessly applied to both Boers and Africans. Although most black Africans were not considered by the British to be hostile, many tens of thousands were also forcibly removed from Boer areas and also placed in concentration camps. Africans were held separately from Boer internees. Eventually there were a total of 64 tented camps for Africans. Conditions were as bad as in the camps for the Boers, but even though, after the Fawcett Commission report, conditions improved in the Boer camps, "improvements were much slower in coming to the black camps." 20,000 died there.[60]
About 10,000 black men were attached to Boer units where they performed camp duties; a handful unofficially fought in combat. The British Army employed over 14,000 Africans as wagon drivers. Even more had combatant roles as spies, guides, and eventually as soldiers. By 1902 there were about 30,000 armed Africans in the British Army.[61]
Concentration camps (1900–1902)[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Second Boer War concentration camps.






Tents in the Bloemfontein concentration camp






Boer women and children in a concentration camp


The term "concentration camp" was used to describe camps operated by the British in South Africa during this conflict, and the term grew in prominence during this period.
The camps had originally been set up by the British Army as "refugee camps" to provide refuge for civilian families who had been forced to abandon their homes for whatever reason related to the war. However, when Kitchener took over in late 1900, he introduced new tactics in an attempt to break the guerrilla campaign and the influx of civilians grew dramatically as a result. Over time a large group of British feminists and pro-Boer critics of the Anglo policies would ameliorate the conditions in these camps, however, disease and starvation would still kill thousands.[62] Kitchener initiated plans to

flush out guerrillas in a series of systematic drives, organised like a sporting shoot, with success defined in a weekly 'bag' of killed, captured and wounded, and to sweep the country bare of everything that could give sustenance to the guerrillas, including women and children ... It was the clearance of civilians—uprooting a whole nation—that would come to dominate the last phase of the war.[63]





Lizzie van Zyl a Boer child, visited by Emily Hobhouse in a British concentration camp


As Boer farms were destroyed by the British under their "Scorched Earth" policy—including the systematic destruction of crops and slaughtering of livestock, the burning down of homesteads and farms, and the poisoning of wells and salting of fields—to prevent the Boers from resupplying from a home base many tens of thousands of women and children were forcibly moved into the concentration camps. This was not the first appearance of internment camps, as the Spanish had used internment in Cuba in the Ten Years' War, but the Boer War concentration camp system was the first time that a whole nation had been systematically targeted, and the first in which some whole regions had been depopulated.
Eventually, there were a total of 45 tented camps built for Boer internees and 64 for black Africans. Of the 28,000 Boer men captured as prisoners of war, 25,630 were sent overseas. The vast majority of Boers remaining in the local camps were women and children. Over 26,000 women and children were to perish in these concentration camps.[64]
The camps were poorly administered from the outset and became increasingly overcrowded when Kitchener's troops implemented the internment strategy on a vast scale. Conditions were terrible for the health of the internees, mainly due to neglect, poor hygiene and bad sanitation. The supply of all items was unreliable, partly because of the constant disruption of communication lines by the Boers. The food rations were meager and there was a two-tier allocation policy, whereby families of men who were still fighting were routinely given smaller rations than others[65] The inadequate shelter, poor diet, bad hygiene and overcrowding led to malnutrition and endemic contagious diseases such as measles, typhoid and dysentery to which the children were particularly vulnerable. [66] Coupled with a shortage of modern medical facilities, many of the internees died.
Public opinion and political opposition[edit]
Although the 1900 UK general election, also known as the "Khaki election," had resulted in a victory for the Conservative government on the back of recent British victories against the Boers, public support quickly waned as it became apparent that the war would not be easy and further unease developed following reports about the treatment by the British army of the Boer civilians. Public and political opposition to government policies in South Africa regarding Boer civilians was first expressed in Parliament in February 1901 in the form of an attack on the policy, the government, and the army by the radical Liberal MP David Lloyd George.




Emily Hobhouse campaigned for improvement to the appalling conditions of the concentration camps. She helped to alter public opinion and to force the government to improve conditions in the camps, resulting in the Fawcett Commission.


Emily Hobhouse, a delegate of the South African Women and Children's Distress Fund, visited some of the camps in the Orange Free State from January 1901, and in May 1901 she returned to England on board the ship, the Saxon. Alfred Milner, High Commissioner in South Africa, also boarded the Saxon for holiday in England but, unfortunately for both the camp internees and the British government, he had no time for Miss Hobhouse, regarding her as a Boer sympathiser and "trouble maker."[67] On her return, Emily Hobhouse did much to publicise the distress of the camp inmates. She managed to speak to the Liberal Party leader, Henry Campbell-Bannerman who professed to be suitably outraged but was disinclined to press the matter, as his party was split between the imperialists and the pro-Boer factions.
The more radical Liberals however such as David Lloyd George and John Ellis were prepared to raise the matter in Parliament and to harass the government on the issue, which they duly did. St John Brodrick, the Conservative secretary of state for war, first defended the government's policy by arguing that the camps were purely "voluntary" and that the interned Boers were "contented and comfortable," but was somewhat undermined as he had no firm statistics to back up his argument, so when his "voluntary" argument proved untenable, he resorted to the "military necessity" argument and stated that everything possible was being done to ensure satisfactory conditions in the camps.
Hobhouse published a report in June 1901 that contradicted Brodrick's claim, and Lloyd George then openly accused the government of "a policy of extermination" directed against the Boer population. The same month Liberal opposition party leader Campbell-Bannerman took up the assault and answered the rhetorical question "When is a war not a war?" with his own rhetorical answer "When it is carried on by methods of barbarism in South Africa," referring to those same camps and the policies that created them. The Hobhouse report caused uproar both domestically and in the international community. However, there was very little public sympathy for the highly reactionary Boer president Kruger.
The Fawcett Commission[edit]
Although the government had comfortably won the parliamentary debate by a margin of 252 to 149, it was stung by the criticism and concerned by the escalating public outcry, it called on Kitchener for a detailed report. In response, complete statistical returns from camps were sent out in July 1901. By August 1901, it was clear to government and opposition alike that Miss Hobhouse's worst fears were being confirmed – 93,940 Boers and 24,457 black Africans were reported to be in "camps of refuge" and the crisis was becoming a catastrophe as the death rates appeared very high, especially among the children.
The government responded to the growing clamour by appointing a commission.[e] The Fawcett Commission, as it became known was, uniquely for its time, an all-woman affair headed by Millicent Fawcett who despite being the leader of the women's suffrage movement was a Liberal Unionist and thus a government supporter and considered a safe pair of hands. Between August and December 1901, the Fawcett Commission conducted its own tour of the camps in South Africa. While it is probable that the British government expected the Commission to produce a report that could be used to fend off criticism, in the end it confirmed everything that Emily Hobhouse had said. Indeed, if anything the Commission's recommendations went even further. The Commission insisted that rations should be increased and that additional nurses be sent out immediately, and included a long list of other practical measures designed to improve conditions in the camp. Millicent Fawcett was quite blunt in expressing her opinion that much of the catastrophe was owed to a simple failure to observe elementary rules of hygiene.
In November 1901, the Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain ordered Alfred Milner to ensure that "all possible steps are being taken to reduce the rate of mortality." The civil authority took over the running of the camps from Kitchener and the British command and by February 1902 the annual death-rate in the concentration camps for white inmates dropped to 6.9 percent and eventually to 2 percent, which was a lower rate than pertained in many British cities at the time. However, by then the damage had been done. A report after the war concluded that 27,927 Boers (of whom 24,074 [50 percent of the Boer child population] were children under 16) had died of starvation, disease and exposure in the concentration camps. In all, about one in four (25 percent) of the Boer inmates, mostly children, died.
"Improvements [however] were much slower in coming to the black camps".[68] It is thought that about 12 percent of black African inmates died (about 14,154) but the precise number of deaths of black Africans in concentration camps is unknown as little attempt was made to keep any records of the 107,000 black Africans who were interned.

The main decisions (or their absence) had been left to the soldiers, to whom the life or death of the 154,000 Boer and African civilians in the camps rated as an abysmally low priority. [It was only] ... ten months after the subject had first been raised in Parliament ... [and after public outcry and after the Fawcett Commission that remedial action was taken and] ... the terrible mortality figures were at last declining. In the interval, at least twenty thousand whites and twelve thousand coloured people had died in the concentration camps, the majority from epidemics of measles and typhoid that could have been avoided.[69][f]

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle had served as a volunteer doctor in the Langman Field Hospital at Bloemfontein between March and June 1900. In his widely distributed and translated pamphlet 'The War in South Africa: Its Cause and Conduct' he justified both the reasonings behind the war and handling of the conflict itself. He also pointed out that over 14,000 British soldiers had died of disease during the conflict (as opposed to 8000 killed in combat) and at the height of epidemics he was seeing 50–60 British soldiers dying each day in a single ill-equipped and overwhelmed military hospital.
Kitchener's policy and the post-war debate[edit]
It has been argued that "this was not a deliberately genocidal policy; rather it was the result of [a] disastrous lack of foresight and rank incompetence on [the] part of the [British] military".[71] British historian Niall Ferguson also argues that "Kitchener no more desired the deaths of women and children in the camps than of the wounded Dervishes after Omdurman, or of his own soldiers in the typhoid stricken hospitals of Bloemfontein."[72]




Lord Kitchener was one of the most controversial British generals in the war. Kitchener took over control of British forces from Lord Roberts and was responsible for expanding the British response to the Boers' guerrilla tactics.


However, to Kitchener and the British Command "the life or death of the 154,000 Boer and African civilians in the camps rated as an abysmally low priority" against military objectives. As the Fawcett Commission was delivering its recommendations, Kitchener wrote to St John Brodrick defending his policy of sweeps, and emphasising that no new Boer families were being brought in unless they were in danger of starving. This was disingenuous as the countryside had by then been devastated under the "Scorched Earth" policy (the Fawcett Commission in December 1901 in its recommendations commented that: "to turn 100,000 people now being held in the concentration camps out on the veldt to take care of themselves would be cruelty") and now that the New Model counter insurgency tactics were in full swing, it made cynical military sense to leave the Boer families in desperate conditions in the countryside.
It was according to one historian that "at [the Vereeniging negotiations in May 1902] Boer leader Louis Botha asserted that he had tried to send [Boer] families to the British, but they had refused to receive them." Quoting a Boer commandant referring to Boer women and children made refugees by Britain's scorched-earth policy as saying, "Our families are in a pitiable condition and the enemy uses those families to force us to surrender ...and there is little doubt that that was indeed the intention of Kitchener when he had issued instructions that no more families were to be brought into the concentration camps." Thomas Pakenham writes of Kitchener's policy U-turn,

No doubt the continued 'hullabaloo' at the death-rate in these concentration camps, and Milner's belated agreement to take over their administration, helped change Kitchener's mind [some time at the end of 1901]. ... By mid-December at any rate, Kitchener was already circulating all column commanders with instructions not to bring in women and children when they cleared the country, but to leave them with the guerrillas. ... Viewed as a gesture to Liberals, on the eve of the new session of Parliament at Westminster, it was a shrewd political move. It also made excellent military sense, as it greatly handicapped the guerrillas, now that the drives were in full swing. ... It was effective precisely because, contrary to the Liberals' convictions, it was less humane than bringing them into camps, though this was of no great concern to Kitchener.[73]

The end of the war[edit]




The end result of the Boer War was the annexation of the Boer Republics to the British Empire in 1902






Peace conference at Vereeniging






C Company returns from Boer War, King Street in Toronto, Ontario, Canada


Towards the end of the war, British tactics of containment, denial, and harassment began to yield results against the guerrillas. The sourcing and co-ordination of intelligence became increasingly efficient with regular reporting from observers in the blockhouses, from units patrolling the fences and conducting "sweeper" operations, and from native Africans in rural areas who increasingly supplied intelligence, as the Scorched Earth policy took effect and they found themselves competing with the Boers for food supplies. Kitchener's forces at last began to seriously affect the Boers' fighting strength and freedom of manoeuvre, and made it harder for the Boers and their families to survive. Despite this success, almost half the Boer fighting strength, 15000 men were still in the field fighting. Kitchener's tactics were very costly: Britain was running out of time and money and needed to change tack.[74]
The Boers and the British both feared the consequences of arming Africans. The memories of the Zulu and other tribal conflicts were still fresh, and they recognised that whoever won would have to deal with the consequences of a mass militarisation of the tribes. There was therefore an unwritten agreement that this war would be a "white man's war." At the outset, British officials instructed all white magistrates in the Natal Colony to appeal to Zulu amakhosi (chiefs) to remain neutral, and President Kruger sent emissaries asking them to stay out of it. However, in some cases there were old scores to be settled, and some Africans, such as the Swazis, were eager to enter the war with the specific aim of reclaiming land confiscated by the Boers. As the war went on there was greater involvement of Africans, and in particular large numbers became embroiled in the conflict on the British side, either voluntarily or involuntarily. By the end of the war, many blacks had been armed and had shown conspicuous gallantry in roles such as scouts, messengers, watchmen in blockhouses, and auxiliaries.
And there were more flash-points outside of the war. On 6 May 1902 at Holkrantz in the southeastern Transvaal, a Zulu faction had their cattle stolen and their people mistreated by the Boers as a punishment for helping the British. The local Boer officer then sent an insulting message to the tribe, challenging them to take back their cattle. The Zulus attacked at night, and in a mutual bloodbath, the Boers lost 56 killed and 3 wounded, while the Africans suffered 52 killed and 48 wounded.[75]
The British offered terms of peace on various occasions, notably in March 1901, but were rejected by Botha and the "Bitter-einders" among the commandos. They pledged to fight until the bitter end and rejected the demand for compromise made by the "Hands-uppers." Their reasons included hatred of the British, loyalty to their dead comrades, solidarity with fellow commandos, an intense desire for independence, religious arguments, and fear of captivity or punishment. On the other hand, their women and children were dying every day and independence seemed impossible.[76] The last of the Boers surrendered in May 1902 and the war ended with the Treaty of Vereeniging signed on 31 May 1902. The British had won and offered generous terms to regain the support of the Boers.The Boers were given £3,000,000 for reconstruction and were promised eventual limited self-government, which was granted in 1906 and 1907. The treaty ended the existence of the South African Republic and the Orange Free State as independent Boer republics and placed them within the British Empire. The Union of South Africa was established as a dominion of the British Empire in 1910.
Cost of the war[edit]
It is estimated that the total cost of the war to the British government was £211,156,000[77] (equivalent to £202,000,000,000 in 2014).[78]


Cost of War over its entire course


Year
Cost at the time[78]
Relative value in 2014[77]


1899–1900
£23,000,000
£21,940,000,000


1900–1901
£63,737,000
£60,110,000,000


1901–1902
£67,670,000
£63,860,000,000


1902–1903
£47,500,000
£45,430,000,000







Sub-total
£201,907,000
£193,100,000,000


Interest
£9,249,000
£8,846,000,000







Grand total
£211,156,000
£202,000,000,000


Aftermath and analysis[edit]




Memorial to soldiers from Quebec who fell in the Second Boer War, Quebec City


The Second Boer War cast long shadows over the history of the South African region. The predominantly agrarian society of the former Boer republics was profoundly and fundamentally affected by the scorched earth policy of Roberts and Kitchener. The devastation of both Boer and black African populations in the concentration camps and through war and exile were to have a lasting effect on the demography and quality of life in the region. Many exiles and prisoners were unable to return to their farms at all; others attempted to do so but were forced to abandon the farms as unworkable given the damage caused by farm burning and salting of the fields in the course of the scorched earth policy. Destitute Boers and black Africans swelled the ranks of the unskilled urban poor competing with the "uitlanders" in the mines.[79]
The postwar reconstruction administration was presided over by Lord Milner and his largely Oxford trained Milner's Kindergarten. This small group of civil servants had a profound effect on the region, eventually leading to the Union of South Africa. "In the aftermath of the war, an imperial administration freed from accountability to a domestic electorate set about reconstructing an economy that was by then predicated unambiguously on gold. At the same time, British civil servants, municipal officials, and their cultural adjuncts were hard at work in the heartland of the former Boer Republics helping to forge new identities – first as 'British South Africans' and then, later still, as 'white South Africans'." Some scholars, for good reasons, identify these new identities as partly underpinning the act of union that followed in 1910. Although challenged by a Boer rebellion only four years later, they did much to shape South African politics between the two world wars and right up to the present day".[80]




Alfred, Lord Milner was the British High Commissioner of Southern Africa. He was involved from the start of the war and had a role in the peace process and the creation of the Union of South Africa.


The counterinsurgency techniques and lessons (the restriction of movement, the containment of space, the ruthless targeting of anything, everything and anyone that could give sustenance to guerrillas, the relentless harassment through sweeper groups coupled with rapid reaction forces, the sourcing and co-ordination of intelligence, and the nurturing of native allies) learned during the Boer War were used by the British (and other forces) in future guerrilla campaigns including to counter Malayan communist rebels during the Malayan Emergency. In World War II the British also adopted some of the concepts of raiding from the Boer commandos when, after the fall of France, they set up their special raiding forces, and in acknowledgement of their erstwhile enemies, chose the name British Commandos.
Many of the Boers referred to the war as the second of the Freedom Wars. The most resistant of Boers wanted to continue the fight and were known as "Bittereinders" (or irreconcilables) and at the end of the war a number of Boer fighters such as Deneys Reitz chose exile rather than sign an oath, such as the following, to pledge allegiance to Britain:[81]


The bearer, <prisoner name> has been released from prison of war camp <Camp name> on signing that he acknowledge terms of surrender and becomes a British subject.


Over the following decade, many returned to South Africa and never signed the pledge. Some, like Reitz, eventually reconciled themselves to the new status quo, but others could not.
Union of South Africa[edit]
Main article: Union of South Africa
One of the most important events in the decade after the end of the war was the creation of the Union of South Africa (later the Republic of South Africa). It proved a key ally to Britain as a Dominion of the British Empire during the World Wars. At the start of the First World War a crisis ensued when the South African government led by Louis Botha and other former Boer fighters, such as Jan Smuts, declared support for Britain and agreed to send troops to take over the German colony of German South-West Africa (Namibia).
Many Boers were opposed to fighting for Britain, especially against Germany, which had been sympathetic to their struggle. A number of bittereinders and their allies took part in a revolt known as the Maritz Rebellion. This was quickly suppressed and in 1916, the leading Boer rebels in the Maritz Rebellion got off lightly (especially compared with the fate of leading Irish rebels of the Easter Rising), with terms of imprisonment of six and seven years and heavy fines. Two years later, they were released from prison, as Louis Botha recognised the value of reconciliation. Thereafter the bittereinders concentrated on political organisation within the constitutional system and built up what later became the National Party, which took power in 1948 and dominated the politics of South Africa from the late 1940s until the early 1990s, under the apartheid system.


Gold Production on the Witwatersrand
1898 to 1910[82]


Year
No. of
Mines
Gold output
(fine ounces)
Value (GB£)
Relative 2010 value
(GB£)[83]


1898
77
4,295,608
£15,141,376
£6,910,000,000


1899 (Jan–Oct)
85
3,946,545
£14,046,686
£6,300,000,000


1899 (Nov- 1901 Apr)
12
574,043
£2,024,278
£908,000,000


1901 (May–Dec)
12
238,994
£1,014,687
£441,000,000


1902
45
1,690,100
£7,179,074
£3,090,000,000


1903
56
2,859,482
£12,146,307
£5,220,000,000


1904
62
3,658,241
£15,539,219
£6,640,000,000


1905
68
4,706,433
£19,991,658
£8,490,000,000





Effect of the war on domestic British politics[edit]
Further information: Opposition to the Second Boer War




Memorial window from St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin executed by An Túr Gloine. Much of the Irish public sympathised with the Boer side, rather than the British side on which fought the Royal Irish Regiment.


Many Irish nationalists sympathised with the Boers, viewing them to be a people oppressed by British imperialism, much like themselves. Irish miners already in the Transvaal at the start of the war formed the nucleus of two Irish commandos. The Second Irish Brigade was headed up by an Australian of Irish parents, Colonel Arthur Lynch. In addition, small groups of Irish volunteers went to South Africa to fight with the Boers – this despite the fact that there were many Irish troops fighting in the British army, including the Royal Dublin Fusiliers.[g] In Britain, the "Pro-Boer" campaign expanded,[h] with writers often idealising the Boer society.
The war also highlighted the dangers of Britain's policy of non-alignment and deepened her isolation. The 1900 UK general election, also known as the "Khaki election", was called by the Prime Minister, Lord Salisbury, on the back of recent British victories. There was much enthusiasm for the war at this point, resulting in a victory for the Conservative government.
However public support quickly waned as it became apparent that the war would not be easy and it dragged on, partially contributing to the Conservatives' spectacular defeat in 1906. There was public outrage at the use of scorched earth tactics – the forced clearance of women and children, the destruction of the countryside, burning of Boer homesteads and poisoning of wells, for example – and the conditions in the concentration camps. It also became apparent that there were serious problems with public health in Britain: up to 40% of recruits in Britain were unfit for military service, suffering from medical problems such as rickets and other poverty-related illnesses. This came at a time of increasing concern for the state of the poor in Britain.
Having taken the country into a prolonged war, the Conservative government was rejected by the electorate at the first general election after the war was over. Balfour, succeeding his uncle Lord Salisbury in 1903 immediately after the war, took over a Conservative party that had won two successive landslide majorities but led it to a landslide defeat in 1906.
Horses[edit]




A horse destined to serve in the war, being off-loaded in Port Elizabeth


The number of horses killed in the war was at the time unprecedented in modern warfare. For example, in the Relief of Kimberley, French's cavalry rode 500 horses to their deaths in a single day. The wastage was particularly heavy among British forces for several reasons: overloading of horses with unnecessary equipment and saddlery, failure to rest and acclimatise horses after long sea voyages and, later in the war, poor management by inexperienced mounted troops and distant control by unsympathetic staffs.[84] The average life expectancy of a British horse, from the time of its arrival in Port Elizabeth, was around six weeks.[85]
Horses were slaughtered for their meat when needed. During the Siege of Kimberley and Siege of Ladysmith, horses were consumed as food once the regular sources of meat were depleted.[86] The besieged British forces in Ladysmith also produced chevril, a Bovril-like paste, by boiling down the horse meat to a jelly paste and serving it like beef tea.[87][88]
The Horse Memorial in Port Elizabeth is a tribute to the 300,000 horses that died during the conflict.[89]
Imperial involvement[edit]
See also: History of the British Army § South Africa




Stretcher-bearers of the Indian Ambulance Corps during the war, including the future leader Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (Middle row, 5th from left).


The vast majority of troops fighting for the British army came from Great Britain. Yet a significant number came from other parts of the British Empire. These countries had their own internal disputes over whether they should remain tied to London, or have full independence, which carried over into the debate around the sending of forces to assist the war. Though not fully independent on foreign affairs, these countries did have local say over how much support to provide, and the manner it was provided. Ultimately, Australia, Canada, New Zealand and British South African Company administered Rhodesia all sent volunteers to aid the United Kingdom. Australia provided the largest number of troops followed by Canada. Troops were also raised to fight with the British from the Cape Colony and the Colony of Natal. Some Boer fighters, such as Jan Smuts and Louis Botha, were technically British subjects as they came from the Cape Colony and Colony of Natal, respectively.[citation needed]
There were also many volunteers from the Empire who were not selected for the official contingents from their countries and travelled privately to South Africa to form private units, such as the Canadian Scouts and Doyle's Australian Scouts. There were also some European volunteer units from British India and British Ceylon, though the British Government refused offers of non-white troops from the Empire. Some Cape Coloureds also volunteered early in the war, but later some of them were effectively conscripted and kept in segregated units. As a community, they received comparatively little reward for their services. In many ways, the war set the pattern for the Empire's later involvement in the two World Wars. Specially raised units, consisting mainly of volunteers, were dispatched overseas to serve with forces from elsewhere in the British Empire.
The United States stayed neutral in the conflict, but some American citizens were eager to participate. Early in the war Lord Roberts cabled the American Frederick Russell Burnham, a veteran of both Matabele wars but at that very moment prospecting in the Klondike, to serve on his personal staff as Chief of Scouts. Burnham went on to receive the highest awards of any American who served in the war, but American mercenaries participated on both sides.[90]
Australia[edit]
See also: History of the Australian Army § Boer War 1899–1902
Main article: Military history of Australia during the Second Boer War




British and Australian officers in South Africa, c. 1900






A memorial in Queanbeyan New South Wales unveiled in 1903, dedicated to Australians who served in the conflict (over 20,000).


From 1899 to 1901 the six separate self-governing colonies in Australia sent their own contingents to serve in the Boer War. That much of the population of the colonies had originated from Great Britain explains a desire to support Britain during the conflict appealing to many. After the colonies formed the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901, the new Government of Australia sent "Commonwealth" contingents to the war.[91] The Boer War was thus the first war in which the Commonwealth of Australia fought. A few Australians fought on the Boer side.[92] The most famous and colourful character was Colonel Arthur Alfred Lynch, formerly of Ballarat, Victoria, who raised the Second Irish Brigade.
The Australian climate and geography were far closer to that of South Africa than most other parts of the empire, so Australians adapted quickly to the environment, with troops serving mostly among the army's "mounted rifles." Enlistment in all official Australian contingents totalled 16,463.[93] Another five to seven thousand Australians served in "irregular" regiments raised in South Africa. Perhaps five hundred Australian irregulars were killed. In total 20,000 or more Australians served and about 1,000 were killed. A total of 267 died from disease, 251 were killed in action or died from wounds sustained in battle. A further 43 men were reported missing.[94]
When the war began some Australians, like some Britons, opposed it. As the war dragged on some Australians became disenchanted, in part because of the sufferings of Boer civilians reported in the press. In an interesting twist (for Australians), when the British missed capturing President Paul Kruger, as he escaped Pretoria during its fall in June 1900, a Melbourne Punch, 21 June 1900, cartoon depicted how the War could be won, using the Kelly Gang.[95]
The convictions and executions of two Australian lieutenants, Harry Harbord Morant, colloquially known as 'The Breaker' for his skill with horses, and Peter Handcock in 1902, and the imprisonment of a third, George Witton, had little impact on the Australian public at the time despite later legend. The controversial court-martial saw the three convicted of executing Boer prisoners under their authority. After the war, though, Australians joined an empire-wide campaign that saw Witton released from jail. Much later, some Australians came to see the execution of Morant and Handcock as instances of wrongfully executed Australians, as illustrated in the 1980 Australian film Breaker Morant.
One of the officers in the photo at left is LTCOL Percy Ricardo. CO of the 1st Queensland Mounted Infantry contingent to South Africa.
Canada[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Canadian Appeal for the Widows and Orphans of the South African War



See also: Military history of Canada § Boer War




The unveiling of the South African War Memorial in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, in 1908


Over 7,000 Canadian soldiers and support personnel were involved in the second Boer war from October 1899 to May 1902.[96] With approximately 7,368[97] soldiers in a combat situation, the conflict became the largest military engagement involving Canadian soldiers from the time of Confederation until the Great War.[96] Eventually, 270 soldiers died in the course of the Boer War.[96] The Canadian public was initially divided on the decision to go to war as some citizens did not want Canada to become Britain's 'tool' for engaging in armed conflicts. Many Anglophone citizens were pro-Empire, and wanted the Prime Minister, Sir Wilfrid Laurier, to support the British in their conflict. On the other hand, many Francophone citizens felt threatened by the continuation of British Imperialism to their national sovereignty.[98]
In the end, in order to appease the citizens who wanted war and avoid angering those who didn't, Laurier sent 1,000 volunteers under the command of Lieutenant Colonel William Otter to aid the confederation in its war to 'liberate' the peoples of the Boer controlled states in South Africa. The volunteers were provided to the British with the stipulation that the British pay costs of the battalion after it arrived in South Africa.[99]
The supporters of the war claimed that it "pitted British Freedom, justice and civilization against Boer backwardness".[100] The French Canadians' opposition to the Canadian involvement in a British 'colonial venture' eventually led to a three-day riot in various areas of Quebec.[97]




Harold Lothrop Borden – son of the National Minister of Defence and the most famous Canadian casualty of the war


Commonwealth involvement in the Boer War can be summarised into three parts. The first part (October 1899 – December 1899) was characterised by questionable decisions and blunders from the Commonwealth leadership which affected its soldiers greatly. The soldiers of the Commonwealth were shocked at the number of Afrikaner soldiers who were willing to oppose the British. The Afrikaner troops were very willing to fight for their country, and were armed with modern weaponry and were highly mobile soldiers.[98] This was one of the best examples of Guerrilla style warfare, which would be employed throughout the twentieth century after set piece fighting was seen as a hindrance by certain groups.[96] The Boer soldiers would evade capture and secure provisions from their enemies therefore they were able to exist as a fighting entity for an indeterminate period of time.[101]
The end of the First part was the period in mid-December which is referred to as the "Black Week". During the week of 10–17 December 1899, the British suffered three major defeats at the hands of the Boers at the battlefields of Stormberg, Magersfontein and Colenso. Afterwards, the British called upon more volunteers to take part in the war from the Commonwealth.[102]
The second part of the war (February–April 1900) was the opposite of the first. After the British reorganised and reinforced under new leadership, they began to experience success against the Boer soldiers. Commonwealth soldiers resorted to using blockhouses, farm burning and concentration camps to 'persuade' the resisting Boers into submission.[103]
The final phase of the war was the guerrilla phase where many Boer soldiers turned to Guerrilla tactics such as raiding infrastructure or communications lines. Many Canadian soldiers did not actually see combat after getting shipped over to South Africa as many arrived around the time of the signing of the Treaty of Vereeniging on 31 May 1902.[104]

Notable Canadian Engagements

Battle
Description


Paardeberg

A British led attack trapped a Boer Army in Central South Africa on the banks of the Modder River from 18–27 February 1900. Over 800 Canadian Soldiers from Otter's 2nd Special Service Battalion were attached to the British attack force. This was the first major attack involving the Canadians in the Boer War as well as the first major victory for Commonwealth soldiers. The Canadian soldiers perched on a hill above the Boer camp and were credited with being the main reason that the Boers under General Cronje surrendered.[99]



Zand River

On 6 May 1900, the Commonwealth's northwards advance to the capital of Pretoria was well on its way. However, the British soldiers encountered a position of Boer soldiers on the Zand River. The British commander felt that the best course of action was to use cavalry to envelop the Boers on their left flank and infantry would therefore march on the Boer right flank to secure a crossing. The Canadian 2nd Battalion was the lead unit advancing on the right flank. However, due to disease and casualties from earlier encounters, the 2nd battalion was reduced to approximately half of its initial strength. The Canadian battalion came under fire from the Boers who were occupying protected positions. The battle continued for several hours until the British cavalry was able to flank the Boers and force a retreat. Canadian casualties were two killed and two wounded. The skirmishes around the Zand River would continue and more soldiers from various Commonwealth countries would become involved.[105]



Doornkop

On the days of 28–29 May 1900, both the Canadian 2nd battalion and the 1st Mounted Infantry Brigade fought together on the same battlefield for the first, and only, time. The Mounted Brigade, which encompassed units such as the Canadian Mounted Rifles and the Royal Canadian Dragoons were given the task to establish a beachhead across a river which the Boers had fortified in an attempt to halt the advancing Commonwealth before they could reach the city of Johannesburg.[106] Since the Boers were mounting a heavy resistance to the advancing mounted units, the Commonwealth infantry units were tasked with holding the Boer units while the mounted units found another route across the river with less resistance.[106] Even after the cavalry made it across to the other side of the river further down the line, the infantry had to advance onto the town of Doornkop as they were the ones who were tasked with its capture. The Canadians suffered very minimal casualties and achieved their objective after the Boer soldiers retreated from their positions.[106] Although the Canadians suffered minimal casualties, the lead British unit in the infantry advance, the Gordon Highlanders, did sustain heavy casualties in their march from the riflemen of the Boer force.[107]



Leliefontein

On 7 November 1900, a British-Canadian force was searching for a unit of Boer commandos which were known to be operating around the town of Belfast, South Africa. After the British Commander reached the farm of Leliefontein, he began to fear that his line had expanded too far and ordered a withdrawal of the front line troops. The rear guard, consisting of the Royal Canadian Dragoons and two 12 pound guns from D section of the Canadian artillery, were tasked with covering the retreat.[108] The Boers mounted a heavy assault against the Canadians with the intention of capturing the two 12 pound artillery pieces. During this battle, the Afrikaners outnumbered the Canadians almost three to one.[109] A small group of the Dragoons interposed themselves between the Boers and the artillery in order to allow the guns and their crews time to escape. The Dragoons won three Victoria Crosses[108] for their actions during the battle of Leliefontein, the most in any battle with the exception of the Battle of Vimy Ridge in World War I.[109]



New Zealand[edit]
See also: Military history of New Zealand § Second Boer War 1899–1902




New Zealand troops marching down Wellesley Street, Auckland, to embark for South Africa






This is the top of the Dunedin Boer War Memorial. The memorial reaffirms New Zealand's dedication to the Empire. As McLean and Phillips said, the New Zealand Boer War Memorials are "tributes to the Empire and outpourings of pride about New Zealand’s place” in the Empire.


When the Second Boer War seemed imminent, New Zealand offered its support. On 28 September 1899, Prime Minister Richard Seddon asked Parliament to approve the offer to the imperial government of a contingent of mounted rifles, thus becoming the first British Colony to send troops to the Boer War. The British position in the dispute with the Transvaal was "moderate and righteous," he maintained. He stressed the "crimson tie" of Empire that bound New Zealand to the mother-country and the importance of a strong British Empire for the colony's security.[110]
By the time peace was concluded two and a half years later, 10 contingents of volunteers, totalling nearly 6,500 men from New Zealand, with 8,000 horses had fought in the conflict, along with doctors, nurses, veterinary surgeons and a small number of school teachers.[111] Some 70 New Zealanders died from enemy action, with another 158 killed accidentally or by disease.[112] The first New Zealander to be killed was Farrier G.R. Bradford at Jasfontein Farm on 18 December 1899.[113] The Boer War was greeted with extraordinary enthusiasm when the war was over, and peace was greeted with patriotism and national pride.[114] This is best shown by the fact that the Third, Fourth and Fifth contingents from New Zealand were funded by public conscription.[113]
South Africa[edit]
During the war, the British army also included substantial contingents from South Africa itself. There were large communities of English-speaking immigrants and settlers in Natal and Cape Colony (especially around Cape Town and Grahamstown), which formed volunteer units that took the field, or local "town guards." At one stage of the war, a "Colonial Division," consisting of five light horse and infantry units under Brigadier General Edward Brabant, took part in the invasion of the Orange Free State. Part of it withstood a siege by Christiaan De Wet at Wepener on the borders of Basutoland. Another large source of volunteers was the uitlander community, many of whom hastily left Johannesburg in the days immediately preceding the war.




Rhodesian volunteers leaving Salisbury for service in the Second Boer War, 1899


Later during the war, Lord Kitchener attempted to form a Boer Police Force, as part of his efforts to pacify the occupied areas and effect a reconciliation with the Boer community. The members of this force were despised as traitors by the Boers still in the field. Those Boers who attempted to remain neutral after giving their parole to British forces were derided as "hensoppers" (hands-uppers) and were often coerced into giving support to the Boer guerrillas. (This was one of the reasons for the British ruthlessly scouring the countryside of people, livestock and anything else the Boer commandos might find useful.)
Like the Canadian and particularly the Australian and New Zealand contingents, many of the volunteer units formed by South Africans were "light horse" or mounted infantry, well suited to the countryside and manner of warfare. Some regular British officers scorned their comparative lack of formal discipline, but the light horse units were hardier and more suited to the demands of campaigning than the overloaded British cavalry, who were still obsessed with the charge by lance or sabre.[i] At their peak, 24,000 South Africans (including volunteers from the Empire) served in the field in various "colonial" units. Notable units (in addition to the Imperial Light Horse) were the South African Light Horse, Rimington's Guides, Kitchener's Horse and the Imperial Light Infantry.
Notable people involved in the Boer War[edit]
Harold Lothrop Borden was the only son of Canada's Canadian Minister of Defence and Militia, Frederick William Borden. Serving in the Royal Canadian Dragoons, he became the most famous Canadian casualty of the Second Boer War.[115] Queen Victoria asked F. W. Borden for a photograph of his son, Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier praised his services, tributes arrived from across Canada, and in his home town Canning, Nova Scotia, there is a monument (by Hamilton MacCarthy) erected to his memory.[115]




Memorial at Plymouth, by Emil Fuchs


Sam Hughes – Senior Militia officer and later a Federally elected cabinet minister. As a very patriotic individual, Hughes became involved in the Boer war as a member of Brigadier-General Herbert Settle's expedition after Hughes unsuccessfully tried to raise his own brigade of soldiers.[103] Hughes was noted by his colleagues for having a dislike of professional soldiers and he was noted for being an exceptional leader of irregular soldiers, whom he preferred to lead in combat.[116] However, Hughes was dismissed and was sent home in the summer of 1900 for; sending letters back home which were published outlining British command incompetence, his impatience and boastfulness and his providing surrendering enemies favourable conditions. When he arrived back in Canada, Hughes became very active politically, and he would eventually start his political career with the Conservatives. When he became a member of parliament, Hughes would be in the position to become the Canadian Minister of Defence and Militia in 1911, just prior the outbreak of World War I. This was a position that Hughes would be dismissed from in 1916, due once again to his impatience, among other reasons.[116]
John McCrae – Best known as the author of the World War I poem In Flanders Fields, McCrae started his active military service in the Boer War as an artillery officer. After completing several major campaigns, McCrae's artillery unit was sent home to Canada in 1901 with what would be referred to today as an 'honourable discharge'. McCrae ended up becoming a special professor in the University of Vermont for pathology and he would later serve in World War I as a Medical officer until his death from pneumonia while on active duty in 1918.[117]
Harry "Breaker" Morant – Australian poet who participated in the summary execution of several Boer prisoners and the killing of a German missionary who had been a witness to the shootings. Morant was court-martialed and executed for murder.[118]
Winston Churchill – Best known as the prime minister of Britain during the main part of the Second World War, Churchill worked as a war correspondent for The Morning Post. At the age of twenty-six,[119] he was captured and held prisoner in a camp in Pretoria from which he escaped and rejoined the British army. He received a commission in the South African Light Horse (still working as a correspondent) and witnessed the capture of Ladysmith and Pretoria.[120]
Mahatma Gandhi – Best known as the leader of the independence movement in India, he lived in South Africa 1893–1915 where he worked on behalf of Indians. He volunteered in 1900 to help the British by forming teams of ambulance drivers and raising 1100 Indian volunteer medics. At Spieon Kop Gandhi and his bearers had to carry wounded soldiers for miles to a field hospital because the terrain was too rough for the ambulances. General Redvers Buller mentioned the courage of the Indians in his dispatch. Gandhi and thirty-seven other Indians received the War Medal.[121]
Victoria Cross recipients[edit]
Four Canadian soldiers in the Second Boer War received a Victoria Cross, which is the highest military medal available to soldiers of the Commonwealth and former British Territories. It is awarded based on exemplary bravery and valour in the presence of danger.[122]
Sergeant Arthur Herbert Lindsay Richardson – Soldier of Lord Strathcona's Horse, Richardson rode a wounded horse, while wounded himself, back into enemy fire to retrieve a wounded comrade whose horse had been killed at Wolve Spruit on 5 July 1900.[122]
Lieutenant Hampden Zane Churchill Cockburn – Soldier of the Royal Canadian Dragoons, Cockburn received his Victoria Cross on 7 November 1900 when his unit was the rear guard at Leliefontein. Cockburn, along with fellow Victoria Cross recipient Lieutenant R.E.W. Turner, held off an advancing group of Boer soldiers in order to allow two Canadian Field guns to escape along with their crews. Cockburn was wounded and captured by the Boer soldiers.[109]
Lieutenant Richard Ernest William Turner – Soldier of the Royal Canadian Dragoons, Turner received his Victoria Cross during the same portion of the conflict as Cockburn.[109] Turner was wounded in the conflict, however unlike Cockburn, Turner escaped. Turner would later become a high-ranking officer in the Canadian army in World War I.
Sergeant Edward James Gibson Holland – Soldier of the Royal Canadian Dragoons. Holland received his Victoria Cross from the same rear guard conflict at Leliefontein on 7 November 1900 as Cockburn and Turner. However, Holland received his medal for a different reason than the two aforementioned Lieutenants. During the Boer advance, Holland kept the Boer soldiers at bay with his carriage mounted Colt machine gun despite the position becoming increasingly dangerous due to the proximity of the enemy. With his gun jammed and in danger of falling into enemy hands, Holland removed the Colt from its carriage and rode away on his horse with the gun in hand.[109]
Final overview[edit]
The Second Boer War was the harbinger for a new type of combat which would persevere throughout the twentieth century, guerrilla warfare.[96] After the war was over, the entire British army underwent a period of reform which was focused on lessening the emphasis placed on mounted units in combat.[123] It was determined that the traditional role of cavalry was antiquated and improperly used on the battlefield in the modern warfare of the Boer War, and that the First World War was the final proof that mounted attacks had no place in twentieth century combat.[123] Cavalry was put to better use after the reforms in the theatres of the Middle East and World War I, and that the idea of mounted infantry was useful in the times where the war was more mobile.[123] An example of this was in the First World War during the battle of Mons where the British cavalry held the Belgian town against an initial German assault. Or the use of mounted infantry at the Battle of Megiddo (1918) when Allenby's force routed the enemy owing to speed and dexterity of arms.[124]
The Canadian units of the Royal Canadian Dragoons and the Royal Canadian Mounted Rifles fought in the First World War in the same role as the Boer war. However, during, and after, the Second World War the regiments swapped their horses for mechanised vehicles.[125] The second Boer War was also the beginning of types of conflict involving machine guns, shrapnel and observation balloons which were all used extensively in the First World War.[96] To the Canadians however, attrition was the leading cause of death in the second Boer war, with disease being the cause of approximately half of the Canadian deaths.[126]
Canadians ended the war with four Victoria Crosses to its soldiers and two more Victoria Crosses were given to Canadian doctors attached to British Medical Corps units, Lieutenant H.E.M. Douglas (1899, Magersfontein) and Lieutenant W.H.S. Nickerson (1900, Wakkerstroom).[103] Not all soldiers saw action since many landed in South Africa after the hostilities ended while others (including the 3rd Special Service Battalion, The Royal Canadian Regiment) performed garrison duty in Halifax, Nova Scotia so that their British counterparts could join at the front lines. Later on, contingents of Canadians served with the paramilitary South Africa Constabulary. Both sides used a scorched Earth policy to deprive the marching enemy of food. And both had to corrall civilians into makeshift huts by 'concentrating them camps.[98] For example, at Buffelspoort British soldiers were held in captivity in Boer encampments after surrendering their arms, and civilians were often mixed in with service personnel because the Boer did not have the resources to do otherwise. A total of 116,000 women, children and Boer soldiers were confined to the Commonwealth concentration camps, of which at least 28,000, mainly women and children, would die.[109] The lack of food, water, and sanitary provisions was a feature of 20th century warfare for both civilians and armed services personnel, yet one consequence of the Boer War and investigative commissions was the implementation of The Hague Convention (1899) and Geneva Convention (1904); of which there were many further agreements thereafter.
Did the British deliberate on the use of encampments?[edit]
The British saw their tactics of Scorched Earth and concentration camps as ways of controlling the Boers by "eliminating the decay and deterioration of the national character" and as a way of reinforcing the values, through subjugation of citizens and the destruction of the means for the Boer soldiers to continue fighting, of British society that the Boers were rejecting by engaging in a war against the Commonwealth.[127] The Boers saw it as a British ploy designed to coerce the Boer soldiers into a surrender. With approximately 10%[128] of their population confined, many of whom were women and children, the Boers suggested that the British were forcing the Afrikaners to return to their homes and protect their families who were in danger of internment.[129]
Commemorations[edit]
The Australian National Boer War Memorial Committee organises events to mark the war on 31 May each year. In Canberra, a commemorative service is usually held at the Saint John the Baptist Anglican Church in Reid. Floral tributes are laid for the dead.[130]
See also[edit]

Category:People of the Second Boer War
The Great Boer War
Boer foreign volunteers
Bombardment in the Second Boer War
British Logistics in the Boer War
History of South Africa
List of Second Boer War Victoria Cross recipients
London to Ladysmith via Pretoria account of the war by Winston Churchill as a newspaper correspondent accompanying the troops
Military history of South Africa
Opposition to the Second Boer War
Premiership of Salisbury, The British prime minister
The Absent-Minded Beggar
Volkstaat
Donkin Heritage Trail

Notes[edit]



^ The Rhodesia Regiment, drawing most of its personnel from the Southern Rhodesia Volunteers, served in the war, contributing around 1,000 men.[1]
^ Larger numbers of volunteers came from the Netherlands, Germany and Sweden-Norway. Smaller forces came from Ireland, Australia, Italy, Congress Poland, France, Belgium, the Russian Empire, the United States, Denmark and Austria-Hungary.
^ 5,774 died in combat; 2,108 died of wounds; 14,210 died of disease [7]
^ 3,990 killed in battle; 157 died in accidents; 924 of wounds and disease; 1,118 while prisoners of war.[9]
^ A personal copy of Millicent Fawcett's report, together with extensive photographs and inserts, is available for consultation at The Women's Library, Old Castle Street, London E1 7NT, archive reference 7MGF/E/1
^ Somewhat higher figures for total deaths in the concentration camps are given some historians.[70]
^ "Although some 30,000 Irishmen served in the British Army under Irish General Lord Frederick Roberts, who had been Commander of Chief of British Forces in Ireland prior to his transfer to South Africa, some historians argue that the sympathies of many of their compatriots lay with the Boers. Nationalist-controlled local authorities passed pro-Boer resolutions and there were proposals to confer civic honours on Boer leader, Paul Kruger." (Irish Ambassador Daniel Mulhall written for History Ireland, 2004.)
^ Lloyd George and Keir Hardie were members of the Stop the War Committee (See the founder's biography: William T. Stead's.) Many British authors gave their "Pro-Boer" opinions in British press, such as G. K. Chesterton's writing to 1905 – (see Rice University Chesterton's poetry analysis
^ British cavalry travelled light compared with earlier campaigns, but were still expected to carry all kit with them on campaign owing to distances covered on the Veldt.





^ Keppel-Jones 1983, pp. 590–59.
^ Jones 1999.
^ Grattan 2009, pp. 147–58.
^ Haydon 1964, p. [page needed].
^ a b sahoboss (31 March 2011). "Role of Black people in the South African War". 
^ a b EB 1911.
^ (Eveleigh Nash 1914, p. 309)
^ (Wessels 2011, p. 79)
^ Wessels 2011, p. 79
^ Wessels 2011, p. 79.
^ Millard, Candice (2016). Hero of the Empire: The Boer War, a daring escape, and the making of Winston Churchill. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 9780385535731. Retrieved 14 April 2017. 
^ Gronum 1977.
^ South African History Online 2011.
^ Pakenham 1979, p. xxi.
^ a b Morris & Linnegar 2004, pp. 58–95.
^ Meintjes 1974, p. 7.
^ a b Pakenham 1979, pp. 1–5.
^ Pakenham 1979, pp. 493–95.
^ Wessels 2000, p. 97
^ Pakenham 1979, p. xv
^ Cartwright 1964, p. [page needed].
^ Nathan 1941, p. [page needed].
^ Pakenham 1979, Part 1, 'Milner's War'[page needed].
^ Bester 1994, p. [page needed]; Wessels 2000, p. 80.
^ a b Wessels 2000, p. 80
^ Connolly, C.N. Manufacturing Spontaneity. 
^ Steele 2000, p. 7
^ Steele 2000, p. 6
^ Jeffery 2000, p. 145 cites Inglis 1974, pp. 53–55
^ Surridge 2000, p. 24.
^ Steele 2000, p. 4
^ Dunlop, Colonel John K., The Development of the British Army 1899–1914, London, Methuen (1938) p 72.
^ Searle 2004, p. 276.
^ Pakenham 1979, p. 56
^ Wessels 2000, p. 74.
^ Pretorius 2000, p. 179.
^ Pakenham 1979, p. 30
^ Wessels 2000, p. 81
^ Wessels 2000, pp. 82–85
^ Field Marshal Lord Carver, The Boer War, pp. 259–62
^ 'Historical Overview' in Antony O'Brien, Bye-Bye Dolly Gray
^ From the "Battle of Magersfontein," verse by Private Smith of the Black Watch December 1899.(Quoted in Pakenham 1979, p. 115)
^ Steele 2000, p. 12
^ Daily Mail 1914.
^ Pakenham 1991a, p. 573.
^ A. B. "Banjo" Patterson,From the Front (see Australian references).[full citation needed]
^ Craig Wilcox, Australia's Boer War, pp. 84–85.
^ N. G. Speed, Born to Fight
^ a b "Anglo-Boer War Philatelic Society: Collecting Interests". Archived from the original on 10 December 2005. 
^ Limited, Burgh House Software for Moonbeams. "Saint Helena Island Info: All about St Helena, in the South Atlantic Ocean • Boer Prisoners (1900–1902)". 
^ "Anglo-Boer War Museum". 
^ "Anglo-Boer War Museum". 
^ Cameron 1986, p. 207.
^ Blake 2010, p. 46.
^ a b c Jones 1996
^ Pakenham 1991, p. 571.
^ Blake 2010, p. 140.
^ Ploeger1985, pp. 15–22.
^ Marsh 1994, pp. 483–85.
^ Warwick 1983, p. [page needed].
^ Pretorius 2011, p. [page needed].
^ Hasian Marouf, Western journal of communication, 2003.
^ Pakenham 1979, p. 493.
^ Wessels 2010, p. 32.
^ Pakenham 1979, p. 505.
^ Judd & Surridge 2013, p. 195.
^ Pakenham 1979, pp. 531–32, 536+
^ Ferguson 2002, p. 235.
^ Pakenham 1979, p. 549
^ Spies 1977, p. 265.
^ Ferguson 2002, p. 250.
^ Pakenham 1979, p. 524
^ Pakenham 1979, pp. 461–572
^ O'Brien 1988, p. [page needed].
^ Pakenham 1979, p. 601.
^ Grundlingh 1980, pp. 258–78.
^ a b Cost of the war,[unreliable source?]
^ a b Measuringworth 2015.
^ Onselen 1982, p. [page needed].
^ Onselen 2003, pp. 483–526.
^ Swardt 1998, p. 97.
^ Yap & Leong Man 1996, p. 134.
^ Measuringworth 2015, Relative Value of a UK Pound Amount – average earnings, retrieved on 27 January 2011
^ McElwee 1974, pp. 223–29.
^ Hayes 1902, pp. 213–14.
^ Davis 1900, p. 34.
^ Watt 1982.
^ Jacson 1908, p. 88.
^ Pocock 1917, p. viii fn. 11.
^ Farwell 1976.
^ See Craig Wilcox, Australia's Boer War[full citation needed]
^ "Boer War". 
^ Australian War Memorial (2008). "Australian Military Statistics". Australian War Memorial. 
^ Australian War Memorial (2008). "Australia and the Boer War, 1899–1902". Australian War Memorial. 
^ Wilcox, p. 103.
^ a b c d e f Webb 2010, pp. 75–90.
^ a b Marshall, Robert. "Boer War Remembered". Maclean's. 
^ a b c Miller, Carman. "South African War". Canadian Encyclopedia. 
^ a b Granatstein 2010, p. [page needed].
^ Berger 1970, pp. 233–234.
^ "The Guerrilla War". Anglo-Boer War Museum. 
^ Rickard, J. "The Black Week". History of War. 
^ a b c "Canada & The South African War, 1899–1902". Canadian War Museum. 
^ Cavendish, Richard. "The Peace of Vereeniging". History Today. 
^ O'Leary 1999.
^ a b c Wessels 2009.
^ Stirling 2009.
^ a b Chase 2012.
^ a b c d e f Pulsifer 2017.
^ New Zealand History Online (2008). "Brief history – New Zealand in the South African ('Boer') War". New Zealand History. Retrieved 10 May 2008. 
^ New Zealand History Online (2008). "New Zealand in the South African ('Boer') War". New Zealand History. Retrieved 10 May 2008. 
^ D.O.W. Hall, (War History Branch, Wellington, 1949).
^ a b Pugsley, Christopher (2016). The ANZAC Experience: New Zealand, Australia and Empire in the First World War. Auckland, New Zealand: Oratia. pp. 42–43. 
^ Phillips, Jock (1990). The Sorrow and the Pride: New Zealand War Memorials. Wellington, New Zealand: GP Books. p. 48. 
^ a b "Biography – Borden, Harold Lothrop – Volume XII (1891–1900) – Dictionary of Canadian Biography". 
^ a b Duffy 2009.
^ Peddie 2009.
^ Witton 2003, p. [page needed].
^ Pakenham 1991a, p. 568.
^ Powell 2015, p. [page needed].
^ Desai & Vahed 2015, p. [page needed].
^ a b "Victoria Cross" (PDF). Government of Canada. 
^ a b c Jones, Spencer (2011). "Scouting for Soldiers:Reconnaissance and the British Cavalry 1899–1914". War in History. doi:10.1177/0968344511417348. 
^ Baker, Chris. "Battle of Mons". 
^ "History of Royal Canadian Dragoons". 
^ "Canadian casualties in the Boer War". Goldi Productions Ltd. 
^ Berger 1970, pp. 233–34.
^ Grundlingh, Albert. "The Bitter Legacy of the Boer War". History Today. 
^ Barnard, Hennie. "The Concentration Camps 1899–1902". 
^ "National Boer War Memorial". 


References[edit]

Berger, Carl (1970). The Sense of Power; Studies in the Ideas of Canadian Imperialism,: 1867–1914. University of Toronto Press. pp. 233–34. ISBN 978-0-8020-6113-3. 
Bester, R. (1994). Boer Rifles and Carbines of the Anglo-Boer Warb. Bloemfontein: War Museum of the Boer Republics. 
Blake, Albert (2010). Boereverraaier. Tafelberg. p. 46. 
"Case Name: Anglo-Boer: Britain's Vietnam (1899–1902)". American University of Washington D.C Trade Environment projects. Retrieved 21 July 2016. 
Desai, Ashwin; Vahed, Goolem (2015). The South African Gandhi: Stretcher-bearer of Empire. Stanford University Press. 
"Miscellaneous information: Cost of the war". AngloBoerWar.com. 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2015. [unreliable source?]
Chase, Sean (4 November 2012). "Dragoons remember the heroes of Leliefontein". Daily Observer. 
Daily Mail (5810). 16 November 1914. pp. 4 ff. ISSN 0307-7578.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
Duffy, Michael (22 August 2009). "Sam Hughes Biography". firstworldwar.com. [unreliable source?]
Cameron, Trewhella, ed. (1986). An Illustrated History of South Africa. Johannesburg,: Jonathan Ball. p. 207. 
Cartwright, A. P (1964). The Dynamite Company. Cape Town: Purnell & Sons. 
Davis, Richard Harding (1900). With Both Armies In South Africa. Charles Scribner Sons. p. 34, fn. 59. 
"South African War (British-South African history)". Encyclopedia Britannica. Britannica.com. 31 March 2011. Retrieved 23 July 2013. 
"Caring for the soldiers health". Nash's war manual. London: Eveleigh Nash. 1914. p. 309. 
Farwell, Byron (March 1976). "Taking Sides in the Boer War". American Heritage Magazine. 20 (3). ISSN 0002-8738. Archived from the original on 7 January 2009. 
Ferguson, Niall (2002). Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British World Order and the Lessons for Global Power. Basic Books. p. 235. 
Grundlingh, Albert (1980). "Collaborators in Boer Society". In Warwick, P. The South African War. London. pp. 258–78. 
Granatstein, J.L. (2010). The Oxford Companion to Canadian Military History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-543088-2. 
Grattan, Robert (2009). "The Entente in World War I: a case study in strategy formulation in an alliance". Journal of Management History. 15 (2): 147–58. 
Gronum, M.A. (1977). Die ontplooiing van die Engelse Oorlog 1899–1900. Tafelberg. 
Haydon, A.P. (1964). "South Australia's first war". Australian Historical Studies. 11 (42). 
Hayes, Matthew Horace (1902). Horses on board ship: a guide to their management. London: Hurst and Blackett. pp. 213–14. 
Jeffery, Keith (2000). "The Irish Soldier in the Boer War". In Gooch, John. The Boer War. London: Cass. p. 145.  cites

Inglis, Brian (1974). Roger Casement. London: Coronet Books. pp. 53–55. 


Jacson, M. (1908). "II". The Record of a Regiment of the Line. Hutchinson & Company. p. 88. ISBN 1-4264-9111-5. 
Jones, Maurig (1996). "Blockhouses of the Boer War". Colonial Conquest, magweb. Archived from the original on 13 May 2008. Retrieved 10 May 2008. 
Jones, Huw M. (October 1999). Neutrality compromised: Swaziland and the Anglo-Boer War, 1899–1902. Military History Journal. 11. 
Judd, Denis; Surridge, Keith (2013). The Boer War: A History (2nd ed.). London: I. B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1780765914. excerpt and text search; a standard scholarly history
Keppel-Jones, Arthur (1983). Rhodes and Rhodesia: The White Conquest of Zimbabwe, 1884–1902. Montreal, Quebec and Kingston, Ontario: McGill-Queen's University Press. pp. 590–99. ISBN 978-0-7735-0534-6. 
McElwee, William (1974). The Art of War: Waterloo to Mons. London: Purnell. pp. 223–29. ISBN 0-253-31075-X. 
"Relative Value of UK£: using Economic Power in 2014 (using the share of GDP)". Five Ways to Compute the Relative Value of a UK Pound Amount, 1270 to Present. Measuringworth.com. 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2015. 
Marsh, Peter T. (1994). Joseph Chamberlain: Entrepreneur in Politics. Yale University Press. pp. 482–522. 
Meintjes, Johannes (1974). President Paul Kruger: A Biography (First ed.). London: Cassell. ISBN 978-0-304-29423-7. 
Morris, Michael; Linnegar, John (2004). Every Step of the Way: The Journey to Freedom in South Africa. Ministry of Education. pp. 58–95. ISBN 0-7969-2061-3. 
Nathan, M. (1941). Paul Kruger: His Life And Times. Durban: Knox. 
O'Brien, P. (1988). The Costs and Benefits of British Imperialism 1846–1914. Past & Present. 
O'Leary, Michael (29 December 1999). "Regimental Rouge – Battles of the Boer War". Regimental Rouge. 
Pakenham, Thomas (1979). The Boer War. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-394-42742-4. 
Peddie, John (22 August 2009). "John McCrae Biography". firstworldwar.com. 
Pocock, Roger S. (1917). Horses. London: J. Murray. p. viii fn. 11. ISBN 0-665-99382-X. 
Powell, Sean-Andre (2015). How Did Winston S. Churchill's Experience As A Prisoner Of War: During The Boer War Affect His Leadership Style And Career?. Pickle Partners Publishing. 
Onselen, Charles van (1982). "Chapter 1:New Babylon". Studies in the Social and Economic History of the Witwatersrand, 1886–1914. London: Longman. ISBN 9780582643840. 
Onselen, Charles van (October 2003). "'The Modernization of the Zuid Afrikaansche Republiek: F. E. T. Krause, J. C. Smuts, and the Struggle for the Johannesburg Public Prosecutor's Office, 1898–1899". Law and History Review. American Society for Legal History. 21 (3): 483–526. doi:10.2307/3595118. 
Pakenham, Thomas (1991) [1979]. The Boer War. London: Cardinal. p. 571. ISBN 0-7474-0976-5. 
Pakenham, Thomas (1991a). The Scramble for Africa. p. 573. ISBN 0-380-71999-1. 
Ploeger, Jan (1985). "Burgers in Britse Diens (1902)". Scientia Militaria. 15 (1): 15–22. 
Pretorius, Fransjohan (2000). "The Experience of the Bitter-Ender Boer". In Gooch, John. The Boer War: Direction, Experience and Image. London: Cass. p. 179. 
Pretorius, Fransjohan (2011). "Anglo-Boer war". In Jacobs, S.; Johnson, K. Encyclopedia of South Africa. 
Pulsifer, Cameron (2017). "For Queen and Country: Canadians and the South African War". Canadian War Museum. Retrieved 2 February 2017. 
"The South African War 1899–1902". South African History Online. 10 November 2011. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
Searle, G.R. (2004). A new England?: peace and war, 1886–1918. Oxford University Press. pp. 269–307. 
Spies, S.B. (1977). Methods of Barbarism: Roberts and Kitchener and Civilians in the Boer Republics January 1900 – May 1902. Cape Town: Human & Rousseau. p. 265. 
Steele, David (2000). "Salisbury and the Soldiers". In Gooch, John. The Boer War: Direction, Experience and Image. London: Cass. 
Stirling, John (17 February 2009). "Gordon Highlanders (extract)". Our Regiments in South Africa. Naval and Military Press. 
Surridge, Keith (2000). "Lansdowne at the War Office". In Gooch, John. The Boer War: Direction, Experience and Image. London: Cass. p. 24. 
Swardt, Eric (1998). "The JJ Potgieter Manuscript" (PDF). p. 97. Retrieved 23 August 2009. 
Villiers, J.C. de (June 1984). "The Medical Aspect of the Anglo-Boer War, 1899–1902 Part ll". Military History Journal. 6 (3):[page needed]. 
Warwick, Peter (1983). Black People and the South African War, 1899–1902. Cambridge University Press. 
Watt, S (December 1982). "Intombi Military Hospital and Cemetery". Military History Journal. Die Suid-Afrikaanse Krygshistoriese Vereniging. 5 (6). 
Webb, Peter (2010). "The Silent Flag in the New Fallen Snow: Sara Jeannette Duncan and the Legacy of the South African War". Journal of Canadian Studies. University of Toronto Press. 44 (1): 75–90. 
Wessels, André (2000). "Afrikaners at War". In Gooch, John. The Boer War: Direction, Experience and Image. London: Cass. 
Wessels, André (2010). A Century of Postgraduate Anglo-Boer War (1899–1902) Studies: Masters' and Doctoral Studies Completed at Universities in South Africa, in English-speaking Countries and on the European Continent, 1908–2008. African Sun Media. p. 32. ISBN 978-1-920383-09-1. 
Wessels, André (2011). The Anglo-Boer War 1889–1902: White Man's War, Black Man's War, Traumatic War. African Sun Media. p. 79. ISBN 978-1-920383-27-5. 
Wessels, Elria (2009). "Boers positions in the Klipriviersberg". Veldslae-Anglo-Boereoorlog 1899–1902. Archived from the original on 14 February 2013. 
Witton, George (2003). Scapegoats of the Empire: The True Story of Breaker Morant's Bushveldt Carbineers. [full citation needed]
Yap, Melanie; Leong Man, Dainne (1996). Colour, Confusion and Concessions: The History of the Chinese in South Africa. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. p. 510. ISBN 962-209-423-6. 

Further reading[edit]

Gooch, John (ed.). The Boer War: Direction, Experience and Image. London: Cass. p. 179.  – an anthology frequently citied in this article.
Ockerbloom, John Mark, ed. (2017). "South African War, 1899–1902". The Online Books Page.  – a Boer War bibliography of on-line books.
British War Office; Maurice, Sir John Frederick; Grant, Maurice Harold (1906–1910). History of the war in South Africa, 1899–1902 (1st in four volumes ed.).  – detailed official British history

volume 1, maps volume 1 (1906)
volume 2, maps volume 2 (1907)
volume 3, maps volume 3 (1908)
volume 4, maps volume 4 (1910)


Reitz, Deneys (1929). Commando: A Boer Journal of the Boer War. OCLC 801364049. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Second Boer War.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Second Boer War



Americanhistoryprojects.com: links to books & articles on Second Boer War
Scrapbook of Boer War, MSS P 456 at L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University
 Media related to Memorials of the Boer wars at Wikimedia Commons







v
t
e


Political history of South Africa



Defunct polities



Kingdom of Mapungubwe (c. 1075–c. 1220)
Dutch Cape Colony (1652–1806)
Mthethwa Paramountcy (c. 1780–1817)
Ndwandwe Kingdom (c. 1780–1819)
Cape Colony (1795–1910)
Zulu Kingdom (1816–97)
Natalia Republic (1839–43)
Natal Colony (1843–1910)
Orange Free State (1854–1902)
South African Republic (1856–1902)
Griqualand East (1861–79)
Griqualand West (1870–73)
Goshen (1882–83)
Stellaland (1882–85)
Nieuwe Republiek (1884–88)
Upingtonia (1885–87)
Klein Vrystaat (1886–91)
Orange River Colony (1902–10)
Transvaal Colony (1902–10)
Union of South Africa (1910–61)
Transkei (1976–94)
Bophuthatswana (1977–94)
Venda (1979–94)
Ciskei (1981–94)





Events




1652–1815



Dutch settlement
French Huguenot settlement
Khoikhoi–Dutch Wars
Xhosa Wars
Battle of Muizenberg
Battle of Blaauwberg
Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814





1815–1910



Mfecane
1820 Settlers
Great Trek
Boer Republics
Transvaal Civil War
Mineral Revolution
Witwatersrand Gold Rush
South African Wars
South Africa Act 1909





1910–1948



Maritz Rebellion
Rand Rebellion
Great Depression
1946 African Mine Workers' Union strike
Bantustans





Apartheid era



1948 general election
Apartheid legislation

Pass laws


Internal resistance
Coloured-vote constitutional crisis
Defiance Campaign
Congress of the People

Freedom Charter


Women's March 1956
1957 Alexandra bus boycott
Sharpeville massacre
1960 republic referendum
International isolation

Academic boycott
Disinvestment
Sporting boycott

Olympics
Rugby union




Rivonia Trial
Tar Baby Option
Durban Moment
Border War
Israeli alliance

Israel–South Africa Agreement


Soweto Uprising
Weapons of mass destruction
Project Coast
Constructive engagement
Church Street bombing
1983 constitutional reform referendum
Langa massacre
Rubicon speech
Dakar Conference
Third Force
CODESA
1992 apartheid referendum
Saint James Church massacre
Bophuthatswana crisis
Shell House massacre





Post-apartheid



1994 general election
Government of National Unity
Reconstruction and Development Programme
Truth and Reconciliation Commission
Arms Deal
Floor crossing
Soweto bombings
African Renaissance
Xenophobia
Marikana massacre
2012 Western Cape farm workers' strike
Nkandlagate
2014 platinum strike
#RhodesMustFall protests
#FeesMustFall student protests
Tshwane riots








Political culture



African nationalism
Afrikaner Calvinism
Afrikaner nationalism
Azania
Baasskap
Boerehaat
Black Consciousness Movement
Day of the Vow
Greater South Africa
Honorary whites
Rooi gevaar
Slavery
Swart gevaar
Uitlander
Volkstaat





Defunct
organisations




Civic and political
organisations



Afrikaner Bond
Afrikaner Broederbond
Afrikaner Party
AITUP
APO
AVF
BPC
Black Sash
CDA
CTEG
COD
Congress Alliance
COSG
CP
Dominion Party
DP (1973–1977)
DP (1989–2000)
DPP
ECC
FA
FD
Genootskap van Regte Afrikaners
GNP
Het Volk
HNP
IDASA
ID
IP
ISL
Jeugkrag
Johannesburg Reform Committee
Labour Party (1910–1958)
Labour Party (1969–1994)
Liberal Party (1953–1968)
NA
NCP
Natal Indian Congress
NLP
NNP
NP
NPP
NRP
NUSAS
PFP
Progressive Party (Cape Colony)
Progressive Party
PRP
Radio Freedom
Reform Party
SABP
SADECO
SAIC
SASO
SAYCO
SAYRCO
South African Party (Cape Colony)
South African Party (1911–1934)
South African Party (1977–1980)
TNIP
Torch Commando
UFP
United Party
Unionist Party
Volksparty
Workers Party
WOSA





Trade unions and
social movements



APF
BCM
BLATU
CNETU
CTSWU
FCWU
FNETU
FOSATU
ICU
IWW
MUSA
NEUM
NURHS
PAWE
SAAPAWU
SACTU
SAIF
SARHU
SATUC
Die Spoorbund
UDF
Umkosi Wezintaba





Paramilitary and
terrorist organisations



APLA
ARM
BBB
Boeremag
Greyshirts
MK
Ossewabrandwag
Orde van die Dood
SANF








Histories of
political parties



African National Congress
Democratic Alliance
Pan Africanist Congress of Azania






 Category










v
t
e


Colonial conflicts involving the English/British Empire



17th
century



Virginia (1609–46)
Swally (1612)
Ormuz (1622)
Saint Kitts (1626)
Quebec (1628)
Pequot War (1634–38)
Acadia (1654–67)
Anglo-Spanish War (1654–60)
Jamaica (1655–1739)
King Philip's War (1675–78)
King William's War (1688–97)
Ghana (1694–1700)





18th
century



Queen Anne's War (1702–13)
Tuscarora War (1711–15)
Yamasee War (1715–17)
Father Rale's War/Dummer's War (1722–25)
War of Jenkins' Ear (1740–42)
King George's War (1744–48)
Carnatic Wars (1746–63)
Nova Scotia (1749–55)
French and Indian War (1754–63)
Seven Years' War (1756–63)
Anglo–Cherokee War (1758–61)
Jamaica (1762)
Anglo-Spanish War (1762–63)
Pontiac's War (1763–66)
Lord Dunmore's War (1774)
American Revolutionary War (1775–83)
First Anglo–Maratha War (1775–82)
Second Anglo–Mysore War (1779–84)
Gold Coast (1781–82)
Sumatra (1782–84)
Australian Frontier Wars (1788–1934)
Nootka Sound (1789)
Third Anglo–Mysore War (1789–92)
Cotiote (Wayanad) War (1793–1806)
Cape Colony (1795)
Jamaica (1795–96)
Ceylon (1795)
Kandyan Wars (1796–1818)
Malta (1798–1800)
Fourth Anglo–Mysore War (1798–99)
Dwyer's Guerrilla Campaign (1799–1803)





19th
century



Newfoundland (1800)
Castle Hill convict rebellion
Second Anglo–Maratha War (1803–05)
Suriname (1804)
Guiana (1804)
Cape Colony (1806)
Río de la Plata (1806–07)
Egypt (1807)
Malta (1807)
Reunion (1809)
Seychelles (1809)
Mauritius (1810)
Java (1810–11)
Xhosa Wars (1811–79)
Martinique (1809)
Guadeloupe (1810)
USA (1812–15)
Nepal (1814–16)
Guadeloupe (1815)
Cape Colony (1815)
Third Anglo-Maratha War (1817–18)
Guiana (1823)
Anglo-Ashanti wars (1824–1901)
First Anglo-Burmese War (1824–26)
Black War (Van Diemen's Land, 1828–32)
Jamaica (1831–32)
Malacca (1831–33)
Lower Canada (1837–38)
Upper Canada (1837–38)
Egyptian–Ottoman War (1839–41)
First Anglo-Afghan War (1839–42)
First Opium War (1839–42)
New Zealand Wars (1845–72)
First Anglo–Sikh War (1845–46)
Río de la Plata (1845–50)
Ceylon (1848)
Second Anglo–Sikh War (1848–49)
Second Anglo–Burmese War (1852)
Eureka Rebellion (1852)
Anglo–Persian War (1856–57)
Second Opium War (1856–60)
Indian Rebellion (1857–59)
Ambela Campaign (1863–64)
Bhutan War (1864–65)
Fenian Rebellion in Canada (1866–71)
Abyssinia (1868)
Manitoba (1870)
Perak (1875–76)
Anglo–Zulu War (1879)
Second Anglo-Afghan War (1879–80)
Basutoland (1880–81)
First Boer War (1880–81)
Mahdist War (1881–99)
Anglo-Egyptian War (1882)
Saskatchewan (1885)
Central Africa (1886–89)
Third Anglo-Burmese War (1885)
Mashonaland (1890)
Hunza-Nagar Campaign (1891)
Anglo-Manipur War (1891)
Matabeleland (1893–94)
North Borneo (1894–1905)
Chitral Expedition (1895)
Jameson Raid South Africa (1896)
Anglo–Zanzibar War (1896)
Matabeleland (1896–97)
Benin Expedition (1897)
Siege of Malakand (1897)
First Mohmand Campaign (1897–98)
Tirah Campaign (1897–98)
Six-Day War (1899)
Boxer Rebellion (1898–1901)
Second Boer War (1899–1902)





20th
century



Somaliland (1900–20)
West Africa (1901–02)
Tibet expedition (1903–04)
Bambatha Rebellion (1906)
Nyasaland (1915)
Nigeria (1915)
Nigeria (1918)
Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919)
Waziristan campaign (1919–1920)
Iraq (1920)
Malabar Rebellion (1921)
Kurdistan (1922–24)
Transjordan (1923)
Pink's War (1925)
Ikhwan Revolt (1927–30)
Barzani revolt (1931–32)
Second Mohmand Campaign (1935)
Palestine (1936–39)
Waziristan campaign (1936–1939)
Ethiopia (1943)
Indochina (1945–46)
Indonesia (1945)
Sarawak (1946–50)
Malayan Emergency (1948–60)
Mau Mau Uprising Kenya (1952–60)
Oman (1954–59)
Cyprus Emergency (1955–59)
Suez Crisis (1956)
Oman (1962–76)
Brunei (1962)
Sarawak (1962–90)
Malaysia (1962–66)
Aden (1963–67)
Falklands (1982)









Authority control



GND: 4147009-6












v
t
e


Major armed conflicts involving the Armed Forces of Sri Lanka



Internal



1971 JVP Insurrection
1987–89 JVP Insurrection
Sri Lankan Civil War





International



Battle of Vijithapura
Ming–Kotte War
Kotte conquest of the Jaffna Kingdom
Sinhalese–Portuguese War
Portuguese conquest of the Jaffna kingdom
Dutch–Portuguese War
British Expedition to Ceylon
Kandyan Wars (Great Rebellion of 1817–18)
Matale Rebellion
Second Boer War
World War I
World War II





Peacekeeping



United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon





Related articles



Military history
Ceylon in World War II











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Second_Boer_War&oldid=818450593"					Categories: Second Boer WarBoer Wars1899 in South Africa1900 in South Africa1901 in South Africa1902 in South Africa1890s in the South African Republic1900s in the South African Republic1890s in Transvaal1900s in TransvaalConflicts in 1899Conflicts in 1900Conflicts in 1901Conflicts in 1902Boer RepublicsBritish colonisation in AfricaWars involving the South African RepublicWars involving the states and peoples of AfricaWars involving the United KingdomAfrican resistance to colonialismHistory of the British EmpireMilitary history of the British EmpireVictorian eraGuerrilla warsSouth Africa–United Kingdom relationsWars involving AustraliaWars involving the British South Africa CompanyWars involving the Orange Free State1890s in South Africa1900s in South AfricaHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2017Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2010Articles needing more detailed referencesAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from February 2017EngvarB from November 2017NPOV disputes from March 2017All NPOV disputesUse dmy dates from November 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2017Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015Articles needing additional references from October 2012All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with local link different than on WikidataArticles with unsourced statements from June 2013Pages with citations lacking titlesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers