

Sensory nervous system



Typical sensory system: the visual system, illustrated by the classic Gray's FIG. 722– This scheme shows the flow of information from the eyes to the central connections of the optic nerves and optic tracts, to the visual cortex. Area V1 is the region of the brain which is engaged in vision.



Details


Identifiers


Latin
organa sensuum


TA
A15.0.00.000


FMA
75259


Anatomical terminology
[edit on Wikidata]







The visual system and the somatosensory system are active even during resting state fMRI






Activation and response in the sensory nervous system


The sensory nervous system is a part of the nervous system responsible for processing sensory information. A sensory system consists of sensory neurons (including the sensory receptor cells), neural pathways, and parts of the brain involved in sensory perception. Commonly recognized sensory systems are those for vision, hearing, touch, taste, smell, and balance. In short, senses are transducers from the physical world to the realm of the mind where we interpret the information, creating our perception of the world around us.[1]

Organisms need information to solve at least three kinds of problems: (a) to maintain an appropriate environment, i.e., homeostasis; (b) to time activities (e.g., seasonal changes in behavior) or synchronize activities with those of conspecifics; and (c) to locate and respond to resources or threats (e.g., by moving towards resources or evading or attacking threats). Organisms also need to transmit information in order to influence another's behavior: to identify themselves, warn conspecifics of danger, coordinate activities, or deceive.[2]

The receptive field is the area of the body or environment to which a receptor organ and receptor cells respond. For instance, the part of the world an eye can see, is its receptive field; the light that each rod or cone can see, is its receptive field.[3] Receptive fields have been identified for the visual system, auditory system and somatosensory system.



Contents


1 Stimulus
2 Senses and receptors

2.1 Receptors
2.2 Chemoreceptors
2.3 Photoreceptors
2.4 Mechanoreceptors
2.5 Thermoreceptors
2.6 Nociceptors


3 Sensory cortex

3.1 Somatosensory cortex
3.2 Visual cortex
3.3 Auditory cortex
3.4 Primary olfactory cortex
3.5 Gustatory cortex


4 Human sensory system
5 Diseases
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Stimulus[edit]
Sensory systems code for four aspects of a stimulus; type (modality), intensity, location, and duration. Arrival time of a sound pulse and phase differences of continuous sound are used for sound localization. Certain receptors are sensitive to certain types of stimuli (for example, different mechanoreceptors respond best to different kinds of touch stimuli, like sharp or blunt objects). Receptors send impulses in certain patterns to send information about the intensity of a stimulus (for example, how loud a sound is). The location of the receptor that is stimulated gives the brain information about the location of the stimulus (for example, stimulating a mechanoreceptor in a finger will send information to the brain about that finger). The duration of the stimulus (how long it lasts) is conveyed by firing patterns of receptors. These impulses are transmitted to the brain through afferent neurons.
Senses and receptors[edit]
While debate exists among neurologists as to the specific number of senses due to differing definitions of what constitutes a sense, Gautama Buddha and Aristotle classified five ‘traditional’ human senses which have become universally accepted: touch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing. Other senses that have been well-accepted in most mammals, including humans, include nociception, equilibrioception, kinaesthesia, and thermoception. Furthermore, some nonhuman animals have been shown to possess alternate senses, including magnetoception and electroreception.[4]
Receptors[edit]
Main article: sensory receptor
The initialization of sensation stems from the response of a specific receptor to a physical stimulus. The receptors which react to the stimulus and initiate the process of sensation are commonly characterized in four distinct categories: chemoreceptors, photoreceptors, mechanoreceptors, and thermoreceptors. All receptors receive distinct physical stimuli and transduce the signal into an electrical action potential. This action potential then travels along afferent neurons to specific brain regions where it is processed and interpreted.[5]
Chemoreceptors[edit]
Main article: Chemoreceptor
Chemoreceptors, or chemosensors, detect certain chemical stimuli and transduce that signal into an electrical action potential. The two primary types of chemoreceptors are:

Distance chemoreceptors are integral to receiving stimuli in the olfactory system through both olfactory receptor neurons and neurons in the vomeronasal organ.
Direct chemoreceptors include the taste buds in the gustatory system as well as receptors in the aortic bodies which detect changes in oxygen concentration.[6]

Photoreceptors[edit]
Main article: Photoreceptor cell
Photoreceptors are capable of phototransduction, a process which converts light (electromagnetic radiation) into, among other types of energy, a membrane potential. The three primary types of photoreceptors are: Cones are photoreceptors which respond significantly to color. In humans the three different types of cones correspond with a primary response to short wavelength (blue), medium wavelength (green), and long wavelength (yellow/red).[7] Rods are photoreceptors which are very sensitive to the intensity of light, allowing for vision in dim lighting. The concentrations and ratio of rods to cones is strongly correlated with whether an animal is diurnal or nocturnal. In humans rods outnumber cones by approximately 20:1, while in nocturnal animals, such as the tawny owl, the ratio is closer to 1000:1.[7] Ganglion Cells reside in the adrenal medulla and retina where they are involved in the sympathetic response. Of the ~1.3 million ganglion cells present in the retina, 1-2% are believed to be photosensitive ganglia.[8] These photosensitive ganglia play a role in conscious vision for some animals,[9] and are believed to do the same in humans.[10]
Mechanoreceptors[edit]
Main article: Mechanoreceptor
Mechanoreceptors are sensory receptors which respond to mechanical forces, such as pressure or distortion.[11] While mechanoreceptors are present in hair cells and play an integral role in the vestibular and auditory systems, the majority of mechanoreceptors are cutaneous and are grouped into four categories:

Slowly adapting type 1 receptors have small receptive fields and respond to static stimulation. These receptors are primarily used in the sensations of form and roughness.
Slowly adapting type 2 receptors have large receptive fields and respond to stretch. Similarly to type 1, they produce sustained responses to a continued stimuli.
Rapidly adapting receptors have small receptive fields and underlie the perception of slip.
Pacinian receptors have large receptive fields and are the predominant receptors for high-frequency vibration.

Thermoreceptors[edit]
Main article: Thermoreceptor
Thermoreceptors are sensory receptors which respond to varying temperatures. While the mechanisms through which these receptors operate is unclear, recent discoveries have shown that mammals have at least two distinct types of thermoreceptors:[12]

The end-bulb of Krause, or bulboid corpuscle, detects temperatures above body temperature.
Ruffini’s end organ detects temperatures below body temperature.

Nociceptors[edit]
Main article: Nociceptor
Nociceptors respond to potentially damaging stimuli by sending signals to the spinal cord and brain. This process, called nociception, usually causes the perception of pain.[13] They are found in internal organs, as well as on the surface of the body. Nociceptors detect different kinds of damaging stimuli or actual damage. Those that only respond when tissues are damaged are known as "sleeping" or "silent" nociceptors.

Thermal nociceptors are activated by noxious heat or cold at various temperatures.
Mechanical nociceptors respond to excess pressure or mechanical deformation.
Chemical nociceptors respond to a wide variety of chemicals, some of which are signs of tissue damage. They are involved in the detection of some spices in food.

Sensory cortex[edit]
All stimuli received by the receptors listed above are transduced to an action potential, which is carried along one or more afferent neurons towards a specific area of the brain. While the term sensory cortex is often used informally to refer to the somatosensory cortex, the term more accurately refers to the multiple areas of the brain at which senses are received to be processed. For the five traditional senses in humans, this includes the primary and secondary cortexes of the different senses: the somatosensory cortex, the visual cortex, the auditory cortex, the primary olfactory cortex, and the gustatory cortex.[14] Other modalities have corresponding sensory cortex areas as well, including the vestibular cortex for the sense of balance.[15]




Skin


Somatosensory cortex[edit]
Located in the parietal lobe, the primary somatosensory cortex is the primary receptive area for the sense of touch and proprioception in the somatosensory system. This cortex is further divided into Brodmann areas 1, 2, and 3. Brodmann area 3 is considered the primary processing center of the somatosensory cortex as it receives significantly more input from the thalamus, has neurons highly responsive to somatosensory stimuli, and can evoke somatic sensations through electrical stimulation. Areas 1 and 2 receive most of their input from area 3. There are also pathways for proprioception (via the cerebellum), and motor control (via Brodmann area 4). See also: S2 Secondary somatosensory cortex.




The human eye is the first element of a sensory system: in this case, vision, for the visual system.


Visual cortex[edit]
The visual cortex refers to the primary visual cortex, labeled V1 or Brodmann area 17, as well as the extrastriate visual cortical areas V2-V5.[16] Located in the occipital lobe, V1 acts as the primary relay station for visual input, transmitting information to two primary pathways labeled the dorsal and ventral streams. The dorsal stream includes areas V2 and V5, and is used in interpreting visual ‘where’ and ‘how.’ The ventral stream includes areas V2 and V4, and is used in interpreting ‘what.’[17] Increases in Task-negative activity are observed in the ventral attention network, after abrupt changes in sensory stimuli,[18] at the onset and offset of task blocks,[19] and at the end of a completed trial.[20]




Ear


Auditory cortex[edit]
Located in the temporal lobe, the auditory cortex is the primary receptive area for sound information. The auditory cortex is composed of Brodmann areas 41 and 42, also known as the anterior transverse temporal area 41 and the posterior transverse temporal area 42, respectively. Both areas act similarly and are integral in receiving and processing the signals transmitted from auditory receptors.




Nose


Primary olfactory cortex[edit]
Located in the temporal lobe, the primary olfactory cortex is the primary receptive area for olfaction, or smell. Unique to the olfactory and gustatory systems, at least in mammals, is the implementation of both peripheral and central mechanisms of action. The peripheral mechanisms involve olfactory receptor neurons which transduce a chemical signal along the olfactory nerve, which terminates in the olfactory bulb. The chemo-receptors involved in olfactory nervous cascade involve using G-protein receptors to send their chemical signals down said cascade. The central mechanisms include the convergence of olfactory nerve axons into glomeruli in the olfactory bulb, where the signal is then transmitted to the anterior olfactory nucleus, the piriform cortex, the medial amygdala, and the entorhinal cortex, all of which make up the primary olfactory cortex.
In contrast to vision and hearing, the olfactory bulbs are not cross-hemispheric; the right bulb connects to the right hemisphere and the left bulb connects to the left hemisphere.




Tongue


Gustatory cortex[edit]
The gustatory cortex is the primary receptive area for taste. The word taste is used in a technical sense to refer specifically to sensations coming from taste buds on the tongue. The five qualities of taste detected by the tongue include sourness, bitterness, sweetness, saltiness, and the protein taste quality, called umami. In contrast, the term flavor refers to the experience generated through integration of taste with smell and tactile information. The gustatory cortex consists of two primary structures: the anterior insula, located on the insular lobe, and the frontal operculum, located on the frontal lobe. Similarly to the olfactory cortex, the gustatory pathway operates through both peripheral and central mechanisms. Peripheral taste receptors, located on the tongue, soft palate, pharynx, and esophagus, transmit the received signal to primary sensory axons, where the signal is projected to the nucleus of the solitary tract in the medulla, or the gustatory nucleus of the solitary tract complex. The signal is then transmitted to the thalamus, which in turn projects the signal to several regions of the neocortex, including the gustatory cortex.[21]
The neural processing of taste is affected at nearly every stage of processing by concurrent somatosensory information from the tongue, that is, mouthfeel. Scent, in contrast, is not combined with taste to create flavor until higher cortical processing regions, such as the insula and orbitofrontal cortex.[22]
Human sensory system[edit]
The human sensory system consists of the following subsystems:

Visual system consists of the photoreceptor cells, optic nerve, and V1
Auditory system
Somatosensory system consists of the receptors, transmitters (pathways) leading to S1, and S1 that experiences the sensations labelled as touch or pressure, temperature (warm or cold), pain (including itch and tickle), and the sensations of muscle movement and joint position including posture, movement, and facial expression (collectively also called proprioception)
Gustatory system
Olfactory system
Vestibular system

Diseases[edit]




Disability-adjusted life year for sense organ diseases per 100,000 inhabitants in 2002.[23]

  no data
  less than 200
  200-400
  400-600
  600-800
  800-1000
  1000-1200
  1200-1400
  1400-1600
  1600-1800
  1800-2000
  2000-2300
  more than 2300





Amblyopia
Anacusis
Astigmatism (eye)
Cataract
Color blindness
Deafness
Hyperopia

See also[edit]

Multisensory integration
Neural adaptation
Neural coding
Sensor
Sensory augmentation
Sensory neuroscience

References[edit]


^ Krantz, John. "Experiencing Sensation and Perception - Chapter 1: What is Sensation and Perception?" (Pdf). p. 1.6. Retrieved May 16, 2013. 
^ Bowdan, E. and G.A. Wyse 1996. "Sensory Ecology: Introduction", The Biological Bulletin, Vol.191, No.1, pp.122–3, p.122.
^ Kolb & Whishaw: Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology (2003)
^ Hofle, M., Hauck, M., Engel, A. K., & Senkowski, D. (2010). Pain processing in multisensory environments. [Article]. Neuroforum, 16(2), 172.
^ [1] Archived January 12, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Satir, P. & Christensen, S.T. (2008) Structure and function of mammalian cilia. in Histochemistry and Cell Biology, Vol 129:6
^ a b "eye, human." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Ultimate Reference Suite. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, 2010.
^ Foster, R. G.; Provencio, I.; Hudson, D.; Fiske, S.; Grip, W.; Menaker, M. (1991). "Circadian photoreception in the retinally degenerate mouse (rd/rd)". Journal of Comparative Physiology A 169. doi:10.1007/BF00198171
^ Jennifer L. Ecker, Olivia N. Dumitrescu, Kwoon Y. Wong, Nazia M. Alam, Shih-Kuo Chen, Tara LeGates, Jordan M. Renna, Glen T. Prusky, David M. Berson, Samer Hattar. "Melanopsin-Expressing Retinal Ganglion-Cell Photoreceptors: Cellular Diversity and Role in Pattern Vision". Neuron. 67 (1). CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Horiguchi, H.; Winawer, J.; Dougherty, R. F.; Wandell, B. A. (2012). "Human trichromacy revisited". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 110 (3): E260–E269. doi:10.1073/pnas.1214240110. ISSN 0027-8424. 
^ Winter, R., Harrar, V., Gozdzik, M., & Harris, L. R. (2008). The relative timing of active and passive touch. [Proceedings Paper]. Brain Research, 1242, 54-58. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2008.06.090
^ Krantz, John. Experiencing Sensation and Perception. Pearson Education, Limited, 2009. p. 12.3
^ Sherrington C. The Integrative Action of the Nervous System. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1906.
^ Brynie, F.H. (2009). Brain Sense: The Science of the Senses and How We Process the World Around Us. American Management Association.
^ Thomas Brandt. "Vestibular cortex: its locations, functions, and disorders.". Vertigo. Springer. pp. 219–231. 
^ McKeeff, T. J., & Tong, F. (2007). The timing of perceptual decisions for ambiguous face stimuli in the human ventral visual cortex. [Article]. Cerebral Cortex, 17(3), 669-678. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhk015
^ Hickey, C., Chelazzi, L., & Theeuwes, J. (2010). Reward Changes Salience in Human Vision via the Anterior Cingulate. [Article]. Journal of Neuroscience, 30(33), 11096-11103. doi:10.1523/jneurosci.1026-10.2010
^ Downar, J., Crawley, A. P., Mikulis, D. J. & Dav is, K. D. (2000) Nature Neuroscience, 3, 277–283.
^ Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Barch, D. M., Gusnard, D. A. & Raichle, M. E. (2005). NeuroImage, 28, 956–966.
^ Shulman, G. I., Tansy, A. P., Kincade, M., Petersen, S. E., McAvoy, M. P. & Corbetta, M. (2002). Cerebral Cortex, 12, 590–600.
^ Purves, Dale et al. 2008. Neuroscience. Second Edition. Sinauer Associates Inc. Sunderland, MA.
^ Dana M. Small and Barry G. Green. "A Proposed Model of a Flavor Modality". In Murray MM, Wallace MT. The Neural Bases of Multisensory Processes. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
^ "Mortality and Burden of Disease Estimates for WHO Member States in 2002" (xls). World Health Organization. 2002. 


External links[edit]



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Sensory Systems





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sensory system.








v
t
e


Human systems and organs



Musculoskeletal




Skeletal system



Bone

Carpus
Collar bone (clavicle)
Thigh bone (femur)
Fibula
Humerus
Mandible
Metacarpus
Metatarsus
Ossicles
Patella
Phalanges
Radius
Skull
Tarsus
Tibia
Ulna
Rib
Vertebra
Pelvis
Sternum


Cartilage





Joints



Fibrous joint
Cartilaginous joint
Synovial joint





Muscular system



Muscle
Tendon
Diaphragm








Circulatory system




Cardiovascular system



peripheral

Artery
Vein
Lymphatic vessel


Heart





Lymphatic system



primary

Bone marrow
Thymus


secondary

Spleen
Lymph node


CNS equivalent

Glymphatic system










Nervous system





Brain
Spinal cord
Nerve


Sensory system

Ear
Eye







Integumentary system



Skin
Subcutaneous tissue
Breast

Mammary gland







Immune system



Myeloid

Myeloid immune system


Lymphoid

Lymphoid immune system







Respiratory system



Upper

Nose
Nasopharynx
Larynx


Lower

Trachea
Bronchus
Lung







Digestive system



Mouth

Salivary gland
Tongue


upper GI

Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Stomach


lower GI

Small intestine
Appendix
Colon
Rectum
Anus


accessory

Liver
Biliary tract
Pancreas







Urinary system



Genitourinary system
Kidney
Ureter
Bladder
Urethra





Reproductive system



Female

Uterus
Vagina
Vulva
Ovary
Placenta


Male

Scrotum
Penis
Prostate
Testicle
Seminal vesicle







Endocrine system



Pituitary
Pineal
Thyroid
Parathyroid
Adrenal
Islets of Langerhans












v
t
e


The sensory system



Special senses



Sight

Visual system


Hearing

Auditory system


Smell

Olfactory system


Taste (Gustatory system)





Touch and position



Pain

Nociception


Temperature

Thermoception


Sense of balance

Vestibular system


Mechanoreception

Pressure
vibration


Proprioception

Sense of body parts and movement







Other



Sensory receptor
Multisensory integration
Sensory processing
Chemoreception












v
t
e


Anatomy of the globe of the eye



Fibrous tunic (outer)




Sclera



Episcleral layer
Schlemm's canal
Trabecular meshwork





Cornea



Limbus
layers

Epithelium
Bowman's
Stroma
Dua's layer
Descemet's
Endothelium















































Uvea/vascular tunic (middle)




Choroid



Capillary lamina of choroid
Bruch's membrane
Sattler's layer





Ciliary body



Ciliary processes
Ciliary muscle
Pars plicata
Pars plana





Iris



Stroma
Pupil
Iris dilator muscle
Iris sphincter muscle








Retina (inner)




Layers



Inner limiting membrane
Nerve fiber layer
Ganglion cell layer
Inner plexiform layer
Inner nuclear layer


Outer plexiform layer
Outer nuclear layer


External limiting membrane
Layer of rods and cones
Retinal pigment epithelium





Cells



Photoreceptor cells (Cone cell, Rod cell) → (Horizontal cell) → Bipolar cell → (Amacrine cell) → Retina ganglion cell (Midget cell, Parasol cell, Bistratified cell, Giant retina ganglion cells, Photosensitive ganglion cell) → Diencephalon: P cell, M cell, K cell, Muller glia





Other



Macula

Perifoveal area
Parafoveal area
Fovea

Foveal avascular zone
Foveola




Optic disc

Optic cup


Ora serrata








Anatomical regions of the eye




Anterior segment



Adnexa
Fibrous tunic
Anterior chamber
Aqueous humour
Iris
Posterior chamber
Ciliary body
Lens

Capsule of lens
Zonule of Zinn







Posterior segment



Vitreous chamber

Vitreous body


Retina
Choroid








Other



Keratocytes
Ocular immune system
Tapetum lucidum
Eye care professional
Eye disease
Refractive error
Accommodation
Physiological Optics
Visual perception












v
t
e


Anatomy of hearing and balance



Outer ear



Auricle

helix
antihelix
tragus
antitragus
intertragic notch
earlobe


Ear canal
Auricular muscles
Eardrum

umbo
pars flaccida







Middle ear




Tympanic cavity



Medial structures

oval window
round window
secondary tympanic membrane
prominence of facial canal
promontory of tympanic cavity


Posterior structures

mastoid cells
aditus to mastoid antrum
pyramidal eminence







Ossicles



Malleus

superior ligament
lateral ligament
anterior ligament


Incus

superior ligament
posterior ligament


Stapes

annular ligament


Muscles

stapedius
tensor tympani







Auditory tube /
Eustachian tube



Torus tubarius








Inner ear/
(membranous labyrinth,
bony labyrinth)




Auditory system/
Cochlear labyrinth




General cochlea



Vestibular duct
Helicotrema
Tympanic duct
Modiolus
Cochlear cupula





Perilymphatic space



Perilymph
Cochlear aqueduct





Cochlear duct /
scala media



Reissner's/vestibular membrane
Basilar membrane
Reticular membrane


Endolymph
Stria vascularis
Spiral ligament


Organ of Corti

stereocilia
tip links


Tectorial membrane
Sulcus spiralis

externus
internus


Spiral limbus





Cells



Claudius cell
Boettcher cell








Vestibular system/
Vestibular labyrinth




Vestibule



Utricle

macula


Saccule

macula


Kinocilium
Otolith
Vestibular aqueduct

endolymphatic duct
endolymphatic sac


Ductus reuniens





Semicircular canals



Superior semicircular canal
Posterior semicircular canal
Horizontal semicircular canal


Ampullary cupula
Ampullae

crista ampullaris




















v
t
e


Anatomy of taste



Tongue



Taste bud
Lingual papilla

Vallate papilla
Foliate papilla
Fungiform papilla
Filiform papilla







Path




medulla



Solitary tract

VII
IX
X


Solitary nucleus

Gustatory nucleus







pons



Central tegmental tract
Medial parabrachial nucleus

Hypothalamus
Amygdala







thalamus



Ventral posteromedial nucleus





cerebrum



Posterior limb of internal capsule
Gustatory cortex








Other



Basic tastes












v
t
e


Anatomy of smell



Microanatomy



Epithelium

glands
mucosa


Sustentacular cell
Tufted cell





Olfactory nerve: 1° neuron



Olfactory receptor neurons (Olfactory receptor) → Olfactory bulb (Glomeruli)





Olfactory nerve: 2° neuron



Mitral cells → Olfactory tract → Olfactory trigone





Lateral olfactory stria/
Primary olfactory cortex







Piriform cortex
EC-hippocampus system

Entorhinal cortex
Hippocampal formation


Prepyriform area
Periamygdaloid cortex








Stria medullaris → Habenular nuclei








Amygdala → Stria terminalis → Hypothalamus








Medial forebrain bundle → Hypothalamus








Medial olfactory stria



Anterior olfactory nucleus












v
t
e


Sensory receptors



Touch



Mechanoreceptor
Vibration

Lamellar corpuscle


Light touch

Tactile corpuscle


Pressure

Merkel nerve ending


Stretch

Bulbous corpuscle







Pain



Free nerve ending
Nociceptors





Temperature



Thermoreceptors





Proprioception



Golgi organ
Muscle spindle

Intrafusal muscle fiber
Nuclear chain fiber
Nuclear bag fiber







Other



Hair cells
Baroreceptor












v
t
e


Systems science



Systems
types



Anatomical
Art
Biological
Complex
Complex adaptive
Conceptual
Coupled human–environment
Database
Dynamical
Ecological
Economic
Energy
Formal
Holarchic
Information
Legal
Measurement
Metric
Multi-agent
Nervous
Nonlinear
Operating
Physical
Planetary
Political
Sensory
Social
Star
Writing





Theoretical
fields







Chaos theory
Complex systems
Control theory
Cybernetics
Earth system science
Living systems
Sociotechnical system
Systemics
Urban metabolism
World-systems theory








analysis
biology
dynamics
ecology
engineering
neuroscience
pharmacology
psychology
theory
thinking








Systems
scientists



Alexander Bogdanov
Russell L. Ackoff
William Ross Ashby
Ruzena Bajcsy
Béla H. Bánáthy
Gregory Bateson
Anthony Stafford Beer
Richard E. Bellman
Ludwig von Bertalanffy
Margaret Boden
Kenneth E. Boulding
Murray Bowen
Kathleen Carley
Mary Cartwright
C. West Churchman
Manfred Clynes
George Dantzig
Edsger W. Dijkstra
Heinz von Foerster
Stephanie Forrest
Jay Wright Forrester
Barbara Grosz
Charles A S Hall
Lydia Kavraki
James J. Kay
Faina M. Kirillova
George Klir
Allenna Leonard
Edward Norton Lorenz
Niklas Luhmann
Humberto Maturana
Margaret Mead
Donella Meadows
Mihajlo D. Mesarovic
James Grier Miller
Radhika Nagpal
Howard T. Odum
Talcott Parsons
Ilya Prigogine
Qian Xuesen
Anatol Rapoport
Peter Senge
Claude Shannon
Katia Sycara
Francisco Varela
Manuela M. Veloso
Kevin Warwick
Norbert Wiener
Jennifer Wilby
Anthony Wilden





Applications



Systems theory in anthropology
Systems theory in archaeology
Systems theory in political science





Organizations



List
Principia Cybernetica








 Systems science portal









Authority control



GND: 4055114-3
NDL: 00564888











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sensory_nervous_system&oldid=811176320"					Categories: Nervous systemSensory systemsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 maint: Uses editors parameterWikipedia articles with GND identifiers