"Serf" redirects here. For the saint, see Saint Serf. For the type of magnetometer, see SERF.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of a series on
Slavery







Contemporary


Child labour
Conscription
Debt
Forced marriage

Bride buying
Wife selling


Forced prostitution
Human trafficking
Peonage
Penal labour
Sexual slavery
Wage slavery








Historical


Antiquity


Ancient Rome
Babylonia
Ancient Greece


Topics and practices


Atlantic slave trade

Middle Passage


Arab slave trade

Ghilman
Mamluk
Saqaliba


Aztec
Blackbirding
Byzantine Empire
Coolie
Corvée labor
Field slaves in the United States
House slaves
Kholop
Medieval Europe
Panyarring
Thrall
Serfs

History
Russia


Slave market
Slave raiding


Naval


Galley slave
Impressment
Pirates
Shanghaiing
Slave ship








By country or region


Sub-Saharan Africa


Contemporary Africa
Slavery on the Barbary Coast
Barbary slave trade
Slave Coast
Angola
Chad
Ethiopia
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Seychelles


North and South America


Americas indigenous

U.S. Natives


Brazil

Lei Áurea


Canada
Caribbean

Barbados
Code Noir


Cuba
Haiti

revolt
Restavek


Latin America
Puerto Rico
Trinidad
United States

colonial
maps
female
partus
penal labor
Slave codes
interregional
Human trafficking


Virgin Islands


Central, East, and South Asia


Human trafficking in Southeast Asia
Bhutan
China

Booi Aha
Laogai


India

Debt bondage
Chukri System


Japan

comfort women


South Korea

Yankee princess


North Korea
Vietnam


Australia and Oceania


Blackbirding in Australia
Human trafficking in Australia
Slave raiding in Easter Island
Human trafficking in Papua New Guinea
Blackbirding in Polynesia


Europe and North Asia


Sex trafficking in Europe
Britain
Denmark
Dutch Republic
Germany in World War II
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Spain

colonies


Sweden


North Africa and West Asia


Iran
Libya
Human trafficking in the Middle East
Ottoman Empire
Yemen








Religion


Bible
Christianity

Catholicism
Mormonism


Islam

21st century


Judaism
Bahá'í Faith








Opposition and resistance


Timeline
Abolitionism

U.K.
U.S.


Anti-Slavery International
Blockade of Africa

U.K.
U.S.


Compensated emancipation
Freedman

manumission


Freedom suit
Abolitionists
Slave Power
Underground Railroad

songs


Slave rebellion
Slave Trade Acts
International law
13th Amendment to the United States Constitution








Related


Common law
Indentured servitude
Unfree labour
Fugitive slaves

laws
Great Dismal Swamp maroons


List of slaves

owners


Slave narrative

films
songs


Slave name
Slave catcher
Slave patrol
Slave Route Project
Treatment in U.S.

breeding
court cases
Washington
Jefferson
Adams
Lincoln
40 acres
Freedmen's Bureau
bit


Emancipation Day









v
t
e






Feudal titles
and status




Lord Paramount


Lord of the manor


Mesne lord


Esquire


Gentleman


Franklin


Yeoman


Freeman


Villein


Bordar


Cottar


Serf


Vagabond


Slave





v
t
e





Serfdom is the status of many peasants under feudalism, specifically relating to manorialism. It was a condition of bondage, which developed primarily during the High Middle Ages in Europe and lasted in some countries until the mid-19th century.
Serfs who occupied a plot of land were required to work for the lord of the manor who owned that land. In return they were entitled to protection, justice, and the right to cultivate certain fields within the manor to maintain their own subsistence. Serfs were often required not only to work on the lord's fields, but also in his mines and forests and to labor to maintain roads. The manor formed the basic unit of feudal society, and the lord of the manor and the villeins, and to a certain extent serfs, were bound legally: by taxation in the case of the former, and economically and socially in the latter.
The decline of serfdom in Western Europe has sometimes been attributed to the widespread plague epidemic of the Black Death, which reached Europe in 1347 and caused massive fatalities, disrupting society.[1] The decline had begun before that date. Serfdom became increasingly rare in most of Western Europe after the Renaissance. But, conversely it grew stronger in Central and Eastern Europe, where it had previously been less common (this phenomenon was known as "later serfdom").
In Eastern Europe the institution persisted until the mid-19th century. In the Austrian Empire serfdom was abolished by the 1781 Serfdom Patent; corvée continued to exist until 1848. Serfdom was abolished in Russia in the 1860s.[2] In Finland, Norway and Sweden, feudalism was never fully established, and serfdom did not exist; however, serfdom-like institutions did exist in both Denmark (the stavnsbånd, from 1733 to 1788) and its vassal Iceland (the more restrictive vistarband, from 1490 until 1894).
According to Joseph R. Strayer, the concept of feudalism can also be applied to the societies of ancient Persia, ancient Mesopotamia, Egypt (Sixth to Twelfth dynasty), Muslim India, China (Zhou dynasty and end of Han dynasty) and Japan during the Shogunate. James Lee and Cameron Campbell describe the Chinese Qing dynasty (1644–1912) as also maintaining a form of serfdom.[3]
Melvyn Goldstein described Tibet as having had serfdom until 1959,[4][5] but whether or not the Tibetan form of peasant tenancy that qualified as serfdom was widespread is contested by other scholars.[6][7] Bhutan is described by Tashi Wangchuk, a Bhutanese civil servant, as having officially abolished serfdom by 1959, but he believes that less than or about 10% of poor peasants were in copyhold situations.[8]
The United Nations 1956 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery also prohibits serfdom as a form of slavery.[citation needed]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Dependency and the lower orders

2.1 Becoming a serf
2.2 Class system

2.2.1 Freemen
2.2.2 Villeins
2.2.3 Bordars and cottagers
2.2.4 Slaves


2.3 Duties
2.4 Rights
2.5 Variations


3 History

3.1 Russia


4 Dates of emancipation from serfdom in various countries
5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Etymology




Costumes of slaves or serfs, from the sixth to the twelfth centuries, collected by H. de Vielcastel from original documents in European libraries


The word serf originated from the Middle French serf and was derived from the Latin servus ("slave"). In Late Antiquity and most of the Middle Ages, what are now called serfs were usually designated in Latin as coloni. As slavery gradually disappeared and the legal status of servi became nearly identical to that of the coloni, the term changed meaning into the modern concept of "serf". Serfdom was coined in 1850.[citation needed]
Dependency and the lower orders
Serfs had a specific place in feudal society, as did barons and knights: in return for protection, a serf would reside upon and work a parcel of land within the manor of his lord. Thus the manorial system exhibited a degree of reciprocity.
One rationale held that a serf "worked for all" while a knight or baron "fought for all" and a churchman "prayed for all"; thus everyone had a place. The serf was the worst fed and rewarded, but at least he had his place and, unlike slaves, had certain rights in land and property.
A lord of the manor could not sell his serfs as a Roman might sell his slaves. On the other hand, if he chose to dispose of a parcel of land, the serfs associated with that land stayed with it to serve their new lord; simply speaking, they were implicitly sold in mass and as a part of a lot. This unified system preserved for the lord long-acquired knowledge of practices suited to the land. Further, a serf could not abandon his lands without permission,[9][citation needed] nor did he possess a saleable title in them.[10]
Becoming a serf
A freeman became a serf usually through force or necessity. Sometimes the greater physical and legal force of a local magnate intimidated freeholders or allodial owners into dependency. Often a few years of crop failure, a war, or brigandage might leave a person unable to make his own way. In such a case he could strike a bargain with a lord of a manor. In exchange for gaining protection, his service was required: in labour, produce, or cash, or a combination of all. These bargains became formalized in a ceremony known as "bondage", in which a serf placed his head in the lord's hands, akin to the ceremony of homage where a vassal placed his hands between those of his overlord. These oaths bound the lord and his new serf in a feudal contract and defined the terms of their agreement.[11] Often these bargains were severe.
A 7th-century Anglo Saxon "Oath of Fealty" states:

By the Lord before whom this sanctuary is holy, I will to N. be true and faithful, and love all which he loves and shun all which he shuns, according to the laws of God and the order of the world. Nor will I ever with will or action, through word or deed, do anything which is unpleasing to him, on condition that he will hold to me as I shall deserve it, and that he will perform everything as it was in our agreement when I submitted myself to him and chose his will.

To become a serf was a commitment that encompassed all aspects of the serf's life.
Moreover, the children born to a serf inherited the status of the parent, and were considered born into serfdom at birth. By taking on the duties of serfdom, individuals bound not only themselves but their future progeny.
Class system
The social class of the peasantry can be differentiated into smaller categories. These distinctions were often less clear than suggested by their different names. Most often, there were two types of peasants:

freemen, workers whose tenure within the manor was freehold
villein

Lower classes of peasants, known as cottars or bordars, generally comprising the younger sons of villeins;[12][13] vagabonds; and slaves, made up the lower class of workers.
Freemen
Freemen, or free tenants held their land by one of a variety of contracts of feudal land-tenure and were essentially rent-paying tenant farmers who owed little or no service to the lord, and had a good degree of security of tenure and independence. In parts of 11th-century England freemen made up only 10% of the peasant population, and in the rest of Europe their numbers were small.
Villeins
See also: Villein
A villein (or villain) represented the most common type of serf in the Middle Ages. Villeins had more rights and higher status than the lowest serf, but existed under a number of legal restrictions that differentiated them from freemen. Villeins generally rented small homes, with or without land. As part of the contract with the landlord, the lord of the manor, they were expected to spend some of their time working on the lord's fields. The requirement often was not greatly onerous, contrary to popular belief, and was often only seasonal, for example the duty to help at harvest-time.[citation needed] The rest of their time was spent farming their own land for their own profit.
Like other types of serfs, villeins had to provide other services, possibly in addition to paying rent of money or produce. Villeins were somehow retained on their land and by unmentioned manners could not move away without their lord's consent and the acceptance of the lord to whose manor they proposed to migrate to. Villeins were generally able to hold their own property, unlike slaves. Villeinage, as opposed to other forms of serfdom, was most common in Continental European feudalism, where land ownership had developed from roots in Roman law.
A variety of kinds of villeinage existed in Europe in the Middle Ages. Half-villeins received only half as many strips of land for their own use and owed a full complement of labour to the lord, often forcing them to rent out their services to other serfs to make up for this hardship. Villeinage was not, however, a purely uni-directional exploitative relationship. In the Middle Ages, land within a lord's manor provided sustenance and survival, and being a villein guaranteed access to land, and crops secure from theft by marauding robbers. Landlords, even where legally entitled to do so, rarely evicted villeins because of the value of their labour. Villeinage was much preferable to being a vagabond, a slave, or an unlanded labourer.
In many medieval countries, a villein could gain freedom by escaping from a manor to a city or borough and living there for more than a year; but this action involved the loss of land rights and agricultural livelihood, a prohibitive price unless the landlord was especially tyrannical or conditions in the village were unusually difficult.
Bordars and cottagers
In England the Domesday Book, of 1086, uses bordarii (bordar) and cottarii (cottar) as interchangeable terms, "cottar" deriving from the native Anglo-Saxon tongue whereas "bordar" derived from the French.[14]




Punishment with a knout. Whipping was a common punishment for Russian serfs.[15]


Status-wise, the bordar or cottar ranked below a serf in the social hierarchy of a manor, holding a cottage, garden and just enough land to feed a family. In England, at the time of the Domesday Survey, this would have comprised between about 1 and 5 acres (0.4 and 2.0 hectares).[16] Under an Elizabethan statute, the Erection of Cottages Act 1588, the cottage had to be built with at least 4 acres (0.02 km2; 0.01 sq mi) of land.[17] However, the later Enclosures Acts (1604 onwards) removed the cottars' right to any land: "before the Enclosures Act the cottager was a farm labourer with land and after the Enclosures Act the cottager was a farm labourer without land".[18]
The bordars and cottars did not own their draught oxen or horses. The Domesday Book showed that England comprised 12% freeholders, 35% serfs or villeins, 30% cotters and bordars, and 9% slaves.[16]
Slaves
The last type of serf was the slave. Slaves had the fewest rights and benefits from the manor. They owned no tenancy in land, worked for the lord exclusively and survived on donations from the landlord. It was always in the interest of the lord to prove that a servile arrangement existed, as this provided him with greater rights to fees and taxes. The status of a man was a primary issue in determining a person's rights and obligations in many of the manorial court-cases of the period. Also, runaway slaves could be beaten if caught.
Duties




Reeve and serfs in feudal England, c. 1310


The usual serf (not including slaves or cottars) paid his fees and taxes in the form of seasonally appropriate labour. Usually a portion of the week was devoted to ploughing his lord's fields held in demesne, harvesting crops, digging ditches, repairing fences, and often working in the manor house. The remainder of the serf's time he spent tending his own fields, crops and animals in order to provide for his family. Most manorial work was segregated by gender during the regular times of the year; however, during the harvest, the whole family was expected to work the fields.
A major difficulty of a serf's life was that his work for his lord coincided with, and took precedence over, the work he had to perform on his own lands: when the lord's crops were ready to be harvested, so were his own. On the other hand, the serf of a benign lord could look forward to being well fed during his service; it was a lord without foresight who did not provide a substantial meal for his serfs during the harvest and planting times.[citation needed] In exchange for this work on the lord's demesne, the serfs had certain privileges and rights, including for example the right to gather deadwood – an essential source of fuel – from their lord's forests.
In addition to service, a serf was required to pay certain taxes and fees. Taxes were based on the assessed value of his lands and holdings. Fees were usually paid in the form of agricultural produce rather than cash. The best ration of wheat from the serf's harvest often went to the landlord. Generally hunting and trapping of wild game by the serfs on the lord's property was prohibited. On Easter Sunday the peasant family perhaps might owe an extra dozen eggs, and at Christmas a goose was perhaps required too. When a family member died, extra taxes were paid to the lord as a form of feudal relief to enable the heir to keep the right to till what land he had. Any young woman who wished to marry a serf outside of her manor was forced to pay a fee for the right to leave her lord, and in compensation for her lost labour.
Often there were arbitrary tests to judge the worthiness of their tax payments. A chicken, for example, might be required to be able to jump over a fence of a given height to be considered old enough or well enough to be valued for tax purposes. The restraints of serfdom on personal and economic choice were enforced through various forms of manorial customary law and the manorial administration and court baron.
It was also a matter of discussion whether serfs could be required by law in times of war or conflict to fight for their lord's land and property. In the case of their lord's defeat, their own fate might be uncertain, so the serf certainly had an interest in supporting his lord.
Rights
Within his constraints, a serf had some freedoms. Though the common wisdom is that a serf owned "only his belly"—even his clothes were the property, in law, of his lord—a serf might still accumulate personal property and wealth, and some serfs became wealthier than their free neighbours, although this happened rarely.[citation needed] A well-to-do serf might even be able to buy his freedom.
A serf could grow what crop he saw fit on his lands, although a serf's taxes often had to be paid in wheat. The surplus he would sell at market.
The landlord could not dispossess his serfs without legal cause and was supposed to protect them from the depredations of robbers or other lords, and he was expected to support them by charity in times of famine. Many such rights were enforceable by the serf in the manorial court.[citation needed]
Variations
Forms of serfdom varied greatly through time and regions. In some places serfdom was merged with or exchanged for various forms of taxation.
The amount of labour required varied. In Poland, for example, it was commonly a few days per year per household in the 13th century. One day per week per household in the 14th century. Four days per week per household in the 17th century. Six days per week per household in the 18th century. Early serfdom in Poland was mostly limited on the royal territories (królewszczyzny).
"Per household" means that every dwelling had to give a worker for the required number of days.[19] For example, in the 18th century, six people: a peasant, his wife, three children and a hired worker might be required to work for their lord one day a week, which would be counted as six days of labour.
Serfs served on occasion as soldiers in the event of conflict and could earn freedom or even ennoblement for valour in combat.[clarification needed] Serfs could purchase their freedom, be manumitted by generous owners, or flee to towns or to newly settled land where few questions were asked. Laws varied from country to country: in England a serf who made his way to a chartered town (i.e. a borough) and evaded recapture for a year and a day obtained his freedom and became a burgher of the town.
History
Main article: History of serfdom
Social institutions similar to serfdom were known in ancient times. The status of the helots in the ancient Greek city-state of Sparta resembled that of the medieval serfs. By the 3rd century AD, the Roman Empire faced a labour shortage. Large Roman landowners increasingly relied on Roman freemen, acting as tenant farmers, instead of slaves to provide labour.[20]
These tenant farmers, eventually known as coloni, saw their condition steadily erode. Because the tax system implemented by Diocletian assessed taxes based on both land and the inhabitants of that land, it became administratively inconvenient for peasants to leave the land where they were counted in the census.[20]
However, medieval serfdom really began with the breakup of the Carolingian Empire around the 10th century.[citation needed] During this period, powerful feudal lords encouraged the establishment of serfdom as a source of agricultural labor. Serfdom, indeed, was an institution that reflected a fairly common practice whereby great landlords were assured that others worked to feed them and were held down, legally and economically, while doing so.
This arrangement provided most of the agricultural labour throughout the Middle Ages. Slavery persisted right through the Middle Ages,[21] but it was rare.
In the later Middle Ages serfdom began to disappear west of the Rhine even as it spread through eastern Europe. Serfdom reached Eastern Europe centuries later than Western Europe—it became dominant around the 15th century. In many of these countries serfdom was abolished during the Napoleonic invasions of the early 19th century, though in some it persisted until mid- or late- 19th century.




Galician slaughter in 1846. It was a revolt against serfdom, directed against manorial property and oppression.


Russia
Main article: Serfdom in Russia
Serfdom became the dominant form of relation between Russian peasants and nobility in the 17th century. Serfdom only existed in central and southern areas of the Russian Empire. It was never established in the North, in the Urals, and in Siberia. According to the Encyclopedia of Human Rights:

In 1649 up to three-quarters of Muscovy's peasants, or 13 to 14 million people, were serfs whose material lives were barely distinguishable from slaves. Perhaps another 1.5 million were formally enslaved, with Russian slaves serving Russian masters.[22]

Russia's over 23 million privately held serfs were freed from their lords by an edict of Alexander II in 1861. The owners were compensated through taxes on the freed serfs. State serfs were emancipated in 1866.[23]
Dates of emancipation from serfdom in various countries





Scotland: neyfs (serfs) disappeared by the late 14th century.[24] However, in the salt and coal mining industries a form of serfdom survived until the Colliers (Scotland) Act 1799.[25][26]
England and Wales: obsolete by 15th–16th century,[27]
Wallachia: August 5, 1746[28] (land reforms in 1864)
Moldavia: August 6, 1749[28] (land reforms in 1864)
Savoy: 19 December 1771
Austria: 1 November 1781 (first step; second step: 1848)
Bohemia: 1 November 1781 (first step; second step: 1848)
Baden: 23 July 1783
Denmark: 20 June 1788
France: August 4, 1789
Helvetic Republic: 4 May 1798
Batavian Republic (Netherlands): constitution of 12 June 1798 (in theory; in practice with the introduction of the French Code Napoléon in 1811)
Serbia: 1804 (de facto, de jure in 1830)
Schleswig-Holstein: 19 December 1804
Swedish Pomerania: 4 July 1806
Duchy of Warsaw (Poland): 22 July 1807
Prussia: 9 October 1807 (effectively 1811–1823)
Mecklenburg: October 1807 (effectively 1820)
Bavaria: 31 August 1808
Nassau: 1 September 1812
Argentina: 1813
Governorate of Estonia: 23 March 1816




Governorate of Courland: 25 August 1817
Württemberg: 18 November 1817
Governorate of Livonia: 26 March 1819
Hanover: 1831
Saxony: 17 March 1832
Hungary: 11 April 1848
Croatia: First steps in 1780 and 1785.[29] Final step on 8 May 1848
Austrian Empire: 7 September 1848[30]
Bulgaria: 1858 (de jure by Ottoman Empire; de facto in 1880)
Russian Empire: 19 February 1861 (see Emancipation reform of 1861)
Tonga: 1862
Hawaii: 1835




The proclamation by count Josip Jelačić abolishing serfdom in the Kingdom of Croatia, dated 25 April 1848



Congress Poland: 1864[31]
Georgia: 1864–1871
Kalmykia: 1892
Iceland: 1894 (completely)
Bosnia and Herzegovina: 1918
Afghanistan: 1923
Bhutan: officially abolished by 1959[8]
Tibet, People's Republic of China: 29 March 1959, but use of "serf" for Tibet is controversial[4][5][6][7]





See also





Alipin
Birkarls
Colonus – early Medieval serfs
Cottar
Feudalism
Fiefdom
Folwark
Freeholder
Fugitive peasants
Hacienda – Spanish manors
Helot – ancient Greek serfs




Indentured servant
Josephinism
Kholop
Kolhoz
Maenor – Welsh manors
Manorialism
Ministerialis
Peonage
Russian Empire#Serfdom
Russian serfdom




Serfdom Patent
Serfdom in Tibet controversy
Serfs Emancipation Day
Sharecropping
Shōen – Japanese serfdom
Slavery
Smerd
Taeog – Welsh serfs
Thrall – Anglo-Saxon serfs
Yeoman – English freeholders





References


^ Austin Alchon, Suzanne (2003). A pest in the land: new world epidemics in a global perspective. University of New Mexico Press. p. 21. ISBN 0-8263-2871-7. 
^ Serf. A Dictionary of World History
^ Lee, James; Campbell, Cameron (1998). "Headship succession and household division in three Chinese banner serf populations, 1789–1909". Continuity and Change. 13 (1): 117–141. doi:10.1017/s0268416098003063. 
^ a b Goldstein, Melvyn C. (1986). "Re-examining Choice, Dependency and Command in the Tibetan Social System-'Tax Appendages' and Other Landless Serfs". Tibet Journal. 11 (4): 79–112. 
^ a b Goldstein, Melvyn C. (1988). "On the Nature of Tibetan Peasantry". Tibet Journal. 13 (1): 61–65. 
^ a b Barnett, Robert (2008) "What were the conditions regarding human rights in Tibet before democratic reform?" in: Authenticating Tibet: Answers to China’s 100 Questions, pp. 81–83. Eds. Anne-Marie Blondeau and Katia Buffetrille. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-24464-1 (cloth); ISBN 978-0-520-24928-8 (paper)
^ a b Samuel, Geoffrey (1982). "Tibet as a Stateless Society and Some Islamic Parallels". Journal of Asian Studies. 41 (2): 215–229. doi:10.2307/2054940. 
^ a b BhutanStudies.org.bt Archived 27 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine., T Wangchuk Change in the land use system in Bhutan: Ecology, History, Culture, and Power Nature Conservation Section. DoF, MoA
^ "serfdom". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-06-06. 
^ "Khan Academy". Khan Academy. Retrieved 2017-06-06. 
^ Marc Bloch, Feudal Society: The Growth of the Ties of Dependence.
^ Studies of field systems in the British Isles By Alan R. H. Baker, Robin Alan Butlin
^ An Economic History of the British Isles By Arthur Birnie. P. 218
^ Hallam, H.E.; Finberg; Thirsk, Joan, eds. (1988). The Agrarian History of England and Wales: 1042–1350. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. p. 58. ISBN 0-521-20073-3. 
^ Chapman, Tim (2001). Imperial Russia, 1801–1905. Routledge. p.83. ISBN 0-415-23110-8
^ a b Daniel D. McGarry, Medieval history and civilization (1976) p 242
^ Elmes, James (1827). On Architectural Jurisprudence; in which the Constitutions, Canons, Laws and Customs etc. London: W.Benning. pp. 178–179. 
^ Hammond, J L; Barbara Hammond (1912). The Village Labourer 1760–1832. London: Longman Green & Co. p. 100. 
^ Maria Bogucka, Białogłowa w dawnej Polsce, Warsaw, 1998, ISBN 83-85660-78-X, p. 72
^ a b Mackay, Christopher (2004). Ancient Rome: A Military and Political History. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 298. ISBN 0521809185. 
^ Ways of ending slavery
^ David P. Forsythe, ed. (2009). Encyclopedia of Human Rights: Vol. 1. Oxford University Press. p. 3. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ David Moon, Abolition of Serfdom in Russia: 1762–1907 (2002)
^ Richard Oram, 'Rural society: 1. medieval', in Michael Lynch (ed.), The Oxford Companion to Scottish History (Oxford: University Press, 2005), p. 549.
^ J. A. Cannon, 'Serfdom', in John Cannon (ed.), The Oxford Companion to British History (Oxford: University Press, 2002), p. 852.
^ The Colliers (Scotland) Act 1799 (text) (Hood family and coalmining)
^ Cannon, 'Serfdom', p. 852.
^ a b Djuvara, Neagu (2009). Între Orient și Occident. Țările române la începutul epocii moderne. Humanitas publishing house. p. 276. ISBN 978-973-50-2490-1. 
^ [1] Croatian encyclopedia, 1780 queen Maria Theresa introduced the regulations in Royal Croatia. 1785. king Joseph II introduced the Patent of freedom of movement of Serfs which gave them the right of movement, education and property, also ended their dependence to feudal lords.
^ Kfunigraz.ac.at Archived 29 October 2004 at Archive.is
^ Emancipation of the Serfs Archived 7 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine.


Further reading

Backman, Clifford R. The Worlds of Medieval Europe Oxford University Press, 2003.
Blum, Jerome. The End of the Old Order in Rural Europe (Princeton UP, 1978)
Coulborn, Rushton, ed. Feudalism in History. Princeton University Press, 1956.
Bonnassie, Pierre. From Slavery to Feudalism in South-Western Europe Cambridge University Press, 1991 excerpt and text search
Freedman, Paul, and Monique Bourin, eds. Forms of Servitude in Northern and Central Europe. Decline, Resistance and Expansion Brepols, 2005.
Frantzen, Allen J., and Douglas Moffat, eds. The World of Work: Servitude, Slavery and Labor in Medieval England. Glasgow: Cruithne P, 1994.
Gorshkov, Boris B. "Serfdom: Eastern Europe" in Peter N. Stearns, ed, Encyclopedia of European Social History: from 1352–2000 (2001) volume 2 pp 379–88
Hoch, Steven L. Serfdom and social control in Russia: Petrovskoe, a village in Tambov (1989)
Kahan, Arcadius. "Notes on Serfdom in Western and Eastern Europe," Journal of Economic History March 1973 33:86–99 in JSTOR
Kolchin, Peter. Unfree labor: American slavery and Russian serfdom (2009)
Moon, David. The abolition of serfdom in Russia 1762–1907 (Longman, 2001)
Scott, Tom, ed. The Peasantries of Europe (1998)
Vadey, Liana. "Serfdom: Western Europe" in Peter N. Stearns, ed, Encyclopedia of European Social History: from 1352–2000 (2001) volume 2 pp 369–78
White, Stephen D. Re-Thinking Kinship and Feudalism in Early Medieval Europe (2nd ed. Ashgate Variorum, 2000)
Wirtschafter, Elise Kimerling. Russia's age of serfdom 1649–1861 (2008)
Wright, William E. Serf, Seigneur, and Sovereign: Agrarian Reform in Eighteenth-century Bohemia (U of Minnesota Press, 1966).
Wunder, Heide. "Serfdom in later medieval and early modern Germany" in T. H. Aston et al., Social Relations and Ideas: Essays in Honour of R. H. Hilton (Cambridge UP, 1983), 249–72

External links






This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (October 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Wikimedia Commons has media related to Serfdom.



Serfdom, Encyclopædia Britannica (on-line edition).
The Hull Project, Hull University
 Vinogradoff, Paul (1911). "Serfdom". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 
Peasantry (social class), Encyclopædia Britannica.
An excerpt from the book Serfdom to Self-Government: Memoirs of a Polish Village Mayor, 1842–1927.
The Causes of Slavery or Serfdom: A Hypothesis, discussion and full online text of Evsey Domar (1970), "The Causes of Slavery or Serfdom: A Hypothesis", Economic History Review 30:1 (March), pp. 18–32.







v
t
e





Social class
Status










Theories



Gilbert model
Marxian
Mudsill theory
New class
Spoon class theory
Weberian (three-component)





Related
topics



Caste
Chattering classes
Class conflict
Class discrimination
Classicide
Classless society
Euthenics
Nouveau riche / Parvenu
Poverty
Ranked society
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social mobility
Social position
Social stigma
Subaltern














By demographic








By status



Administrative detainee
Alien

illegal immigrant
refugee


Citizen

dual or multiple
native-born
naturalized
second-class


Convicted
Migrant worker
Political prisoner
Stateless





By "collar"



Blue
Gold
Green
Grey
Pink
White





By type




Creative



Bohemians
Robber baron
Russian oligarch
Business magnate
Overclass
Superclass





Middle



Lower middle class
Upper middle class
Bourgeoisie
Petite bourgeoisie





Working



Working poor
Proletariat
Lumpenproletariat





Warrior



Harii
Kshatriya
Yadav
Nair
Cossacks
Hashashin
Knight
Vanniyar
Samurai
Cuāuh
Ocēlōtl
Spartiate





Under



Commoner
Outcast
Outlaw
Peasant / Serf
Slave
Untouchable





Upper



Bourgeoisie
Elite
Gentry
Global elite
Nobility
Old money





Ruling



Aristocracy
Hanseaten
Patrician
Royal family





Intellectual



Clergy
Knowledge worker




















By country or region








United States







Affluence
American Dream
Conflict
Social class in American history





Classes



Lower
Middle (Mexican-American, Black)
Upper
Under





Income



Household
Inequality
Personal
Poverty





Standard of living



Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home ownership
Wealth








Other countries
or regions



Africa
Cambodia
China
Colombia
Ecuador
France
Haiti
India
Iran
Italy
New Zealand
Romania
Sri Lanka
Tibet
United Kingdom





Historic



Ancient Greece
Ancient Rome
Aztec
Ottoman Empire
Soviet Union
Pre-industrial East Asia
Pre-industrial Europe














 Category









Authority control



GND: 4035132-4
HDS: 8967
NDL: 00568594











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Serfdom&oldid=817244906"					Categories: Agricultural laborFeudalismSerfdomHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listWebarchive template archiveis linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesArticles needing additional references from February 2016All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from November 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014Articles with unsourced statements from May 2008Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2013Articles with unsourced statements from June 2008Wikipedia external links cleanup from October 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from October 2015Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with GND identifiers