



The sex organs of a green alga Chara are the male antheridia (red) and female archegonia (brown).


A sex organ (also called a reproductive organ, primary sex organ or primary sexual characteristic) is any anatomical part of the body in a complex organism that is involved in sexual reproduction and together constitute the reproductive system. The external and visible organs, in males and females, are the primary sex organs known as the genitals or genitalia. The internal organs are known as the secondary sex organs[not in citation given][1][2] and are sometimes referred to as the internal genitalia. The characteristics that begin to appear during puberty, such as, in humans, pubic hair on both sexes and facial hair on the male, are known as secondary sex characteristics.
Mosses, ferns, and some similar plants have gametangia for reproductive organs, which are part of the gametophyte.[3] The flowers of flowering plants produce pollen and egg cells, but the sex organs themselves are inside the gametophytes within the pollen and the ovule.[4] Coniferous plants likewise produce their sexually reproductive structures within the gametophytes contained within the cones and pollen. The cones and pollen are not themselves sexual organs.



Contents


1 Terminology
2 Mammals

2.1 External and internal organs
2.2 Development


3 Other animals

3.1 Insects
3.2 Slugs and snails
3.3 Planaria


4 Plants

4.1 Flowering plants


5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading



Terminology[edit]
The Latin term genitalia, sometimes anglicized as genitals, is used to describe the externally visible sex organs, known as the primary sex organs: in male mammals, the penis and scrotum; and in female mammals, the clitoris and vulva.
The other, hidden sex organs are referred to as the secondary sex organs or internal genitalia. The most important of these are the gonads, a pair of sex organs, specifically the testes in the male or the ovaries in the female. Gonads are the true sex organs, generating reproductive gametes containing inheritable DNA. They also produce most of the primary hormones that affect sexual development, and regulate other sexual organs and sexually differentiated behaviors.
In general zoology, given the great variety in organs, physiologies, and behaviors involved in copulation, male genitalia are more strictly defined as "all male structures that are inserted in the female or that hold her near her gonopore during sperm transfer"; female genitalia are defined as "those parts of the female reproductive tract that make direct contact with male genitalia or male products (sperm, spermatophores) during or immediately after copulation".[5]
Mammals[edit]

External and internal organs[edit]
Further information: Mammalian reproductive system and Human reproductive system
The visible portion of the mammalian genitals for males consists of the scrotum and penis; for females, it consists of the vulva (labia, clitoris, etc.) and vagina.
In placental mammals, females have two genital orifices, the vagina and urethra, while males have only one, the urethra.[6] Male and female genitals have many nerve endings, resulting in pleasurable and highly sensitive touch.[7][8] In most human societies, particularly in conservative ones, exposure of the genitals is considered a public indecency.[9]
In mammals, sex organs include:


Male
Female




Bulbourethral glands
Epididymis
Penis

Foreskin
Frenulum of penis
Glans penis


Prostate
Scrotum
Seminal vesicles
Testicles






An image of human male external sex organs






Bartholin's glands
Fallopian tubes
Ovaries
Skene's gland
Uterus

Cervix


Vagina
Vulva

Hymen
Clitoris

Clitoral frenulum
Clitoral glans (glans clitoridis)
Clitoral hood


Labia

Labia majora
Labia minora

Frenulum of labia minora












An image of human female external sex organs (shaved pubic hair)






Development[edit]
Main article: Development of the reproductive system
In typical prenatal development, sexual organs originate from a common anlage anatomy during early gestation and differentiate into male or female variations. The SRY gene, usually located on the Y chromosome and encoding the testis determining factor, determines the direction of this differentiation. The absence of it allows the gonads to continue to develop into ovaries.
Thereafter, the development of the internal reproductive organs and the external genitalia is determined by hormones produced by certain fetal gonads (ovaries or testes) and the cells' response to them. The initial appearance of the fetal genitalia (a few weeks after conception) looks basically feminine: a pair of "urogenital folds" with a small protuberance in the middle, and the urethra behind the protuberance. If the fetus has testes, and if the testes produce testosterone, and if the cells of the genitals respond to the testosterone, the outer urogenital folds swell and fuse in the midline to produce the scrotum; the protuberance grows larger and straighter to form the penis; the inner urogenital swellings grow, wrap around the penis, and fuse in the midline to form the penile urethra.
Each sexual organ in one sex has a homologous counterpart in the other one. See a list of homologues of the human reproductive system. In a larger perspective, the whole process of sexual differentiation also includes development of secondary sexual characteristics such as patterns of pubic and facial hair and female breasts that emerge at puberty. Furthermore, differences in brain structure arise, affecting, but not absolutely determining, behavior.
Intersex is the development of genitalia somewhere between typical male and female genitalia. Once the child is born, the parents are faced with decisions that are often difficult to make, such as whether or not to modify the genitalia, assign the child as male or female, or leave the genitalia as is. Some parents allow their doctors to choose. If they do decide to modify the genitalia, they have approximately a 50% chance of getting genitalia that will match the child's gender identity. If they pick the wrong one, their child may begin to show symptoms of transsexualism, which can lead them to a life of discomfort until they are able to remedy the issue.[10]
Because of the strong sexual selection affecting the structure and function of genitalia, they form an organ system that evolves faster than any other.[11] A great variety of genital form and function may therefore be found among animals.
Other animals[edit]
In many other animals a single posterior orifice, called the cloaca, serves as the only opening for the reproductive, digestive, and urinary tracts (if present). All amphibians, birds, reptiles, some fish, and a few mammals (monotremes, tenrecs, golden moles, and marsupial moles) have this orifice, from which they excrete both urine and feces in addition to serving reproductive functions. Excretory systems with analogous purpose in certain invertebrates are also sometimes referred to as cloacae.
Insects[edit]
Main article: Insect reproductive system




The female genitalia of Lepidoptera


The organs concerned with insect mating and the deposition of eggs are known collectively as the external genitalia, although they may be largely internal; their components are very diverse in form.
Slugs and snails[edit]
Main article: Reproductive system of gastropods
The reproductive system of gastropods (slugs and snails) varies greatly from one group to another.
Planaria[edit]
Main article: Reproductive system of planarians
Planaria are flat worms widely used in biological research. There are sexual and asexual planaria. Sexual planaria are hermaphrodites, possessing both testicles and ovaries. Each planarian transports its excretion to the other planarian, giving and receiving sperm.
Plants[edit]
Main articles: Alternation of generations and Plant reproductive morphology
The life cycle of land plants involves alternation of generations between a sporophyte and a haploid gametophyte. The gametophyte produces sperm or egg cells by mitosis. The sporophyte produces spores by meiosis which in turn develop into gametophytes. Any sex organs that are produced by the plant will develop on the gametophyte. The seed plants, which include conifers and flowering plants have small gametophytes that develop inside the pollen grains (male) and the ovule (female).
Flowering plants[edit]
Sexual reproduction in flowering plants involves the union of the male and female germ cells, sperm and egg cells respectively. Pollen is produced in stamens, and is carried to the pistil, which has the ovary at its base where fertilization can take place. Within each pollen grain is a male gametophyte which consists of only three cells. In most flowering plants the female gametophyte within the ovule consists of only seven cells. Thus there are no sex organs as such.
See also[edit]


Andrology
Genital modification and mutilation
Hermaphrodite
Human sexuality
Hysterectomy
Intimate part
Obstetrics and gynaecology
Oophorectomy
Orchiectomy
Emasculation


References[edit]



^ "Sex organ (sɛks ˈɔːɡən)". Collins English Dictionary. Retrieved September 14, 2013. 
^ P. R. Ashalatha, G. Deepa (2012). Textbook of Anatomy and Physiology for Nurses. JP Medical Ltd. pp. 252–274. ISBN 9350254239. Retrieved September 14, 2013. 
^ "Mosses and Ferns". Biology.clc.uc.edu. 16 March 2001. Archived from the original on 28 July 2012. Retrieved 1 August 2012. 
^ "Flowering Plant Reproduction". Emc.maricopa.edu. 2010-05-18. Retrieved 2012-08-01. 
^ Eberhard, W.G., 1985. Sexual Selection and Animal Genitalia. Harvard University Press
^ Marvalee H. Wake (15 September 1992). Hyman's Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy. University of Chicago Press. p. 583. ISBN 978-0-226-87013-7. Retrieved 6 May 2013. 
^ Sexual Intimacy in Marriage William Cutrer
^ Daphne's Dance: True Tales in the Evolution of Woman's Sexual Awareness Brigitta Olsen
^ Unpopular Privacy: What Must We Hide? retrieved 9 February 2012
^ Fausto Sterling, Anne (2000). Sexing The Body. New York: New York. pp. 44–77. 
^ Schilthuizen, M. 2014. Nature's Nether Regions: What the Sex Lives of Bugs, Birds, and Beasts Tell Us About Evolution, Biodiversity, and Ourselves. Penguin USA



Further reading[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sexual anatomy.





Look up Wikisaurus:genitalia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Leonard, Janet L. and Alex Córdoba-Aguilar (2010). The Evolution of Primary Sexual Characters in Animals. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0199717036. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)







v
t
e


Sex



Biological terms



Sexual dimorphism

Male
Female


Sexual differentiation

Feminization
Virilization


Sex-determination system

XY
ZW
XO
Temperature-dependent
Haplodiploidy


Heterogametic sex
Homogametic sex
Sex chromosome

X chromosome
Y chromosome


Testis-determining factor
Hermaphrodite

Sequential hermaphroditism


Intersex





Sexual reproduction



Evolution of sexual reproduction

Anisogamy
Isogamy


Germ cell
Reproductive system
Sex organ
Meiosis
Gametogenesis

Spermatogenesis
Oogenesis


Gamete

spermatozoon
ovum


Fertilization

External
Internal


Sexual selection
Plant reproduction
Fungal reproduction
Sexual reproduction in animals

Sexual intercourse
Human reproduction







Sexuality



Plant sexuality
Animal sexuality
Human sexuality

Mechanics
Differentiation
Activity










 Sex portal
 Biology portal












v
t
e


Human regional anatomy



Head



Ear
Face

Cheek
Chin
Eye
Mouth
Nose
Forehead


Jaw
Occiput
Scalp
Temple





Neck



Adam's apple
Throat





Trunk



Abdomen

Waist
Midriff
Navel


Back
Thorax

Breast


Pelvis

Sex organs







Limbs




Arm



Shoulder
Axilla
Brachium
Elbow
Forearm
Wrist
Hand
Finger

Thumb
Index
Middle
Ring
Little







Leg



Buttocks
Hip
Thigh
Knee
Calf
Foot

Ankle
Heel
Sole


Toe








Other



Écorché






General anatomy: systems and organs, regional anatomy, planes and lines, superficial axial anatomy, superficial anatomy of limbs









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sex_organ&oldid=817371694"					Categories: Sexual anatomySex organsHidden categories: Use dmy dates from July 2012All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from December 2017Commons category with local link different than on WikidataCS1 maint: Uses authors parameter