"Sexual preference" redirects here. For the book, see Sexual Preference (book).


Sexual orientation





Sexual orientations




Asexual
Bisexual
Heterosexual
Homosexual




Non-binary categories




Androphilia and gynephilia
Gray asexuality
Non-heterosexual
Pansexuality
Polysexuality
Queer




Research




Biological
Human female sexuality
Human male sexuality
Demographics
Environment
Hetero/homosexual continuum
Kinsey scale
Klein Grid
Neuroscientific
Queer studies
Romantic orientation
Sexology
Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine




Non-human animals




Animal sexual behaviour
Non-reproductive sexual behavior in animals
Homosexual behavior in animals (list)






 Category







v
t
e





Sexual orientation is an enduring pattern of romantic or sexual attraction (or a combination of these) to persons of the opposite sex or gender, the same sex or gender, or to both sexes or more than one gender. These attractions are generally subsumed under heterosexuality, homosexuality, and bisexuality,[1][2] while asexuality (the lack of sexual attraction to others) is sometimes identified as the fourth category.[3][4]
These categories are aspects of the more nuanced nature of sexual identity and terminology.[1] For example, people may use other labels, such as pansexual or polysexual,[5] or none at all.[1] According to the American Psychological Association, sexual orientation "also refers to a person's sense of identity based on those attractions, related behaviors, and membership in a community of others who share those attractions".[1][6] Androphilia and gynephilia are terms used in behavioral science to describe sexual orientation as an alternative to a gender binary conceptualization. Androphilia describes sexual attraction to masculinity; gynephilia describes the sexual attraction to femininity.[7] The term sexual preference largely overlaps with sexual orientation, but is generally distinguished in psychological research.[8] A person who identifies as bisexual, for example, may sexually prefer one sex over the other.[9] Sexual preference may also suggest a degree of voluntary choice,[8][10][11] whereas the scientific consensus is that sexual orientation is not a choice.[12][13][14]
Scientists do not know the exact causes of sexual orientation, but they believe that it is caused by a complex interplay of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences.[12][14][15] They favor biologically-based theories,[12] which point to genetic factors, the early uterine environment, both, or the inclusion of genetic and social factors.[16][17] There is no substantive evidence which suggests parenting or early childhood experiences play a role when it comes to sexual orientation.[16] Research over several decades has demonstrated that sexual orientation ranges along a continuum, from exclusive attraction to the opposite sex to exclusive attraction to the same sex.[1]
Sexual orientation is reported primarily within biology and psychology (including sexology), but it is also a subject area in anthropology, history (including social constructionism), and law,[18] and there are other explanations that relate to sexual orientation and culture.



Contents


1 Definitions and distinguishing from sexual identity and behavior

1.1 General
1.2 Androphilia, gynephilia and other terms
1.3 Gender, transgender, cisgender, and conformance
1.4 Relationships outside of orientation
1.5 Fluidity

1.5.1 General aspects
1.5.2 Born bisexual, then monosexualizing




2 Causes

2.1 Biology

2.1.1 Genetic factors
2.1.2 Hormones
2.1.3 Birth order


2.2 Environmental factors
2.3 Influences: professional organizations' statements


3 Efforts to change sexual orientation
4 Assessment and measurement

4.1 Early classification schemes
4.2 Kinsey scale
4.3 Klein Sexual Orientation Grid
4.4 The Sell Assessment of Sexual Orientation
4.5 Difficulties with assessment

4.5.1 Implications
4.5.2 Proposed solutions


4.6 Means of assessment

4.6.1 Sexual arousal




5 Culture

5.1 Language
5.2 Perceptions
5.3 Racism and ethnically relevant support
5.4 Religion
5.5 Internet and media


6 Demographics

6.1 Kinsey data


7 Social constructionism and Western societies
8 Law, politics and theology
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links

12.1 Policies





Definitions and distinguishing from sexual identity and behavior[edit]
General[edit]
See also: Sexual identity, Human sexual activity, and Situational sexual behavior
Sexual orientation is traditionally defined as including heterosexuality, bisexuality, and homosexuality, while asexuality is considered the fourth category of sexual orientation by some researchers and has been defined as the absence of a traditional sexual orientation. An asexual has little to no sexual attraction to people.[4][19] It may be considered a lack of a sexual orientation,[20] and there is significant debate over whether or not it is a sexual orientation.[3][4]
Most definitions of sexual orientation include a psychological component, such as the direction of an individual's erotic desires, or a behavioral component, which focuses on the sex of the individual's sexual partner/s. Some people prefer simply to follow an individual's self-definition or identity. Scientific and professional understanding is that "the core attractions that form the basis for adult sexual orientation typically emerge between middle childhood and early adolescence".[1] Sexual orientation differs from sexual identity in that it encompasses relationships with others, while sexual identity is a concept of self.
The American Psychological Association states that "[s]exual orientation refers to an enduring pattern of emotional, romantic, and/or sexual attractions to men, women, or both sexes" and that "[t]his range of behaviors and attractions has been described in various cultures and nations throughout the world. Many cultures use identity labels to describe people who express these attractions. In the United States, the most frequent labels are lesbians (women attracted to women), gay men (men attracted to men), and bisexual people (men or women attracted to both sexes). However, some people may use different labels or none at all". They additionally state that sexual orientation "is distinct from other components of sex and gender, including biological sex (the anatomical, physiological, and genetic characteristics associated with being male or female), gender identity (the psychological sense of being male or female), and social gender role (the cultural norms that define feminine and masculine behavior)".[1] According to psychologists, sexual orientation also refers to a person’s choice of sexual partners, who may be homosexual, heterosexual, or bisexual.[21][22][23]
Sexual identity and sexual behavior are closely related to sexual orientation, but they are distinguished, with sexual identity referring to an individual's conception of themselves, behavior referring to actual sexual acts performed by the individual, and orientation referring to "fantasies, attachments and longings."[24] Individuals may or may not express their sexual orientation in their behaviors.[1] People who have a non-heterosexual sexual orientation that does not align with their sexual identity are sometimes referred to as 'closeted'. The term may, however, reflect a certain cultural context and particular stage of transition in societies which are gradually dealing with integrating sexual minorities. In studies related to sexual orientation, when dealing with the degree to which a person's sexual attractions, behaviors and identity match, scientists usually use the terms concordance or discordance. Thus, a woman who is attracted to other women, but calls herself heterosexual and only has sexual relations with men, can be said to experience discordance between her sexual orientation (homosexual or lesbian) and her sexual identity and behaviors (heterosexual).[25]
Sexual identity may also be used to describe a person's perception of his or her own sex, rather than sexual orientation. The term sexual preference has a similar meaning to sexual orientation, and the two terms are often used interchangeably, but sexual preference suggests a degree of voluntary choice.[8] The term has been a listed by the American Psychological Association's Committee on Gay and Lesbian Concerns as a wording that advances a "heterosexual bias".[8]
Androphilia, gynephilia and other terms[edit]
Main article: Androphilia and gynephilia
Androphilia and gynephilia (or gynecophilia) are terms used in behavioral science to describe sexual attraction, as an alternative to a homosexual and heterosexual conceptualization. They are used for identifying a subject's object of attraction without attributing a sex assignment or gender identity to the subject. Related terms such as pansexual and polysexual do not make any such assignations to the subject.[5][26] People may also use terms such as queer, pansensual, polyfidelitous, ambisexual, or personalized identities such as byke or biphilic.[5]
Same gender loving (SGL) is considered to be more than a different term for gay; it introduces the concept of love into the discussion. SGL also acknowledges relationships between people of like identities; for example, third gender individuals who may be oriented toward each other, and expands the discussion of sexuality beyond the original man/woman gender duality. The complexity of transgender orientation is also more completely understood within this perspective.[27]
Using androphilia and gynephilia can avoid confusion and offense when describing people in non-western cultures, as well as when describing intersex and transgender people. Psychiatrist Anil Aggrawal explains that androphilia, along with gynephilia, "is needed to overcome immense difficulties in characterizing the sexual orientation of trans men and trans women. For instance, it is difficult to decide whether a trans man erotically attracted to males is a heterosexual female or a homosexual male; or a trans woman erotically attracted to females is a heterosexual male or a lesbian female. Any attempt to classify them may not only cause confusion but arouse offense among the affected subjects. In such cases, while defining sexual attraction, it is best to focus on the object of their attraction rather than on the sex or gender of the subject."[28] Sexologist Milton Diamond writes, "The terms heterosexual, homosexual, and bisexual are better used as adjectives, not nouns, and are better applied to behaviors, not people. This usage is particularly advantageous when discussing the partners of transsexual or intersexed individuals. These newer terms also do not carry the social weight of the former ones."[29]
Some researchers advocate use of the terminology to avoid bias inherent in Western conceptualizations of human sexuality. Writing about the Samoan fa'afafine demographic, sociologist Johanna Schmidt writes that in cultures where a third gender is recognized, a term like "homosexual transsexual" does not align with cultural categories.[30]
Some researchers, such as Bruce Bagemihl, have criticized the labels "heterosexual" and "homosexual" as confusing and degrading. Bagemihl writes, "...the point of reference for 'heterosexual' or 'homosexual' orientation in this nomenclature is solely the individual's genetic sex prior to reassignment (see for example, Blanchard et al. 1987, Coleman and Bockting, 1988, Blanchard, 1989). These labels thereby ignore the individual's personal sense of gender identity taking precedence over biological sex, rather than the other way around." Bagemihl goes on to take issue with the way this terminology makes it easy to claim transsexuals are really homosexual males seeking to escape from stigma.[31]
Gender, transgender, cisgender, and conformance[edit]




Ladyboys in Thailand


The earliest writers on sexual orientation usually understood it to be intrinsically linked to the subject's own sex. For example, it was thought that a typical female-bodied person who is attracted to female-bodied persons would have masculine attributes, and vice versa.[32] This understanding was shared by most of the significant theorists of sexual orientation from the mid nineteenth to early twentieth century, such as Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Magnus Hirschfeld, Havelock Ellis, Carl Jung, and Sigmund Freud, as well as many gender-variant homosexual people themselves. However, this understanding of homosexuality as sexual inversion was disputed at the time, and, through the second half of the twentieth century, gender identity came to be increasingly seen as a phenomenon distinct from sexual orientation. Transgender and cisgender people may be attracted to men, women, or both, although the prevalence of different sexual orientations is quite different in these two populations. An individual homosexual, heterosexual or bisexual person may be masculine, feminine, or androgynous, and in addition, many members and supporters of lesbian and gay communities now see the "gender-conforming heterosexual" and the "gender-nonconforming homosexual" as negative stereotypes. Nevertheless, studies by J. Michael Bailey and Kenneth Zucker found a majority of the gay men and lesbians sampled reporting various degrees of gender-nonconformity during their childhood years.[33]
Transgender people today identify with the sexual orientation that corresponds with their gender; meaning that a trans woman who is solely attracted to women would often identify as a lesbian. A trans man solely attracted to women would be a straight man.
Sexual orientation sees greater intricacy when non-binary understandings of both sex (male, female, or intersex) and gender (man, woman, transgender, third gender, etc. are considered. Sociologist Paula Rodriguez Rust (2000) argues for a more multifaceted definition of sexual orientation:

...Most alternative models of sexuality... define sexual orientation in terms of dichotomous biological sex or gender... Most theorists would not eliminate the reference to sex or gender, but instead advocate incorporating more complex nonbinary concepts of sex or gender, more complex relationships between sex, gender, and sexuality, and/or additional nongendered dimensions into models of sexuality.
— Paula C. Rodriguez Rust[34]

Relationships outside of orientation[edit]
Gay and lesbian people can have sexual relationships with someone of the opposite sex for a variety of reasons, including the desire for a perceived traditional family and concerns of discrimination and religious ostracism.[35][36][37][38][39] While some LGBT people hide their respective orientations from their spouses, others develop positive gay and lesbian identities while maintaining successful heterosexual marriages.[40][41][42] Coming out of the closet to oneself, a spouse of the opposite sex, and children can present challenges that are not faced by gay and lesbian people who are not married to people of the opposite sex or do not have children.
Fluidity[edit]
Main article: Sexual fluidity
General aspects[edit]
Often, sexual orientation and sexual orientation identity are not distinguished, which can impact accurately assessing sexual identity and whether or not sexual orientation is able to change; sexual orientation identity can change throughout an individual's life, and may or may not align with biological sex, sexual behavior or actual sexual orientation.[9][25][43] While the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health and American Psychiatric Association state that sexual orientation is innate, continuous or fixed throughout their lives for some people, but is fluid or changes over time for others,[44][45] the American Psychological Association distinguishes between sexual orientation (an innate attraction) and sexual orientation identity (which may change at any point in a person's life).[46]
Some research suggests that "[f]or some [people] the focus of sexual interest will shift at various points through the life span..."[47] "There... [was, as of 1995,] essentially no research on the longitudinal stability of sexual orientation over the adult life span... It [was]... still an unanswered question whether... [the] measure [of 'the complex components of sexual orientation as differentiated from other aspects of sexual identity at one point in time'] will predict future behavior or orientation. Certainly, it is... not a good predictor of past behavior and self-identity, given the developmental process common to most gay men and lesbians (i.e., denial of homosexual interests and heterosexual experimentation prior to the coming-out process)."[48][48][49][50] Some studies report that "[a number of] lesbian women, and some heterosexual women as well, perceive choice as an important element in their sexual orientations."[51]
Born bisexual, then monosexualizing[edit]
Main article: Innate bisexuality
Innate bisexuality is an idea introduced by Sigmund Freud. According to this theory, all humans are born bisexual in a very broad sense of the term, that of incorporating general aspects of both sexes. In Freud's view, this was true anatomically and therefore also psychologically, with sexual attraction to both sexes being one part of this psychological bisexuality. Freud believed that in the course of sexual development the masculine side would normally become dominant in men and the feminine side in women, but that as adults everyone still has desires derived from both the masculine and the feminine sides of their natures. Freud did not claim that everyone is bisexual in the sense of feeling the same level of sexual attraction to both genders.[52]
Causes[edit]
The exact causes for the development of a particular sexual orientation have yet to be established. To date, a lot of research has been conducted to determine the influence of genetics, hormonal action, development dynamics, social and cultural influences—which has led many to think that biology and environment factors play a complex role in forming it. It was once thought that homosexuality was the result of faulty psychological development, resulting from childhood experiences and troubled relationships, including childhood sexual abuse. It has been found that this was based on prejudice and misinformation.[1][2]
Biology[edit]
Main article: Biology and sexual orientation
Research has identified several biological factors which may be related to the development of sexual orientation, including genes, prenatal hormones, and brain structure. No single controlling cause has been identified, and research is continuing in this area.[53]
Though researchers generally believe that sexual orientation is not determined by any one factor but by a combination of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences,[12][14][15] with biological factors involving a complex interplay of genetic factors and the early uterine environment,[14][16] they favor biological models for the cause.[12] They believe that sexual orientation is not a choice,[12][13][14] and some of them believe that it is established at conception.[54] That is, individuals do not choose to be homosexual, heterosexual, bisexual, or asexual. Current scientific investigation usually seeks to find biological explanations for the adoption of a particular sexual orientation.[12] Scientific studies have found a number of statistical biological differences between gay people and heterosexuals, which may result from the same underlying cause as sexual orientation itself.
Genetic factors[edit]
Genes may be related to the development of sexual orientation. A twin study from 2001 appears to exclude genes as a major factor,[53] while a twin study from 2010 found that homosexuality was explained by both genes and environmental factors.[55] However, experimental design of the available twin studies have made their interpretation difficult.
In 2012, a large, comprehensive genome-wide linkage study of male sexual orientation was conducted by several independent groups of researchers.[56] Significant linkage to homosexuality was found with genes on chromosome Xq28 and chromosome 8 in the pericentromeric region. The authors concluded that "our findings, taken in context with previous work, suggest that genetic variation in each of these regions contributes to development of the important psychological trait of male sexual orientation." It was the largest study of the genetic basis of homosexuality to date and was published online in November 2014.[57]
Hormones[edit]
Main article: Prenatal hormones and sexual orientation
The hormonal theory of sexuality holds that just as exposure to certain hormones plays a role in fetal sex differentiation, hormonal exposure also influences the sexual orientation that emerges later in the adult. Fetal hormones may be seen as either the primary influence upon adult sexual orientation or as a co-factor interacting with genes or environmental and social conditions.[58]
As female fetuses have two X chromosomes and male ones a XY pair, the chromosome Y is the responsible for producing male differentiation on the defect female development. The differentiation process is driven by androgen hormones, mainly testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT). The newly formed testicles in the fetus are responsible for the secretion of androgens, that will cooperate in driving the sexual differentiation of the developing fetus, including its brain. This results in sexual differences between males and females.[59] This fact has led some scientists to test in various ways the result of modifying androgen exposure levels in mammals during fetus and early life.[60]
Birth order[edit]
Main article: Fraternal birth order and sexual orientation
Recent studies found an increased chance of homosexuality in men whose mothers previously carried to term many male children. This effect is nullified if the man is left-handed.[61]
Known as the fraternal birth order (FBO) effect, this theory has been backed up by strong evidence of its prenatal origin, although no evidence thus far has linked it to an exact prenatal mechanism. However, research suggests that this may be of immunological origin, caused by a maternal immune reaction against a substance crucial to male fetal development during pregnancy, which becomes increasingly likely after every male gestation. As a result of this immune effect, alterations in later-born males' prenatal development have been thought to occur. This process, known as the maternal immunization hypothesis (MIH), would begin when cells from a male fetus enter the mother's circulation during pregnancy or while giving birth. These Y-linked proteins would not be recognized in the mother's immune system because she is female, causing her to develop antibodies which would travel through the placental barrier into the fetal compartment. From here, the anti-male bodies would then cross the blood/brain barrier (BBB) of the developing fetal brain, altering sex-dimorphic brain structures relative to sexual orientation, causing the exposed son to be more attracted to men over women.[62]
Environmental factors[edit]
Main article: Environment and sexual orientation
There is no substantive evidence to support the suggestion that early childhood experiences, parenting, sexual abuse, or other adverse life events influence sexual orientation. However, studies do find that aspects of sexuality expression have an experiential basis and that parental attitudes towards a particular sexual orientation may affect how children of the parents experiment with behaviors related to a certain sexual orientation.[1][12][16][63][64]
Influences: professional organizations' statements[edit]
The American Academy of Pediatrics in 2004 stated:[12]

The mechanisms for the development of a particular sexual orientation remain unclear, but the current literature and most scholars in the field state that one's sexual orientation is not a choice; that is, individuals do not choose to be homosexual or heterosexual. A variety of theories about the influences on sexual orientation have been proposed. Sexual orientation probably is not determined by any one factor but by a combination of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences. In recent decades, biologically based theories have been favored by experts. Although there continues to be controversy and uncertainty as to the genesis of the variety of human sexual orientations, there is no scientific evidence that abnormal parenting, sexual abuse, or other adverse life events influence sexual orientation. Current knowledge suggests that sexual orientation is usually established during early childhood.

The American Psychological Association, the American Psychiatric Association, and the National Association of Social Workers in 2006 stated:[6]

Currently, there is no scientific consensus about the specific factors that cause an individual to become heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual – including possible biological, psychological, or social effects of the parents' sexual orientation. However, the available evidence indicates that the vast majority of lesbian and gay adults were raised by heterosexual parents and the vast majority of children raised by lesbian and gay parents eventually grow up to be heterosexual.

The Royal College of Psychiatrists in 2007 stated:[16]

Despite almost a century of psychoanalytic and psychological speculation, there is no substantive evidence to support the suggestion that the nature of parenting or early childhood experiences play any role in the formation of a person's fundamental heterosexual or homosexual orientation. It would appear that sexual orientation is biological in nature, determined by a complex interplay of genetic factors and the early uterine environment. Sexual orientation is therefore not a choice, though sexual behaviour clearly is.

The American Psychiatric Association stated:[2]

No one knows what causes heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality. Homosexuality was once thought to be the result of troubled family dynamics or faulty psychological development. Those assumptions are now understood to have been based on misinformation and prejudice.

A legal brief dated September 26, 2007, and presented on behalf of the American Psychological Association, California Psychological Association, American Psychiatric Association, National Association of Social Workers, and National Association of Social Workers, California Chapter, stated:[6]

Although much research has examined the possible genetic, hormonal, developmental, social, and cultural influences on sexual orientation, no findings have emerged that permit scientists to conclude that sexual orientation – heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality – is determined by any particular factor or factors. The evaluation of amici is that, although some of this research may be promising in facilitating greater understanding of the development of sexual orientation, it does not permit a conclusion based in sound science at the present time as to the cause or causes of sexual orientation, whether homosexual, bisexual, or heterosexual.

Efforts to change sexual orientation[edit]
Main articles: Sexual orientation change efforts and Conversion therapy
Sexual orientation change efforts are methods that aim to change a same-sex sexual orientation. They may include behavioral techniques, cognitive behavioral therapy, reparative therapy, psychoanalytic techniques, medical approaches, and religious and spiritual approaches.[46]
No major mental health professional organization has sanctioned efforts to change sexual orientation and virtually all of them have adopted policy statements cautioning the profession and the public about treatments that purport to change sexual orientation. These include the American Psychiatric Association, American Psychological Association, American Counseling Association, National Association of Social Workers in the USA,[6][65] the Royal College of Psychiatrists,[66] and the Australian Psychological Society.[67]
In 2009, the American Psychological Association Task Force on Appropriate Therapeutic Responses to Sexual Orientation conducted a systematic review of the peer-reviewed journal literature on sexual orientation change efforts (SOCE) and concluded:

Efforts to change sexual orientation are unlikely to be successful and involve some risk of harm, contrary to the claims of SOCE practitioners and advocates. Even though the research and clinical literature demonstrate that same-sex sexual and romantic attractions, feelings, and behaviors are normal and positive variations of human sexuality, regardless of sexual orientation identity, the task force concluded that the population that undergoes SOCE tends to have strongly conservative religious views that lead them to seek to change their sexual orientation. Thus, the appropriate application of affirmative therapeutic interventions for those who seek SOCE involves therapist acceptance, support, and understanding of clients and the facilitation of clients' active coping, social support, and identity exploration and development, without imposing a specific sexual orientation identity outcome.[46]

In 2012, the Pan American Health Organization (the North and South American branch of the World Health Organization) released a statement cautioning against services that purport to "cure" people with non-heterosexual sexual orientations as they lack medical justification and represent a serious threat to the health and well-being of affected people, and noted that the global scientific and professional consensus is that homosexuality is a normal and natural variation of human sexuality and cannot be regarded as a pathological condition. The Pan American Health Organization further called on governments, academic institutions, professional associations and the media to expose these practices and to promote respect for diversity. The World Health Organization affiliate further noted that gay minors have sometimes been forced to attend these "therapies" involuntarily, being deprived of their liberty and sometimes kept in isolation for several months, and that these findings were reported by several United Nations bodies. Additionally, the Pan American Health Organization recommended that such malpractices be denounced and subject to sanctions and penalties under national legislation, as they constitute a violation of the ethical principles of health care and violate human rights that are protected by international and regional agreements.[68]
The National Association for Research & Therapy of Homosexuality (NARTH), which describes itself as a "professional, scientific organization that offers hope to those who struggle with unwanted homosexuality," disagrees with the mainstream mental health community's position on conversion therapy, both on its effectiveness and by describing sexual orientation not as a binary immutable quality, or as a disease, but as a continuum of intensities of sexual attractions and emotional affect.[69][70][71][72] The American Psychological Association and the Royal College of Psychiatrists expressed concerns that the positions espoused by NARTH are not supported by the science and create an environment in which prejudice and discrimination can flourish.[66][73]
Assessment and measurement[edit]
Varying definitions and strong social norms about sexuality can make sexual orientation difficult to quantify.
Early classification schemes[edit]
One of the earliest sexual orientation classification schemes was proposed in the 1860s by Karl Heinrich Ulrichs in a series of pamphlets he published privately.[74] The classification scheme, which was meant only to describe males, separated them into three basic categories: dionings, urnings and uranodionings. An urning can be further categorized by degree of effeminacy. These categories directly correspond with the categories of sexual orientation used today: heterosexual, homosexual, and bisexual. In the series of pamphlets, Ulrichs outlined a set of questions to determine if a man was an urning. The definitions of each category of Ulrichs' classification scheme are as follows:



Dioning - Comparable to the modern term "heterosexual"






Urning - Comparable to the modern term "homosexual"




Mannling - A manly urning
Weibling - An effeminate urning
Zwischen - A somewhat manly and somewhat effeminate urning
Virilised - An urning that sexually behaves like a dioning








Urano-Dioning - Comparable to the modern term "bisexual"



From at least the late nineteenth century in Europe, there was speculation that the range of human sexual response looked more like a continuum than two or three discrete categories. Berlin sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld published a scheme in 1896 that measured the strength of an individual's sexual desire on two independent 10-point scales, A (homosexual) and B (heterosexual).[75] A heterosexual individual may be A0, B5; a homosexual individual may be A5, B0; an asexual would be A0, B0; and someone with an intense attraction to both sexes would be A9, B9.
Kinsey scale[edit]
The Kinsey scale, also called the Heterosexual-Homosexual Rating Scale, was first published in Sexual Behavior in the Human Male (1948) by Alfred Kinsey, Wardell Pomeroy, and Clyde Martin and also featured in Sexual Behavior in the Human Female (1953).[76] The scale was developed to combat the assumption at the time that people are either heterosexual or homosexual and that these two types represent antitheses in the sexual world.[77] Recognizing that a large portion of population is not completely heterosexual or homosexual and people can experience both heterosexual and homosexual behavior and psychic responses, Kinsey et al., stated:

Males do not represent two discrete populations, heterosexual and homosexual. The world is not to be divided into sheep and goats. Not all things are black nor all things white... The living world is a continuum in each and every one of its aspects. The sooner we learn this concerning human sexual behavior, the sooner we shall reach a sound understanding of the realities of sex.
— Kinsey et al. (1948) pp. 639.

The Kinsey scale provides a classification of sexual orientation based on the relative amounts of heterosexual and homosexual experience or psychic response in one's history at a given time.[78] The classification scheme works such that individuals in the same category show the same balance between the heterosexual and homosexual elements in their histories. The position on the scale is based on the relation of heterosexuality to homosexuality in one's history, rather than the actual amount of overt experience or psychic response. An individual can be assigned a position on the scale in accordance with the following definitions of the points of the scale:[79]


Rating
Description


0
Exclusively heterosexual. Individuals make no physical contact which results in erotic arousal or orgasm and make no psychic responses to individuals of their own sex.


1
Predominantly heterosexual/incidentally homosexual. Individuals have only incidental homosexual contacts which have involved physical or psychic response or incidental psychic response without physical contact.


2
Predominantly heterosexual but more than incidentally homosexual. Individuals have more than incidental homosexual experience or respond rather definitely to homosexual stimuli.


3
Equally heterosexual and homosexual. Individuals are about equally homosexual and heterosexual in their experiences or psychic reactions.


4
Predominantly homosexual but more than incidentally heterosexual. Individuals have more overt activity or psychic reactions in the homosexual while still maintaining a fair amount of heterosexual activity or responding rather definitively to heterosexual contact.


5
Predominantly homosexual/only incidentally heterosexual. Individuals are almost entirely homosexual in their activities or reactions.


6
Exclusively homosexual. Individuals who are exclusively homosexual, both in regard to their overt experience and in regard to their psychic reactions.


The Kinsey scale has been praised for dismissing the dichotomous classification of sexual orientation and allowing for a new perspective on human sexuality. However, the scale has been criticized because it is still not a true continuum. Despite seven categories being able to provide a more accurate description of sexual orientation than a dichotomous scale, it is still difficult to determine which category individuals should be assigned to. In a major study comparing sexual response in homosexual males and females, Masters and Johnson discuss the difficulty of assigning the Kinsey ratings to participants.[80] Particularly, they found it difficult to determine the relative amount heterosexual and homosexual experience and response in a person's history when using the scale. They report finding it difficult to assign ratings 2-4 for individuals with a large number of heterosexual and homosexual experiences. When there are a substantial number of heterosexual and homosexual experiences in one's history, it becomes difficult for that individual to be fully objective in assessing the relative amount of each.
Weinrich et al. (1993) and Weinberg et al. (1994) criticized the scale for lumping individuals who are different based on different dimensions of sexuality into the same categories.[81][82] When applying the scale, Kinsey considered two dimensions of sexual orientation: overt sexual experience and psychosexual reactions. Valuable information was lost by collapsing the two values into one final score. A person who has only predominantly same sex reactions is different from someone with relatively little reaction but lots of same sex experience. It would have been quite simple for Kinsey to have measured the two dimensions separately and report scores independently to avoid loss of information. Furthermore, there are more than two dimensions of sexuality to be considered. Beyond behavior and reactions, one could also assess attraction, identification, lifestyle etc. This is addressed by the Klein Sexual Orientation Grid.
A third concern with the Kinsey scale is that it inappropriately measures heterosexuality and homosexuality on the same scale, making one a tradeoff of the other.[83] Research in the 1970s on masculinity and femininity found that concepts of masculinity and femininity are more appropriately measured as independent concepts on a separate scale rather than as a single continuum, with each end representing opposite extremes.[84] When compared on the same scale, they act as tradeoffs such, whereby to be more feminine one had to be less masculine and vice versa. However, if they are considered as separate dimensions one can be simultaneously very masculine and very feminine. Similarly, considering heterosexuality and homosexuality on separate scales would allow one to be both very heterosexual and very homosexual or not very much of either. When they are measured independently, the degree of heterosexual and homosexual can be independently determined, rather than the balance between heterosexual and homosexual as determined using the Kinsey Scale.[85]
Klein Sexual Orientation Grid[edit]
Main article: Klein Sexual Orientation Grid
In response to the criticism of the Kinsey scale only measuring two dimensions of sexual orientation, Fritz Klein developed the Klein sexual orientation grid (KSOG), a multidimensional scale for describing sexual orientation. Introduced in Klein's book The Bisexual Option (1978), the KSOG uses a 7-point scale to assess seven different dimensions of sexuality at three different points in an individual's life: past (from early adolescence up to one year ago), present (within the last 12 months), and ideal (what would you choose if it were completely your choice).
The Sell Assessment of Sexual Orientation[edit]
The Sell Assessment of Sexual Orientation (SASO) was developed to address the major concerns with the Kinsey Scale and Klein Sexual Orientation Grid and as such, measures sexual orientation on a continuum, considers various dimensions of sexual orientation, and considers homosexuality and heterosexuality separately. Rather than providing a final solution to the question of how to best measure sexual orientation, the SASO is meant to provoke discussion and debate about measurements of sexual orientation.[83]
The SASO consists of 12 questions. Six of these questions assess sexual attraction, four assess sexual behavior, and two assess sexual orientation identity. For each question on the scale that measures homosexuality there is a corresponding question that measures heterosexuality giving six matching pairs of questions. Taken all together, the six pairs of questions and responses provide a profile of an individual's sexual orientation. However, results can be further simplified into four summaries that look specifically at responses that correspond to either homosexuality, heterosexuality, bisexuality or asexuality.[86]
Of all the questions on the scale, Sell considered those assessing sexual attraction to be the most important as sexual attraction is a better reflection of the concept of sexual orientation which he defined as "extent of sexual attractions toward members of the other, same, both sexes or neither" than either sexual identity or sexual behavior. Identity and behavior are measured as supplemental information because they are both closely tied to sexual attraction and sexual orientation. Major criticisms of the SASO have not been established, but a concern is that the reliability and validity remains largely unexamined.[86]
Difficulties with assessment[edit]
Research focusing on sexual orientation uses scales of assessment to identify who belongs in which sexual population group. It is assumed that these scales will be able to reliably identify and categorize people by their sexual orientation. However, it is difficult to determine an individual's sexual orientation through scales of assessment, due to ambiguity regarding the definition of sexual orientation. Generally, there are three components of sexual orientation used in assessment. Their definitions and examples of how they may be assessed are as follows:


Component
Definition
Questions


Sexual attraction
Attraction toward one sex or the desire to have sexual relations or to be in a primary loving, sexual relationship with one or both sexes
"Have you ever had a romantic attraction to a male? Have you ever had a romantic attraction to a female?"[87]


Sexual behavior
"Any mutually voluntary activity with another person that involves genital contact and sexual excitement or arousal, that is, feeling really turned on, even if intercourse or orgasm did not occur"[88]
"Have you ever had a relationship with someone of your own sex which resulted in sexual orgasm?"[89]


Sexual identity
Personally selected, socially and historically bound labels attached to the perceptions and meaning individuals have about their sexual identity.
"Pick from these six option: gay or lesbian; bisexual, but mostly gay or lesbian; bisexual equally gay/lesbian and heterosexual; bisexual but mostly heterosexual; heterosexual; and uncertain, don't know for sure."[90]


Though sexual attraction, behavior, and identity are all components of sexual orientation, if a person defined by one of these dimensions were congruent with those defined by another dimension it would not matter which was used in assessing orientation, but this is not the case. There is "little coherent relationship between the amount and mix of homosexual and heterosexual behavior in a person's biography and that person's choice to label himself or herself as bisexual, homosexual, or heterosexual".[91] Individuals typically experience diverse attractions and behaviors that may reflect curiosity, experimentation, social pressure and is not necessarily indicative of an underlying sexual orientation. For example, a woman may have fantasies or thoughts about sex with other women but never act on these thoughts and only have sex with opposite gender partners. If sexual orientation was being assessed based on one's sexual attraction then this individual would be considered homosexual, but her behavior indicates heterosexuality.
As there is no research indicating which of the three components is essential in defining sexual orientation, all three are used independently and provide different conclusions regarding sexual orientation. Savin Williams (2006) discusses this issue and notes that by basing findings regarding sexual orientation on a single component, researchers may not actually capture the intended population. For example, if homosexual is defined by same sex behavior, gay virgins are omitted, heterosexuals engaging in same sex behavior for other reasons than preferred sexual arousal are miscounted, and those with same sex attraction who only have opposite-sex relations are excluded.[92] Because of the limited populations that each component captures, consumers of research should be cautious in generalizing these findings.
One of the uses for scales that assess sexual orientation is determining what the prevalence of different sexual orientations are within a population. Depending on subject's age, culture and sex, the prevalence rates of homosexuality vary depending on which component of sexual orientation is being assessed: sexual attraction, sexual behavior, or sexual identity. Assessing sexual attraction will yield the greatest prevalence of homosexuality in a population whereby the proportion of individuals indicating they are same sex attracted is two to three times greater than the proportion reporting same sex behavior or identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. Furthermore, reports of same sex behavior usually exceed those of gay, lesbian, or bisexual identification.[93] The following chart demonstrates how widely the prevalence of homosexuality can vary depending on what age, location and component of sexual orientation is being assessed:

Prevalence of homosexuality


Attraction
Behaviour
Identity


Country: Age group
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male




USA: Youth[94]


6%
3%
11%
5%
8%
3%




USA: Young adults[95]


13%
5%
4%
3%
4%
3%




USA: Adults[96]


8%
8%
4%
9%
1%
2%


Australia: Adults[97]
17%
15%
8%
16%
4%
7%


Turkey: Young adults[98]
7%
6%
4%
5%
2%
2%


Norway: Adolescents[99]
21%
9%
7%
6%
5%
5%


The variance in prevalence rates is reflected in people's inconsistent responses to the different components of sexual orientation within a study and the instability of their responses over time. Laumann et al., (1994) found that among U.S. adults 20% of those who would be considered homosexual on one component of orientation were homosexual on the other two dimensions and 70% responded in a way that was consistent with homosexuality on only one of the three dimensions.[100] Furthermore, sexuality may be fluid; for example, a person's sexual orientation identity is not necessarily stable or consistent over time but is subject to change throughout life. Diamond (2003) found that over 7 years 2/3 of the women changed their sexual identity at least once, with many reporting that the label was not adequate in capturing the diversity of their sexual or romantic feelings. Furthermore, women who relinquished bisexual and lesbian identification did not relinquish same sex sexuality and acknowledged the possibility for future same sex attractions or behaviour. One woman stated "I'm mainly straight but I'm one of those people who, if the right circumstance came along, would change my viewpoint".[101] Therefore, individuals classified as homosexual in one study might not be identified the same way in another depending on which components are assessed and when the assessment is made making it difficult to pin point who is homosexual and who is not and what the overall prevalence within a population may be.[1]
Implications[edit]
Depending on which component of sexual orientation is being assessed and referenced, different conclusions can be drawn about the prevalence rate of homosexuality which has real world consequences. Knowing how much of the population is made up of homosexual individuals influences how this population may be seen or treated by the public and government bodies. For example, if homosexual individuals constitute only 1% of the general population they are politically easier to ignore or than if they are known to be a constituency that surpasses most ethnic and ad minority groups. If the number is relatively minor then it is difficult to argue for community based same sex programs and services, mass media inclusion of gay role models, or Gay/Straight Alliances in schools. For this reason, in the 1970s Bruce Voeller, the chair of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force perpetuated a common myth that the prevalence of homosexuality is 10% for the whole population by averaging a 13% number for men and a 7% number for women. Voeller generalized this finding and used it as part of the modern gay rights movement to convince politicians and the public that "we [gays and lesbians] are everywhere".[102]
Proposed solutions[edit]
In the paper "Who's Gay? Does It Matter?", Ritch Savin-Williams proposes two different approaches to assessing sexual orientation until well positioned and psychometrically sound and tested definitions are developed that would allow research to reliably identify the prevalence, causes, and consequences of homosexuality.[103] He first suggests that greater priority should be given to sexual arousal and attraction over behaviour and identity because it is less prone to self- and other-deception, social conditions and variable meanings. To measure attraction and arousal he proposed that biological measures should be developed and used. There are numerous biological/physiological measures that exist that can measure sexual orientation such as sexual arousal, brain scans, eye tracking, body odour preference, and anatomical variations such as digit-length ratio and right or left handedness. Secondly, Savin-Williams suggests that researchers should forsake the general notion of sexual orientation altogether and assess only those components that are relevant for the research question being investigated. For example:

To assess STDs or HIV transmission, measure sexual behaviour
To assess interpersonal attachments, measure sexual/romantic attraction
To assess political ideology, measure sexual identity

Means of assessment[edit]
Means typically used include surveys, interviews, cross-cultural studies, physical arousal measurements[49] sexual behavior, sexual fantasy, or a pattern of erotic arousal.[104] The most common is verbal self-reporting[49] or self-labeling,[104] which depend on respondents being accurate about themselves.[49]
Sexual arousal[edit]
Studying human sexual arousal has proved a fruitful way of understanding how men and women differ as genders and in terms of sexual orientation. A clinical measurement may use penile or vaginal photoplethysmography, where genital engorgement with blood is measured in response to exposure to different erotic material.[104]
Some researchers who study sexual orientation argue that the concept may not apply similarly to men and women. A study of sexual arousal patterns[105] found that women, when viewing erotic films which show female-female, male-male and male-female sexual activity (oral sex or penetration), have patterns of arousal which do not match their declared sexual orientations as well as men's. That is, heterosexual and lesbian women's sexual arousal to erotic films do not differ significantly by the genders of the participants (male or female) or by the type of sexual activity (heterosexual or homosexual). On the contrary, men's sexual arousal patterns tend to be more in line with their stated orientations, with heterosexual men showing more penis arousal to female-female sexual activity and less arousal to female-male and male-male sexual stimuli, and homosexual and bisexual men being more aroused by films depicting male-male intercourse and less aroused by other stimuli.
Another study on men and women's patterns of sexual arousal confirmed[106] that men and women have different patterns of arousal, independent of their sexual orientations. The study found that women's genitals become aroused to both human and nonhuman stimuli from movies showing humans of both genders having sex (heterosexual and homosexual) and from videos showing non-human primates (bonobos) having sex. Men did not show any sexual arousal to non-human visual stimuli, their arousal patterns being in line with their specific sexual interest (women for heterosexual men and men for homosexual men).
These studies suggest that men and women are different in terms of sexual arousal patterns and that this is also reflected in how their genitals react to sexual stimuli of both genders or even to non-human stimuli. Sexual orientation has many dimensions (attractions, behavior, identity), of which sexual arousal is the only product of sexual attractions which can be measured at present with some degree of physical precision. Thus, the fact that women are aroused by seeing non-human primates having sex does not mean that women's sexual orientation includes this type of sexual interest. Some researchers argue that women's sexual orientation depends less on their patterns of sexual arousal than men's and that other components of sexual orientation (like emotional attachment) must be taken into account when describing women's sexual orientations. In contrast, men's sexual orientations tend to be primarily focused on the physical component of attractions and, thus, their sexual feelings are more exclusively oriented according to sex.
More recently, scientists have started to focus on measuring changes in brain activity related to sexual arousal, by using brain-scanning techniques. A study on how heterosexual and homosexual men's brains react to seeing pictures of naked men and women has found[107] that both hetero- and homosexual men react positively to seeing their preferred sex, using the same brain regions. The only significant group difference between these orientations was found in the amygdala, a brain region known to be involved in regulating fear.[108]
Although these findings have contributed to understanding how sexual arousal can differentiate between genders and sexual orientations, it is still a matter of debate whether these results reflect differences which are the result of social learning or genetic or biological factors. Further studies are needed to clarify how much of people's reactions to sexual stimuli of their preferred gender are due to learned or innate factors.
Culture[edit]
See also: LGBT history, Societal attitudes toward homosexuality, and LGBT community and multiculturalism




Gay Pride, Paris 2009


Research suggests that sexual orientation is independent of cultural and other social influences, but that open identification of one's sexual orientation may be hindered by homophobic/hetereosexist settings. Social systems such as religion, language and ethnic traditions can have a powerful impact on realization of sexual orientation. Influences of culture may complicate the process of measuring sexual orientation. The majority of empirical and clinical research on LGBT populations are done with largely white, middle-class, well-educated samples, however there are pockets of research that document various other cultural groups, although these are frequently limited in diversity of gender and sexual orientation of the subjects.[109] Integration of sexual orientation with sociocultural identity may be a challenge for LGBT individuals. Individuals may or may not consider their sexual orientation to define their sexual identity, as they may experience various degrees of fluidity of sexuality,[110] or may simply identify more strongly with another aspect of their identity such as family role. American culture puts a great emphasis on individual attributes, and views the self as unchangeable and constant. In contrast, East Asian cultures put a great emphasis on a person's social role within social hierarchies, and view the self as fluid and malleable.[111] These differing cultural perspectives have many implications on cognitions of the self, including perception of sexual orientation.
Language[edit]
Translation is a major obstacle when comparing different cultures. Many English terms lack equivalents in other languages, while concepts and words from other languages fail to be reflected in the English language.[112][113] Translation and vocabulary obstacles are not limited to the English language.[114] Language can force individuals to identify with a label that may or may not accurately reflect their true sexual orientation. Language can also be used to signal sexual orientation to others.[115] The meaning of words referencing categories of sexual orientation are negotiated in the mass media in relation to social organization.[114] New words may be brought into use to describe new terms or better describe complex interpretations of sexual orientation. Other words may pick up new layers or meaning. For example, the heterosexual Spanish terms marido and mujer for "husband" and "wife", respectively, have recently been replaced in Spain by the gender-neutral terms cónyuges or consortes meaning "spouses".[114]
Perceptions[edit]
One person may presume knowledge of another person's sexual orientation based upon perceived characteristics, such as appearance, clothing, tone of voice, and accompaniment by and behavior with other people. The attempt to detect sexual orientation in social situations is known as gaydar; some studies have found that guesses based on face photos perform better than chance.[116][117][118] 2015 research suggests that "gaydar" is an alternate label for using LGBT stereotypes to infer orientation, and that face-shape is not an accurate indication of orientation.[119]
Perceived sexual orientation may affect how a person is treated. For instance, in the United States, the FBI reported that 15.6% of hate crimes reported to police in 2004 were "because of a sexual-orientation bias".[120] Under the UK Employment Equality (Sexual Orientation) Regulations 2003, as explained by Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service,[121] "workers or job applicants must not be treated less favourably because of their sexual orientation, their perceived sexual orientation or because they associate with someone of a particular sexual orientation".[122]
In Euro-American cultures, sexual orientation is defined by the gender(s) of the people a person is romantically or sexually attracted to. Euro-American culture generally assumes heterosexuality, unless otherwise specified. Cultural norms, values, traditions and laws facilitate heterosexuality,[123] including constructs of marriage and family.[109] Efforts are being made to change these attitudes, and legislation is being passed to promote equality.[114]
Some other cultures do not recognize a homosexual/heterosexual/bisexual distinction. It is common to distinguish a person's sexuality according to their sexual role (active/passive; insertive/penetrated). In this distinction, the passive role is typically associated with femininity or inferiority, while the active role is typically associated with masculinity or superiority.[114][124][125] For example, an investigation of a small Brazilian fishing village revealed three sexual categories for men: men who have sex only with men (consistently in a passive role), men who have sex only with women, and men who have sex with women and men (consistently in an active role). While men who consistently occupied the passive role were recognized as a distinct group by locals, men who have sex with only women, and men who have sex with women and men, were not differentiated.[125] Little is known about same-sex attracted females, or sexual behavior between females in these cultures.
Racism and ethnically relevant support[edit]
See also: African-American culture and sexual orientation
In the United States, non-Caucasian LGBT individuals may find themselves in a double minority, where they are neither fully accepted or understood by mainly Caucasian LGBT communities, nor are they accepted by their own ethnic group.[126][127] Many people experience racism in the dominant LGBT community where racial stereotypes merge with gender stereotypes, such that Asian-American LGBTs are viewed as more passive and feminine, while African-American LGBTs are viewed as more masculine and aggressive.[109] There are a number of culturally specific support networks for LGBT individuals active in the United States. For example, "Ô-Môi" for Vietnamese American queer females.[127]
Religion[edit]
See also: LGBT matters and religion and Religion and homosexuality
Sexuality in the context of religion is often a controversial subject, especially that of sexual orientation. In the past, various sects have viewed homosexuality from a negative point of view and had punishments for same-sex relationships. In modern times, an increasing number of religions and religious denominations accept homosexuality. It is possible to integrate sexual identity and religious identity, depending on the interpretation of religious texts.
Some religious organizations object to the concept of sexual orientation entirely. In the 2014 revision of the code of ethics of the American Association of Christian Counselors, members are forbidden to "describe or reduce human identity and nature to sexual orientation or reference," even while counselors must acknowledge the client’s fundamental right to self-determination.[128]
Internet and media[edit]
See also: LGBT stereotypes
The internet has influenced sexual orientation in two ways: it is a common mode of discourse on the subject of sexual orientation and sexual identity, and therefore shapes popular conceptions;[114] and it allows anonymous attainment of sexual partners, as well as facilitates communication and connection between greater numbers of people.[129]
Demographics[edit]
Main article: Demographics of sexual orientation
The multiple aspects of sexual orientation and the boundary-drawing problems already described create methodological challenges for the study of the demographics of sexual orientation. Determining the frequency of various sexual orientations in real-world populations is difficult and controversial.
Most modern scientific surveys find that the majority of people report a mostly heterosexual orientation. However, the relative percentage of the population that reports a homosexual orientation varies with differing methodologies and selection criteria. Most of these statistical findings are in the range of 2.8 to 9% of males, and 1 to 5% of females for the United States[130] – this figure can be as high as 12% for some large cities and as low as 1% for rural areas.
Estimates for the percentage of the population that are bisexual vary widely, at least in part due to differing definitions of bisexuality. Some studies only consider a person bisexual if they are nearly equally attracted to both sexes, and others consider a person bisexual if they are at all attracted to the same sex (for otherwise mostly heterosexual persons) or to the opposite sex (for otherwise mostly homosexual persons). A small percentage of people are not sexually attracted to anyone (asexuality). A study in 2004 placed the prevalence of asexuality at 1%.[20][131]
Kinsey data[edit]
In the oft-cited and oft-criticized Sexual Behavior in the Human Male (1948) and Sexual Behavior in the Human Female (1953), by Alfred C. Kinsey et al., people were asked to rate themselves on a scale from completely heterosexual to completely homosexual. Kinsey reported that when the individuals' behavior as well as their identity are analyzed, most people appeared to be at least somewhat bisexual — i.e., most people have some attraction to either sex, although usually one sex is preferred. According to Kinsey, only a minority (5–10%) can be considered fully heterosexual or homosexual.[citation needed] Conversely, only an even smaller minority can be considered fully bisexual (with an equal attraction to both sexes). Kinsey's methods have been criticized as flawed, particularly with regard to the randomness of his sample population, which included prison inmates, male prostitutes and those who willingly participated in discussion of previously taboo sexual topics. Nevertheless, Paul Gebhard, subsequent director of the Kinsey Institute for Sex Research, reexamined the data in the Kinsey Reports and concluded that removing the prison inmates and prostitutes barely affected the results.[132]
Social constructionism and Western societies[edit]
See also: Queer theory and Human male sexuality
Because sexual orientation is complex and multi-dimensional, some academics and researchers, especially in queer studies, have argued that it is a historical and social construction. In 1976, philosopher and historian Michel Foucault argued in The History of Sexuality that homosexuality as an identity did not exist in the eighteenth century; that people instead spoke of "sodomy," which referred to sexual acts. Sodomy was a crime that was often ignored, but sometimes punished severely (see sodomy law). He wrote, "'Sexuality' is an invention of the modern state, the industrial revolution, and capitalism."[133]
Sexual orientation is argued as a concept that evolved in the industrialized West, and there is a controversy as to the universality of its application in other societies or cultures.[134][135][136] Non-westernized concepts of male sexuality differ essentially from the way sexuality is seen and classified under the Western system of sexual orientation.[137][unreliable source?] The validity of the notion of sexual orientation as defined in the West, as a biological phenomenon rather than a social construction specific to a region and period, has also been questioned within the industrialized Western society).[138][139][140]
Heterosexuality and homosexuality are terms often used in European and American cultures to encompass a person's entire social identity, which includes self and personality. In Western cultures, some people speak meaningfully of gay, lesbian, and bisexual identities and communities. In other cultures, homosexuality and heterosexual labels do not emphasize an entire social identity or indicate community affiliation based on sexual orientation.[141]
Some historians and researchers argue that the emotional and affectionate activities associated with sexual-orientation terms such as "gay" and "heterosexual" change significantly over time and across cultural boundaries. For example, in many English-speaking nations, it is assumed that same-sex kissing, particularly between men, is a sign of homosexuality, whereas various types of same-sex kissing are common expressions of friendship in other nations. Also, many modern and historic cultures have formal ceremonies expressing long-term commitment between same-sex friends, even though homosexuality itself is taboo within the cultures.[142]
Law, politics and theology[edit]
Two researchers, raising (1995) 'serious doubt whether sexual orientation is a valid concept at all,' warned against increasing politicization of this area.[49][50]
Professor Michael King stated, "The conclusion reached by scientists who have investigated the origins and stability of sexual orientation is that it is a human characteristic that is formed early in life, and is resistant to change. Scientific evidence on the origins of homosexuality is considered relevant to theological and social debate because it undermines suggestions that sexual orientation is a choice."[143]
Legally as well, a person's sexual orientation is hard to establish as either an intrinsic or a binary quality. In 1999, law professor David Cruz wrote that "sexual orientation (and the related concept homosexuality) might plausibly refer to a variety of different attributes, singly or in combination. What is not immediately clear is whether one conception is most suited to all social, legal, and constitutional purposes."[18]
See also[edit]


Sexuality portal
LGBT portal



Romantic orientation
Ascribed characteristics
Bisexuality in the United States
Genetic diagnosis of intersex
Hate crime and Homophobia
History of gay men in the United States
History of lesbianism in the United States
LGBT (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender)
List of anti-discrimination acts
LGBT rights by country or territory
Fundamental Rights Agency
Human male sexuality, including non-western perspectives on sexual orientation
Marriage and Same-sex marriage
Sexual orientation and military service
Sexual orientation hypothesis
Terminology of homosexuality
Sociosexual orientation
Sexual orientation and gender identity at the United Nations

References[edit]



^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Sexual orientation, homosexuality and bisexuality". American Psychological Association. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013. Retrieved August 10, 2013. 
^ a b c "Sexual Orientation". American Psychiatric Association. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved January 1, 2013. 
^ a b Melby, Todd (November 2005). "Asexuality gets more attention, but is it a sexual orientation?". Contemporary Sexuality. 39 (11): 1, 4–5. 
^ a b c Marshall Cavendish Corporation, ed. (2009). "Asexuality". Sex and Society. 2. Marshall Cavendish. pp. 82–83. ISBN 978-0-7614-7905-5. Retrieved February 2, 2013. 
^ a b c Firestein, Beth A. (2007). Becoming Visible: Counseling Bisexuals Across the Lifespan. Columbia University Press. p. 9. ISBN 0231137249. Retrieved October 3, 2012. 
^ a b c d "Case No. S147999 in the Supreme Court of the State of California, In re Marriage Cases Judicial Council Coordination Proceeding No. 4365(...) - APA California Amicus Brief — As Filed" (PDF). Page 33 n. 60 (p. 55 per Adobe Acrobat Reader);citation per id., Brief, p. 6 n. 4 (p. 28 per Adobe Acrobat Reader). p. 30. Retrieved March 13, 2013. 
^ Schmidt J (2010). Migrating Genders: Westernisation, Migration, and Samoan Fa'afafine, p. 45 Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., ISBN 978-1-4094-0273-2
^ a b c d "Avoiding Heterosexual Bias in Language" (PDF). American Psychological Association. Retrieved July 19, 2011. 
^ a b Rosario, M.; Schrimshaw, E.; Hunter, J.; Braun, L. (2006). "Sexual identity development among lesbian, gay, and bisexual youths: Consistency and change over time". Journal of Sex Research. 43 (1): 46–58. doi:10.1080/00224490609552298. PMC 3215279 . 
^ Friedman, Lawrence Meir (1990). The republic of choice: law, authority, and culture. Harvard University Press. p. 92. ISBN 978-0-674-76260-2. Retrieved 8 January 2012. 
^ Heuer, Gottfried (2011). Sexual revolutions: psychoanalysis, history and the father. Taylor & Francis. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-415-57043-5. Retrieved 8 January 2011. 
^ a b c d e f g h i Frankowski BL; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Adolescence (June 2004). "Sexual orientation and adolescents". Pediatrics. 113 (6): 1827–32. doi:10.1542/peds.113.6.1827. PMID 15173519. 
^ a b Gloria Kersey-Matusiak (2012). Delivering Culturally Competent Nursing Care. Springer Publishing Company. p. 169. ISBN 0826193811. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Most health and mental health organizations do not view sexual orientation as a 'choice.' 
^ a b c d e Mary Ann Lamanna, Agnes Riedmann, Susan D Stewart (2014). Marriages, Families, and Relationships: Making Choices in a Diverse Society. Cengage Learning. p. 82. ISBN 1305176898. Retrieved February 11, 2016. The reason some individuals develop a gay sexual identity has not been definitively established  – nor do we yet understand the development of heterosexuality. The American Psychological Association (APA) takes the position that a variety of factors impact a person's sexuality. The most recent literature from the APA says that sexual orientation is not a choice that can be changed at will, and that sexual orientation is most likely the result of a complex interaction of environmental, cognitive and biological factors...is shaped at an early age...[and evidence suggests] biological, including genetic or inborn hormonal factors, play a significant role in a person's sexuality (American Psychological Association 2010). CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ a b Gail Wiscarz Stuart (2014). Principles and Practice of Psychiatric Nursing. Elsevier Health Sciences. p. 502. ISBN 032329412X. Retrieved February 11, 2016. No conclusive evidence supports any one specific cause of homosexuality; however, most researchers agree that biological and social factors influence the development of sexual orientation. 
^ a b c d e "Submission to the Church of England's Listening Exercise on Human Sexuality". The Royal College of Psychiatrists. Retrieved 13 June 2013. 
^ Långström, N.; Rahman, Q.; Carlström, E.; Lichtenstein, P. (2008). "Genetic and Environmental Effects on Same-sex Sexual Behavior: A Population Study of Twins in Sweden". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 39 (1): 75–80. doi:10.1007/s10508-008-9386-1. PMID 18536986. 
^ a b Cruz, David B. (1999). "Controlling Desires: Sexual Orientation Conversion and the Limits of Knowledge and Law" (PDF). Southern California Law Review. 72: 1297. 
^ Bogaert, Anthony F (2006). "Toward a conceptual understanding of asexuality". Review of General Psychology. 10 (3): 241–250. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.10.3.241. 
^ a b Bogaert, Anthony F (2004). "Asexuality: prevalence and associated factors in a national probability sample". Journal of Sex Research. 41 (3): 281. doi:10.1080/00224490409552235. PMID 15497056. Archived from the original on 2012-05-13. 
^ Greene, B., & Herek, G. M. (eds.). (1994). Lesbian and Gay Psychology: Theory, Research, and Clinical Applications. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. p. 162. Quotation: "A second aspect of sexual identity, sexual orientation, refers to a person's choice of sexual partners: heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual".
^ American Psychological Association (2005). "Lesbian & Gay Parenting".
^ Tasker, F.; Patterson, C. J. (2007). "Research on Lesbian and Gay Parenting: Retrospect and Prospect" (PDF). Journal of GLBT Family Studies. 3 (2–3): 9–34. doi:10.1300/J461v03n02_02. 
^ Reiter L. (1989). "Sexual orientation, sexual identity, and the question of choice". Clinical Social Work Journal. 17: 138–50. doi:10.1007/bf00756141. 
^ a b Ross, Michael W.; Essien, E. James; Williams, Mark L.; Fernandez-Esquer, Maria Eugenia. (2003). "Concordance Between Sexual Behavior and Sexual Identity in Street Outreach Samples of Four Racial/Ethnic Groups". Sexually Transmitted Diseases. American Sexually Transmitted Diseases Association. 30 (2): 110–3. doi:10.1097/00007435-200302000-00003. PMID 12567166. 
^ Rice, Kim (2009). "Pansexuality". In Marshall Cavendish Corporation. Sex and Society. 2. Marshall Cavendish. p. 593. ISBN 978-0-7614-7905-5. Retrieved October 3, 2012. 
^ Sinclair, Karen, About Whoever: The Social Imprint on Identity and Orientation, NY, 2013
^ Aggrawal, Anil (2008). Forensic and medico-legal aspects of sexual crimes and unusual sexual practices. CRC Press, ISBN 978-1-4200-4308-2
^ Diamond M (2010). Sexual orientation and gender identity. In Weiner IB, Craighead EW eds. The Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology, Volume 4. p. 1578. John Wiley and Sons, ISBN 978-0-470-17023-6
^ Schmidt J (2001). Redefining fa’afafine: Western discourses and the construction of transgenderism in Samoa. Intersections: Gender, history and culture in the Asian context
^ Bagemihl B. Surrogate phonology and transsexual faggotry: A linguistic analogy for uncoupling sexual orientation from gender identity. In Queerly Phrased: Language, Gender, and Sexuality. Anna Livia, Kira Hall (eds.) pp. 380 ff. Oxford University Press ISBN 0-19-510471-4
^ Minton HL (1986). "Femininity in men and masculinity in women: American psychiatry and psychology portray homosexuality in the 1930s". Journal of Homosexuality. 13 (1): 1–21. doi:10.1300/J082v13n01_01. PMID 3534080. 
Terry, J. (1999). An American obsession: Science, medicine, and homosexuality in modern society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
^ Bailey JM, Zucker KJ (1995). "Childhood sex-typed behavior and sexual orientation: a conceptual analysis and quantitative review". Developmental Psychology. 31 (1): 43–55. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.31.1.43. 
^ Rodriguez Rust, Paula C. Bisexuality: A contemporary paradox for women, Journal of Social Issues, vol. 56(2), Summer 2000, pp. 205–221. Special Issue: Women's sexualities: New perspectives on sexual orientation and gender. Article online. Archived 2007-03-10 at the Wayback Machine.
Also published in: Rodriguez Rust, Paula C. Bisexuality in the United States: A Social Science Reader. Columbia University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-231-10227-5.
^ Butler, Katy (March 7, 2006). "Many Couples Must Negotiate Terms of 'Brokeback' Marriages". New York Times. 
^ Hentges, Rochelle (October 4, 2006). "How to tell if your husband is gay". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. Archived from the original on October 22, 2006. 
^ Gay Men from Heterosexual Marriages: Attitudes, Behaviors, Childhood Experiences, and Reasons for Marriage
^ Stack, Peggy Fletcher (August 5, 2006), "Gay, Mormon, married", The Salt Lake Tribune 
^ "Gay No More". psychologytoday.com. Archived from the original on 2006-03-18. 
^ Hays D; Samuels A (1989). "Heterosexual women's perceptions of their marriages to bisexual or homosexual men". J Homosex. 18 (1–2): 81–100. doi:10.1300/J082v18n01_04. PMID 2794500. 
^ Coleman E (1981). "Bisexual and gay men in heterosexual marriage: conflicts and resolutions in therapy". J Homosex. 7 (2–3): 93–103. doi:10.1300/J082v07n02_11. PMID 7346553. 
^ Matteson DR (1985). "Bisexual men in marriage: is a positive homosexual identity and stable marriage possible?". J Homosex. 11 (1–2): 149–71. doi:10.1300/J082v11n01_12. PMID 4056386. 
^ Sinclair, Karen, About Whoever: The Social Imprint on Identity and Orientation, NY, 2013 ISBN 9780981450513
^ "Question A2: Sexual orientation". Centre for Addiction and Mental Health. Archived from the original on 7 September 2014. Retrieved 3 February 2015. 
^ "LGBT-Sexual Orientation: What is Sexual Orientation?" Archived 2014-06-28 at the Wayback Machine., the official web pages of APA. Accessed April 9, 2015
^ a b c "Appropriate Therapeutic Responses to Sexual Orientation" (PDF). American Psychological Association. 2009: 63, 86. Retrieved February 3, 2015. 
^ Susan Moore and Doreen Rosenthal, Sexuality in Adolescence: Current Trends (E. Sussex/London: Routledge (Adolescence and Society ser.), 2d ed., pbk., 2006), p. 48 (authors respectively developmental social psychologist, Swinburne Univ. Melbourne, & developmental psychologist, Univ. of Melbourne, id., cover IV).
^ a b http://search.proquest.com/docview/224888124
^ a b c d e http://psycnet.apa.org/?fa=main.doiLanding&fuseaction=showUIDAbstract&uid=1996-16078-001
^ a b [1][dead link]
^ Gonsiorek, John C., Randall L Sell, & James D. Weinrich, Definition and Measurement of Sexual Orientation, op. cit., citing Golden, C., Our Politics and Choices: The Feminist Movement and Sexual Orientation, in B. Greene & G. Herek, eds., Lesbian. and Gay Psychology: Theory, Research and Clinical Applications (Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage 1994), vol. 1, pp. 54–70 (sic: period so in title).
^ Ruse, Michael (1988). Homosexuality: A Philosophical Inquiry. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. pp. 22, 25, 45. ISBN 0 631 15275 X. 
^ a b Bearman, P. S.; Bruckner, H. (2001). "Opposite-sex twins and adolescent same-sex attraction" (PDF). American Journal of Sociology. 107: 1179–1205. doi:10.1086/341906. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-07-09. 
^ Vare, Jonatha W., and Terry L. Norton. "Understanding Gay and Lesbian Youth: Sticks, Stones and Silence." Cleaning House 71.6 (1998): 327-331: Education Full Text (H.W. Wilson). Web. 19 April 2012.
^ Långström, Niklas; Rahman, Qazi; Carlström, Eva; Lichtenstein, Paul (2010-02-01). "Genetic and Environmental Effects on Same-sex Sexual Behavior: A Population Study of Twins in Sweden". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 39 (1): 75–80. doi:10.1007/s10508-008-9386-1. ISSN 0004-0002. 
^ Sanders, A. R.; Martin, E. R.; Beecham, G. W.; Guo, S.; Dawood, K.; Rieger, G.; Badner, J. A.; Gershon, E. S.; Krishnappa, R. S. (May 2015). "Genome-wide scan demonstrates significant linkage for male sexual orientation". Psychological Medicine. 45 (7): 1379–1388. doi:10.1017/S0033291714002451. ISSN 0033-2917. 
^ Sanders, A. R.; Martin, E. R.; Beecham, G. W.; Guo, S.; Dawood, K.; Rieger, G.; Badner, J. A.; Gershon, E. S.; Krishnappa, R. S.; Kolundzija, A. B.; Duan, J.; Gejman, P. V.; Bailey, J. M. (17 November 2014). "Genome-wide scan demonstrates significant linkage for male sexual orientation". Psychological Medicine. 45 (07): 1379–1388. doi:10.1017/S0033291714002451. PMID 25399360. 
^ Wilson, G., & Q. Rahman, Born Gay: The Psychobiology of Human Sex Orientation, op. cit.
^ Siiteri, PK; Wilson, JD (Jan 1974). "Testosterone formation and metabolism during male sexual differentiation in the human embryo". The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism. 38 (1): 113–25. doi:10.1210/jcem-38-1-113. PMID 4809636. 
^ LeVay, Simon (2011). Gay, Straight, and the reason why. The science of sexual orientation. Oxford University Press. pp. 45–71; 129–156. ISBN 978-0-19-993158-3. 
^ Blanchard, R.; Cantor, J. M.; Bogaert, A. F.; Breedlove, S. M.; Ellis, L. (2006). "Interaction of fraternal birth order and handedness in the development of male homosexuality" (PDF). Hormones and Behavior. 49 (3): 405–414. doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2005.09.002. PMID 16246335. 
^ Anthony F. Bogaert; Malvina Skorska (April 2011). "Sexual orientation, fraternal birth order, and the maternal immune hypothesis: a review". Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology. 32 (2): 247–254. doi:10.1016/j.yfrne.2011.02.004. PMID 21315103. 
^ "Different aspects of sexual orientation may be influenced to a greater or lesser degree [p. 303:] by experiential factors such that sexual experimentation with same-gender partners may be more dependent on a conducive family environment than the development of a gay or lesbian identity." Susan E. Golombok & Fiona L. Tasker, Do Parents Influence the Sexual Orientation of Their Children?, in J. Kenneth Davidson, Sr., & Nelwyn B. Moore, Speaking of Sexuality: Interdisciplinary Readings (Los Angeles, Calif.: Roxbury Publishing, 2001) (ISBN 1-891487-33-7), pp. 302–303 (adapted from same authors, Do Parents Influence the Sexual Orientation of Their Children? Findings From a Longitudinal Study of Lesbian Families, in Developmental Psychology (American Psychological Association), vol. 32, 1996, 3–11) (author Susan Golombok prof. psychology, City Univ., London, id., p. xx, & author Fiona Tasker sr. lecturer, Birkbeck Coll., Univ. of London, id., p. xxiii).
^ "Whereas there is no evidence from the present investigation to suggest that parents have a determining influence on the sexual orientation of their children, the findings do indicate that by creating a climate of acceptance or rejection of homosexuality within the family, parents may have some impact on their children's sexual experimentation as heterosexual, lesbian, or gay." Do Parents Influence the Sexual Orientation of Their Children?, ibid., in Speaking of Sexuality, id., p. 303 (adapted per id., p. 303).
^ Expert affidavit of Gregory M. Herek, Ph.D.
^ a b Statement from the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Gay and Lesbian Mental Health Special Interest Group.
^ Australian Psychological Society: Sexual orientation and homosexuality.
^ ""Therapies" to change sexual orientation lack medical justification and threaten health". Pan American Health Organization. Archived from the original on May 26, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2012. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) archived .
^ NARTH Mission Statement
^ Spitzer R. L. (1981). "The diagnostic status of homosexuality in DSM-III: a reformulation of the issues". American Journal of Psychiatry. 138 (2): 210–15. doi:10.1176/ajp.138.2.210. PMID 7457641. 
^ "An Instant Cure", Time; April 1, 1974.
^ The A.P.A. Normalization of Homosexuality, and the Research Study of Irving Bieber
^ Statement of the American Psychological Association.
^ Ulrichs, Karl Heinrich (1994). The Riddle of Man-Manly Love. Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-866-X. 
^ Hirschfeld, Magnus, 1896. Sappho und Socrates, Wie erklärt sich die Liebe der Männer & und Frauen zu Personen des eigenen Geschlechts? (Sappho and Socrates, How Can One Explain the Love of Men and Women for Individuals of Their Own Sex?).
^ Kinsey; et al. (1953). Sexual Behavior in the Human Female. Indiana University Press. p. 499. ISBN 4-87187-704-3. 
^ Kinsey; et al. (1948). Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-33412-8. 
^ Kinsey; et al. (1948). Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. p. 639. 
^ Kinsey; et al. (1948). Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. pp. 639–641. 
^ Masters and Johnson (1979). Homosexuality in Perspective. ISBN 0-316-54984-3. 
^ Weinrich, J.; et al. (1993). "A factor analysis of the Klein Sexual Orientation Grid in two disparate samples". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 22: 157–168. doi:10.1007/bf01542364. 
^ Weinberg; et al. (1994). Dual Attraction. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-508482-9. 
^ a b Sell, R.L. (1997). "Defining and measuring sexual orientation: A review". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 26: 643–58. doi:10.1023/A:1024528427013. PMID 9415799. 
^ Bem, S.L. (1981). Bem sex-rol inventory professional manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 
^ Shively, M.G.; DeCecco, J.P. (1977). "Components of sexual identity". Journal of Homosexuality. 3: 41–48. doi:10.1300/j082v03n01_04. 
^ a b Sell, R.L. (1996). "The Sell assessment of sexual orientation: Background and scoring". Journal of Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Identity. 1: 295–310. 
^ Udry, J.; Chantala, K. (2005). "Risk factors differ according to same sex and opposite-sex interest". Journal of Biological Sciences. 37: 481–497. doi:10.1017/s0021932004006765. 
^ Laumann; et al. (1994). The Social Organization of Sexuality. The University of Chicago Press. p. 67. ISBN 0-226-46957-3. 
^ Eskin, M.; et al. (2005). "Same-sex sexual orientation, childhood sexual abuse, and suicidal behaviour in university students in Turkey". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 34 (2): 185–195. doi:10.1007/s10508-005-1796-8. PMID 15803252. 
^ D'Augelli; Hershberger, SL; Pilkington, NW; et al. (2001). "Suicidality patterns and sexual orientation-related factors among lesbian, gay, and bisexual youths". Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior. 31 (3): 250–264. doi:10.1521/suli.31.3.250.24246. PMID 11577911. 
^ Rust, Paula (2000). Bisexuality in the United States: A Social Science Reader. Columbia University Press. p. 167. ISBN 0-231-10226-7. 
^ Savin-Williams, R. (2006). "Who's Gay? Does it Matter?". Current Directions in Psychological Sciences. 15: 40–44. doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2006.00403.x. 
^ Laumann; et al. (1994). The Social Organization of Sexuality. The University of Chicago Press. p. 301. ISBN 0-226-46957-3. 
^ Mosher, W; Chandra, A.; Jones, J. "Sexual behaviour and selected health measures: Men and women 15-44 years of age, United States, 2002". Advance Data from Vital and Health Statistics. National Center for Health Statistics. 362. 
^ Savin-Williams, R.; Ream, G.L. (2003). "Suicide attempts among sexual-minority male youth". Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology. 32 (4): 509–522. doi:10.1207/S15374424JCCP3204_3. PMID 14710459. 
^ Laumann; et al. (1994). The Social Organization of Sexuality. The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-46957-3. 
^ Dunne, M.; Bailey, J.; Kirk, K.; Martin, N. (2000). "The subtlety of sex -atypicality". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 29 (6): 549–565. doi:10.1023/A:1002002420159. PMID 11100262. 
^ Eskin, M., Kaynak-Demir, H., & Demis, S., Mehmet; Kaynak-Demir, Hadiye; Demir, Sinem (2005). "Same-sex sexuall orientation, childhood sexual abuse, and suicidal behaviour in university students in Turkey". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 34 (2): 185–195. doi:10.1007/s10508-005-1796-8. PMID 15803252. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Wichstrom, L., & Hegna, K., L; Hegna, K (2003). "Sexual orientation and suicide attempt: A longitudinal study of the general Norwegian adolescent population". Journal of Abnormal Psychology. 112 (1): 144–151. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.112.1.144. PMID 12653422. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Laumann; et al. (1994). The Social Organization of Sexuality. The University of Chicago Press. p. 303. ISBN 0-226-46957-3. 
^ Diamond, L.M. (2003). "Was it a phase? Young women's relinquishment of lesbian/bisexual identities over a 5-year period". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 84 (2): 352–364. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.84.2.352. PMID 12585809. 
^ Laumann; et al. (1994). The Social Organization of Sexuality. The University of Chicago Press. p. 289. ISBN 0-226-46957-3. 
^ Savin-Williams, R. (2006). "Who's Gay? Does it Matter?". Current Directions in Psychological Science. 15: 40–44. doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2006.00403.x. 
^ a b c Wilson, G., & Q. Rahman, Born Gay: The Psychobiology of Human Sex Orientation (London: Peter Owen Publishers, 2005), p. 21.
^ Chivers, Meredith L.; Gerulf Rieger; Elizabeth Latty; J. Michael Bailey (2004). "A Sex Difference in the Specificity of Sexual Arousal" (PDF). Psychological Science. Blackwell Publishing. 15 (11): 736–44. doi:10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00750.x. PMID 15482445. 
^ Chivers, Meredith L.; J. Michael Bailey. (2005). "A sex difference in features that elicit genital response". Biological Psychology. Elsevier B.V. 70 (2): 115–20. doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2004.12.002. PMID 16168255. 
^ Safron, Adam; Bennett, Barch; Bailey, J. Michael; Gitelman, Darren R.; Parrish, Todd B.; Reber, Paul J. (2007). "Neural Correlates of Sexual Arousal in Homosexual and Heterosexual Men". Behavioral Neuroscience. American Psychological Association. 121 (2): 237–48. doi:10.1037/0735-7044.121.2.237. PMID 17469913. 
^ LeDoux JE, The Emotional Brain (N.Y.: Simon & Schuster, 1996).
^ a b c Garnets, L. & Kimmel, D. C. (Eds.). (2003). Psychological perspectives on lesbian, gay and bisexual experiences. New York: Columbia University Press
^ Mock, S. E.; Eibach, R. P. (2011). "Stability and change in sexual orientation identity over a 10-year period in adulthood". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 41: 641–648. doi:10.1007/s10508-011-9761-1. PMID 21584828. 
^ Markus H. R.; Kitayama S. (1991). "Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation". Psychological Review. 98: 224–253. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.224. 
^ Minwalla O.; Rosser B. R. S.; Feldman J.; Varga C. (2005). "Identity experience among progressive gay Muslims in North America: A qualitative study within Al-Fatiha" (PDF). Culture, Health & Sexuality. 7 (2): 113–128. doi:10.1080/13691050412331321294. 
^ Sechrest, L.; Fay, T. L.; Zaidi, M. H. (1972). "Problems of Translation in Cross-Cultural Research". Journal of Cross-Cultural Research. 3 (1): 41–56. doi:10.1177/002202217200300103. 
^ a b c d e f Santaemilia, J. (2008). 'War of words' on New (Legal) Sexual Identities: Spain's Recent Gender-Related Legislation and Discursive Conflict. In J. Santaemilia & P. Bou (Eds.). Gender and sexual identities in transition: international perspectives, pp.181-198. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
^ Leap, W. L. (1996). Word's Out: Gay Men's English. Minneapolis:University of Minnesota Press.
^ Rule, NO (2011). "The influence of target and perceiver race in the categorisation of male sexual orientation". Perception. 40 (7): 830–9. doi:10.1068/p7001. PMID 22128555. 
^ Johnson, KL; Ghavami, N (2011). Gilbert, Sam, ed. "At the crossroads of conspicuous and concealable: What race categories communicate about sexual orientation". PLoS ONE. 6 (3): e18025. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0018025. PMC 3069043 . PMID 21483863. 
^ Rule, NO; Ishii, K; Ambady, N; Rosen, KS; Hallett, KC (2011). "Found in translation: Cross-cultural consensus in the accurate categorization of male sexual orientation". Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 37 (11): 1499–507. doi:10.1177/0146167211415630. PMID 21807952. 
^ Cox, William T. L.; Devine, Patricia G.; Bischmann, Alyssa A.; Hyde, Janet S. (2015). "Inferences About Sexual Orientation: The Roles of Stereotypes, Faces, and The Gaydar Myth". The Journal of Sex Research. 52 (8): 1–15. doi:10.1080/00224499.2015.1015714. PMC 4731319 . 
^ "Crime in the United States 2004: Hate Crime". FBI. Archived from the original on April 11, 2007. Retrieved 2007-05-04. 
^ ACAS (About Us), as accessed April 19, 2010.
^ Sexual orientation and the workplace: Putting the Employment Equality (Sexual Orientation) Regulations 2003 into practice
^ Rust, P. C. (2003). Finding a Sexual Identity and Community: Therapeutic Implications and Cultural Assumptions in Scientific Models of Coming Out. In L. Garnets & D. C. Kimmel (Eds.). Psychological perspectives on lesbian, gay and bisexual experiences (pp. 227-269). New York: Columbia University Press
^ Carballo-Diéguez A.; Dolezal C.; Nieves L.; Díaz F.; Decena C.; Balan I. (2004). "Looking for a tall, dark, macho man… sexual-role behaviour variations in Latino gay and bisexual men". Culture, Health & Sexuality. 6 (2): 159–171. doi:10.1080/13691050310001619662. 
^ a b Cardoso F. L. (2005). "Cultural Universals and Differences in Male Homosexuality: The Case of a Brazilian Fishing Village". Archives of Sexual Behavior. 34 (1): 103–109. doi:10.1007/s105080051004x. 
^ Cheng, P (2011). "Gay Asian Masculinities and Christian Theologies". Cross currents. 61 (4): 540–548. doi:10.1111/j.1939-3881.2011.00202.x. 
^ a b Masequesmay, G (2003). "Emergence of queer Vietnamese America". Amerasia Journal. 29 (1): 117–134. doi:10.17953/amer.29.1.l15512728mj65738. 
^ "Code of Ethics of the American Association of Christian Counselors" (PDF). www.aacc.net. American Association of Christian Counselors. Retrieved May 2015.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Davis, M.; Hart, G.; Bolding, G.; Sherr, L.; Elford, J. (2006). "Sex and the Internet: Gay men, risk reduction and serostatus". Culture, Health & Sexuality. 8 (2): 161–174. doi:10.1080/13691050500526126. 
^ James Alm, M. V. Lee Badgett, Leslie A. Whittington, Wedding Bell Blues: The Income Tax Consequences of Legalizing Same-Sex Marriage, p. 24 (1998) PDF link.
^ "Study: One in 100 adults asexual". CNN. 15 October 2004. Archived from the original on 27 October 2007. Retrieved 11 November 2007. 
^ "The Kinsey Institute - [Publications]". kinseyinstitute.org. Archived from the original on 2002-05-29. 
^ Chinese Femininities, Chinese Masculinities: A Reader, by Susan Brownell & Jeffrey N. Wasserstrom (Univ. of Calif. Press, 2002 (ISBN 0520221168, ISBN 978-0-520-22116-1)). Quote: "The problem with sexuality: Some scholars have argued that maleness and femaleness were not closely linked to sexuality in China. Michel Foucault's The History of Sexuality (which deals primarily with Western civilization and western Europe) began to influence some China scholars in the 1980s. Foucault's insight was to demonstrate that sexuality has a history; it is not fixed psycho-biological drive that is the same for all humans according to their sex, but rather it is a cultural construct inseparable from gender constructs. After unmooring sexuality from biology, he anchored it in history, arguing that this thing we now call sexuality came into existence in the eighteenth-century West and did not exist previously in this form. "Sexuality" is an invention of the modern state, the industrial revolution, and capitalism. Taking this insight as a starting point, scholars have slowly been compiling the history of sexuality in China. The works by Tani Barlow, discussed above, were also foundational in this trend. Barlow observes that, in the West, heterosexuality is the primary site for the production of gender: a woman truly becomes a woman only in relation to a man's heterosexual desire. By contrast, in China before the 1920s the "jia" (linage unit, family) was the primary site for the production of gender: marriage and sexuality were to serve the lineage by producing the next generation of lineage members; personal love and pleasure were secondary to this goal. Barlow argues that this has two theoretical implications: (1) it is not possible to write a Chinese history of heterosexuality, sexuality as an institution, and sexual identities in the European metaphysical sense, and (2) it is not appropriate to ground discussions of Chinese gender processes in the sexed body so central in "Western" gender processes. Here she echoes Furth's argument that, before the early twentieth century, sex-identity grounded on anatomical difference did not hold a central place in Chinese constructions of gender. And she echoes the point illustrated in detail in Sommer's chapter on male homosexuality in the Qing legal code: a man could engage in homosexual behavior without calling into question his manhood so long as his behavior did not threaten the patriarchal Confucian family structure."
^ The Psychology of Sexual Orientation, Behavior, and identity, by Louis Diamant & Richard D. McAnulty (Greenwood Publishing Group, 1995 (ISBN 0313285012, ISBN 978-0-313-28501-1) (522 pages). Quote from page 81: Although sexual orientation is a loaded Western concept, the term is still a useful one, if we avoid imposing Western thoughts and meanings associated with our language on non-Western, non contemporary cultures.
^ The Handbook of Social Work Direct Practice, by Paula Allen-Meares & Charles D. Garvin & Contributors Paula Allen-Meares & Charles D. Garvin (SAGE, 2001 (ISBN 0761914994, ISBN 978-0-7619-1499-0) (733 pages). Quote from page 478: The concept of sexual orientation is a product of contemporary Western thought.
^ Sexual behavior and the non-construction of sexual identity: Implications for the analysis of men who have sex with men and women who have sex with women., [by?] Michael W. Ross & Ann K. Brooks. Quote from Page 9: Chou (2000) notes in his analysis of the lack of applicability of western concepts of sexual identity in China, just because a person has a particular taste for a specific food doesn't mean that we label them in terms of the food that they prefer. A similar approach to sexual appetite as not conferring identity may be operating in this sample. McIntosh (1968) has previously noted that people who do not identify with the classic western, white gay/lesbian role may not necessarily identify their behavior as homosexual;
^ Transnational Transgender: Reading Sexual Diversity in Cross-Cultural Contexts Through Film and Video [by?] Ryan, Joelle Ruby (American Studies Association). Quote: Many of the projects which have historically investigated sex/gender variance in non-Western contexts have been ethnographies and anthropological studies. Due to strong and lingering problems with ethnocentrism, many of these research studies have attempted to transpose a Western understanding of sex, gender and sexuality onto cultures in Asia, Latin America and Africa. Terms such as "homosexual," "transvestite," and "transsexual" all arose out of Western concepts of identity based on science, sexology and medicine and often bear little resemblance to sex/gender/sexuality paradigms in the varied cultures of the developing world.
^ "Sexual Orientation, Human Rights and Global Politics" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-09-27. 
^ Waits, Matthew. "Matthew Waits of Dept. Sociology, Anthropology & Applied Social Sciences, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom".  Quote from the Abstract: The paper problematises utilisation of the concept of 'sexual orientation' in moves to revise human rights conventions and discourses in the light of social constructionist and queer theory addressing sexuality, which has convincingly suggested that 'sexual orientation' is a culturally specific concept, misrepresenting many diverse forms of sexuality apparent in comparative sociological and anthropological research conducted worldwide. I will argue in particular that 'orientation' is a concept incompatible with bisexuality when interpreted within the context of dominant dualistic assumptions about sex, gender and desire in western culture (suggested by Judith Butler's concept of the 'heterosexual matrix'). I will discuss the implications of the this for interpreting contemporary struggles among competing social movements, NGO and governmental actors involved in contesting the relationship of sexuality to human rights as defined by the United Nations.
^ "Resisting Orientation" (PDF).  McIntosh argues that the labeling process should be the focus of inquiry and that homosexuality should be seen as a social role rather than a condition. Role is more useful than condition, she argues, because roles (of heterosexual and homosexual) can be dichotomised in a way that behavior cannot. She draws upon cross-cultural data to demonstrate that in many societies 'there may be much homosexual behavior, but there are no "homosexuals"' (p71).
^ Zachary Green & Michael J. Stiers, Multiculturalism and Group Therapy in the United States: A Social Constructionist Perspective (Springer Netherlands, 2002), pp. 233–246.
^ Robert Brain, Friends and Lovers (Granada Publishing Ltd. 1976), chs. 3, 4.
^ Church Times: How much is known about the origins of homosexuality?



Further reading[edit]

Anders Agmo, Functional and Dysfunctional Sexual Behavior (Elsevier, 2007).
Brum, Gil, Larry McKane, & Gerry Karp, Biology – Exploring Life (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2d ed. 1994), p. 663. (About INAH-3.)
De La Torre, Miguel A., Out of the Shadows, Into the Light: Christianity and Homosexuality (Chalice Press, 2009).
Dynes, Wayne, ed., Encyclopedia of Homosexuality. (New York & London: Garland Publishing, 1990).
Sell, Randall L., Defining and measuring sexual orientation: a review, in Archives of Sexual Behavior, 26 (6) (December 1997), 643–658. (excerpt).
Wunsch, Serge, PhD thesis about sexual behavior (Paris: Sorbonne, 2007).
Isidro A. T. Savillo's "New Statements: Breakthrough in Human Sexual Behavioral Phenotypes", June 2013.

External links[edit]






This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (May 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Look up sexual orientation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Sexual orientation



Sexual Orientation FAQ
A law lecture (mp3) on sexual orientation and U.S. constitutional law
American Psychological Association: Answers to Your Questions About Sexual Orientation and Homosexuality
Aspirin changes sexual behaviour of rats
Brain gender: prostaglandins have their say
Loraine JA; Ismail AA; Adamopoulos DA; Dove GA (November 1970). "Endocrine Function in Male and Female Homosexuals". Br Med J. 4 (5732): 406–9. doi:10.1136/bmj.4.5732.406. PMC 1819981 . PMID 5481520. 
Etiology on glbtq.com
Magnus Hirschfeld Archive of Sexology at the Humboldt University in Berlin
Is sexual orientation determined at birth?
Sanders BK (2007). "Sex, drugs and sports: prostaglandins, epitestosterone and sexual development". Med. Hypotheses. 69 (4): 829–35. doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2006.12.058. PMID 17382481. 
Survivor bashing – bias motivated hate crimes
The Science Of Sexual Orientation
The SexEdLibrary
BORN FREE AND EQUAL - Sexual orientation and gender identity in international human rights law

Policies[edit]

Australia


Australian Medical Association


United States


American Academy of Pediatrics
American Medical Association
American Medical Student Association
American Psychological Association: for public or educators
Catholic Medical Association
Christian Medical and Dental Association







v
t
e


Human sexuality and sexology




Sexual relationship
phenomena




Asexuality

Gray asexuality


Bisexuality
Casual relationship
Casual sex
Celibacy
Celibacy syndrome
Committed relationship
Free love
Foreplay
Herbivore men
Heterosexuality
Homosexuality
Hypersexuality
Marriage
One-night stand
Polyamory
Promiscuity

Female


Romantic love

Romantic orientation


Flirting
Sex life
Sexual abstinence
Sexual partner
Single person
Swinging





Sexual dynamics



Hypergamy
Intersex
Physical attractiveness
Sexual attraction
Sexual ethics





See also



Sexual addiction
Sex Addicts Anonymous
Sexual surrogate












v
t
e


Gender and sexual identities



Gender
identities




Gender



Man
Woman
Male
Female
Androgyne
Bigender
Boi
Cisgender
Cross-dresser
Gender bender
Genderqueer
Gender neutrality
Postgenderism
Gender variance
Pangender
Transgender
Trans man
Trans woman
Transmasculine
Transfeminine
Transsexual
Trigender





Third gender,
third sex



Akava'ine
Bakla
Bissu
Calabai
Eunuch
Fa'afafine
Fakaleiti
Femminiello
Galli
Hijra
Kathoey
Khanith
Köçek
Koekchuch
Māhū
Maknyah
Mukhannathun
Muxe
Nullo
Sworn virgin
Takatāpui
Third gender
Travesti
Tumtum
Two-Spirit
Winkte





Other



Skoptsy








Sexual
orientation,
identities




Gender binary



Asexual
Bisexual
Heterosexual
Homosexual





Non-binary



Ambiphilia, Androphilia, Gynephilia
Pansexuality
Polysexuality
Third gender
Two-Spirit





Other



Antisexuality
Attraction to transgender people
Banjee
Bi-curious
Ex-gay
Ex-ex-gay
Gay
Gray asexuality
Heteroflexible
Lesbian
Kinsey scale
Monosexuality
Non-heterosexual
Queer
Questioning
Polyamorous
Romantic orientation
Same gender loving








See also



Disorders of sex development
Ego-dystonic sexual orientation
Erotic target location error
Gender roles
Hermaphrodite
Human female sexuality
Human male sexuality
Intersex
Sex and gender distinction
Sex assignment
Sex change
Sex reassignment surgery
Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures
Social construction of gender
The NeuroGenderings Network
Violence against women & Men (Gendercide)








Gender studies portal
Sexuality portal
LGBT portal












v
t
e


Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) topics










Academic fields
Discourse








LGBT topics in education
Gender studies
Lavender linguistics
Lesbian feminism
LGBT literature
LGBT/Queer studies
Queer theory
Transfeminism















Community
Culture








Anthems
Bars
Bisexual community
Coming out
Community center
Cross-dressers

Drag king
Drag queen


Fiction topics
Gay friendly
Icons
Lesbian utopia
Literature
Music
Neighborhoods
Organizations
Periodicals
Pride
Pride parade
Religious groups
Rodeos
Same-sex relationships
Slang

List of slang terms


Slogans
Sports




Symbols
Tourism

Category:LGBT culture














Gender identities
Sexual identities
Sexual diversities









Gender identities



Androgyne
Bigender
Boi
Cisgender
Female
Gender bender
Gender neutrality
Genderqueer
Male
Pangender
Transfeminine
Transgender
Trans man
Transmasculine
Transsexual
Trans woman
Womyn





Third sex / Third gender



Akava'ine
Androgynos
Bakla
Bissu
Eunuch
Fa'afafine
Fakaleiti
Femminiello
Hijra
Kathoey
Khanith
Köçek
Mahu
Mak nyah
Mukhannathun
Muxe
Sworn virgins
Takatāpui
Tomboy
Travesti
Tumtum
Two-Spirit
Winkte





Sexual orientation identities




Sexual orientations



Asexual
Bisexual
Heterosexual
Homosexual








Attraction to transgender people
Banjee
Bi-curious
Ex-gay
Ex-ex-gay
Gay
Heteroflexible
Lesbian
Monosexual
Non-heterosexual
Pansexual
Polyamorous
Queer
Questioning
Romantic orientation
Same gender loving








Related



Gender and Sexual Diversity
Erotic target location error
Gender roles
Human female sexuality
Human male sexuality
Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures
Intersex
Hermaphrodite
















History







LGBT history



History of homosexuality
History of lesbianism
LGBT history timeline
Social movements
History of Christianity and homosexuality
History of same-sex unions
Pederasty
Category:LGBT history








Pre-modern era



Adelphopoiesis
Homosexuality in ancient Egypt
Homosexuality in ancient Greece
Homosexuality in ancient Peru
Homosexuality in ancient Rome
Homosexuality in medieval Europe





16th to 19th century



Mollies
Urnings





20th century



Homosexuals in Nazi Germany and the Holocaust
Sea queens
Stonewall riots
Festival of Light action
White Night riots





21st century



Timeline of same-sex marriage
LGBTQ culture in New York City
Stonewall National Monument


















Rights and legal issues









LGBT rights by country or territory



Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe
Oceania
List of LGBT rights articles by region





LGBT rights topics



Adoption
Civil unions and partnerships
Hate crime laws
Intersex human rights
Military service
Parenting
Same-sex marriage

Timeline
List of couples


Socialism
Sodomy laws
Transgender rights
United Nations/Yogyakarta Principles
La Francophonie
Commonwealth of Nations





LGBT rights movements



Homophile
Gay liberation
LGBT rights groups
LGBT rights activists
Pink capitalism
















Sexual orientations – Medicine, science and sexology






Biology
Birth order
Demographics
Environment
Heterosexual–homosexual continuum
Homosexuality and psychology
Kinsey scale
Klein Grid
Neuroscience
Prenatal hormones
Sexual inversion
Sexual orientation change efforts
Sexual orientation identity
Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine















Social attitudes
Prejudice
Violence









Social attitudes



Anti-LGBT slogans
Heteronormativity
Heteropatriarchy
Homonationalism
Pinkwashing
Gay panic
LGBT rights opposition
LGBT stereotypes
Religion and homosexuality
Transgenderism and religion





Prejudice and discrimination



AIDS stigma
Biphobia
Genderism
Heterosexism
Homophobia
Internalized homophobia
Lesbophobia
Non-binary discrimination
Riddle scale
SPLC-designated list of anti-gay U.S. hate groups
Transmisogyny
Transphobia





Violence against LGBT people



Corrective rape
Death penalty for homosexuality
Gay bashing
History of violence in the UK
History of violence in the US

Orlando nightclub shooting


Significant acts of violence against LGBT people
Trans bashing
Unlawfully killed transgender people
LGBT suicides














 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Sexual ethics



Human sexuality



Adolescent sexuality

Rainbow party


Adultery
Education
Fetishism
Incest

law


Miscegenation
Objectification
Orientation
Pregnancy

Abortion


Prostitution

law


Survival sex





Child sexuality



Child marriage
Child pornography

law


Child prostitution
Child sex tourism





Sexual abuse



Child-on-child sexual abuse
Child sexual abuse

law


Harassment
Rape

law







Age of consent (reform)



Africa
Asia
Europe
North America

United States


Oceania
South America








 List of topics









Authority control



LCCN: sh91005179
GND: 7568353-2
BNF: cb15086667w (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sexual_orientation&oldid=818170867"					Categories: Interpersonal relationshipsSexual orientationLGBTHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 errors: datesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2013All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from October 2011Wikipedia external links cleanup from May 2013Wikipedia spam cleanup from May 2013Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers