Not to be confused with Shinny or Iomain.

Shinty
Camanachd, Iomain  (Scottish Gaelic)


A shinty game in progress



Highest governing body
Camanachd Association


First played
Pre-historic Scotland and Ireland


Characteristics


Contact
Contact


Team members
12 players per side
substitutes are permitted


Mixed gender
No
(there are no rules to prevent women from playing in men's teams; this happens occasionally in the lower leagues)


Equipment
Shinty ball


Shinty (Scottish Gaelic: camanachd, iomain) is a team game played with sticks and a ball. Shinty is now played mainly in the Scottish Highlands, and amongst Highland migrants to the big cities of Scotland, but it was formerly more widespread in Scotland,[1] and was even played for a considerable time in England[2] and other areas in the world where Scottish Highlanders migrated.[3]
While comparisons are often made with field hockey, the two games have several important differences. In shinty, a player is allowed to play the ball in the air and is allowed to use both sides of the stick, called a caman, which is wooden and slanted on both sides. The stick may also be used to block and to tackle, although a player may not come down on an opponent's stick, a practice called hacking. Players may also tackle using the body as long as it is shoulder-to-shoulder.
The game was derived from the same root as the Irish game of hurling and the Welsh game of bando, but has developed unique rules and features. These rules are governed by the Camanachd Association. A composite rules shinty–hurling game has been developed, which allows Scotland and Ireland to play annual international matches.
Another sport with common ancestry is bandy, which is played on ice. In fact, in Scottish Gaelic the name for bandy is "ice shinty" (camanachd-deighe) and once upon a time bandy and shinty (and shinney) could be used interchangeably in the English language.[4]



Contents


1 Origins
2 Game

2.1 Playing area
2.2 Ball
2.3 Stick


3 Rules of play

3.1 Scoring
3.2 Team size
3.3 Substitutions


4 Organisation
5 Competitions

5.1 Season
5.2 Leagues
5.3 Cup
5.4 Shinty and hurling internationals


6 Outside Scotland
7 Media coverage
8 In popular culture
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Origins[edit]


Pronunciation






Scots Gaelic:
cam


Pronunciation:
[ˈkʰaum] ( listen)





Scots Gaelic:
camag


Pronunciation:
[ˈkʰamak] ( listen)





Scots Gaelic:
caman


Pronunciation:
[ˈkʰaman] ( listen)





Scots Gaelic:
camanachd


Pronunciation:
[ˈkʰamanəxk] ( listen)





Scots Gaelic:
cluich-bhall


Pronunciation:
[ˈkʰlˠ̪ɯçvalˠ̪] ( listen)





Scots Gaelic:
cnapag


Pronunciation:
[ˈkɾãʰpak] ( listen)





Scots Gaelic:
Comann na Camanachd


Pronunciation:
[ˈkʰomən̪ˠ nə ˈkʰamanəxk] ( listen)





Scots Gaelic:
iomain


Pronunciation:
[ˈjumɛɲ] ( listen)





Scots Gaelic:
sìnteag


Pronunciation:
[ˈʃiːɲtʲak] ( listen)





Scots Gaelic:
Spòrs


Pronunciation:
[ˈs̪pɔːrˠs̪] ( listen)


Shinty is older than the recorded history of Scotland and is thought to predate Christianity.[citation needed] Hurling, an Irish pastime for at least 2,000 years similar to shinty, is derived from the historic game common to both peoples. Shinty/Hurling appears prominently in the legend of Cúchulainn, the Celtic mythology hero.[5] A similar game was played on the Isle of Man known as cammag, a name cognate with camanachd. The old form of hurling played in the northern half of Ireland, called "commons", resembled shinty more closely than the standardised form of hurling of today. Like shinty, it was commonly known as camánacht and was traditionally played in winter.[citation needed]
The origins of the name shinty are uncertain. There is a theory that the name was derived from the cries used in the game; shin ye, shin you and shin t'ye, other dialect names were shinnins, shinnack and shinnup,[6] or as Hugh Dan MacLennan proposes from the Scottish Gaelic sìnteag.[5] However, there was never one all encompassing name for the game, as it held different names from glen to glen, including cluich-bhall (play-ball in English) and in the Scottish Lowlands, where it was formerly referred to as Hailes, common/cammon (caman), cammock (from Scottish Gaelic camag), knotty and various other names, as well as the terms still used to refer to it in modern Gaelic, camanachd or iomain.
The game was traditionally played through the winter months, with New Year's Day being the day when whole villages would gather together to play games featuring teams of up to several hundred a side, players often using any piece of wood with a hook as a caman.[citation needed] In Uist, stalks of seaweed were put to use due to a lack of trees.[citation needed] Modern camans are made from several laminates of ash or hickory, which are glued and cut into shape, although one-piece camans were still commonplace until the early 1980s.[citation needed] The ball was traditionally a round piece of wood or bone, sometimes called a cnapag, but soon developed into the worsted leather balls used today.[citation needed]
Game[edit]
Playing area[edit]
The objective of the game is to play a small ball into a goal, or "hail", erected at the ends of a 140 to 170-yard-long by 70 to 80-yard-wide pitch.[7] The game is traditionally played on grass, although as of 2009 the sport may be played on artificial turf.[8] The pitch also has marks indicating a 10 yard area around the goals, the penalty and centre spots (along with their associated arcs/circles of 5 yards or 5 metres radius), and corner arcs at the corners of the rectangular pitch of 2 yards or 2 metres radius.[7] The goals, at opposite ends of the field, measure 12 feet wide and 10 feet high and a net is affixed to catch the ball when a goal is scored.[7]




Shinty field (Winterton), Inveraray


Ball[edit]
The ball is a hard solid sphere of around half the diameter of a tennis ball, consisting of a cork core covered by two pieces of leather stitched together. The seam is raised. It is very similar to a hurling sliotar in that it resembles an American baseball with more pronounced stitching. With the permitted circumference between seven and a half and eight inches and weight between two and a half and three ounces.[7] The ball is usually white, but there is no statutory colour, black being a common colour for Kyles Athletic and fluorescent balls now being available.
Plastic balls or soft balls are often used in youth competitions such as the variant, "First Shinty".
Stick[edit]
The ball is played using a caman, which is a stick of about 3 1⁄2 ft (1.1 m) long with two slanted faces and the head, which is wedge shaped (a triangular cross section),[citation needed] must be able to pass through a ring two and a half inches in diameter.[7] Unlike the Irish camán, it has no blade. The caman is traditionally made of wood, traditionally ash but now more commonly hickory, and must not have any plate or metal attached to it. The caman would be made from any piece of wood with a hook in it, hence caman, from the Scottish and Irish Gaelic word, cam meaning bent or crooked. It can also be called a stick or club. The slant of the face will vary according to the position that the stick is used for. It can be made according to the player's height.




Showing the development of shinty sticks through the years


Plastic camans are common in the youth variant "First Shinty".




The field of play


Rules of play[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A player can play the ball in the air and is allowed to use both sides of the stick. The stick may also be used to block and to tackle, although a player may not bring their stick down on an opponent's stick, which is defined as hacking. A player may tackle an opponent using the body as long as it is shoulder-to-shoulder as in Association Football (soccer).
A player may only stop the ball with the stick, the chest, two feet together or one foot on the ground. Only the goalkeeper may use his hands, but only with an open palm since he is not allowed to catch it. Playing the ball with the head constitutes a foul whether intentional or not, as it is considered dangerous play. Other examples of dangerous play, which will be penalised, are a player, while grounded, playing the ball, or a player recklessly swinging the caman in the air in a way which might endanger another player.




A player doing keepy-uppy.


Fouls are penalised by a free-hit, which is indirect unless the foul is committed in the penalty area, commonly referred to as "The D". This results in a penalty hit from 20 yards. [9]
A ball played by a team over the opposing bye line results in a goal hit from the edge of the D, while a ball played by a team over their own line results in a corner. A ball hit over the sideline results in a shy: a shinty shy involves the taker tossing the ball above his head and hitting the ball with the shaft of the caman, and the ball must be directly overhead when struck.
Scoring[edit]
The winner of a game is the team that scores the most goals. A team scores a goal "when the whole of the ball has passed over the goal-line and under the cross-bar". A goal can only be scored with the caman; there is no goal when the ball "has been kicked, carried or propelled by hand or arm by a player of the attacking side." A goal can not be scored directly from a free-hit.[9]
Team size[edit]
Teams consist of 12 players (men) or 10 players (women), including a goalkeeper. A match is played over two halves of 45 minutes. With the exception of the goalkeeper, no player is allowed to play the ball with his hands. There are also variants with smaller sides, with some adjustments in the field size and duration of play.[citation needed]
Substitutions[edit]
As with sports such as football, shinty originally did not have substitutes. These were introduced in the 1960s, progressively expanding to allow a maximum of three substitutions per game. As of 2011, a rule change allowed for rolling substitutions to be made at senior level.[10] It was already a common place practice at youth level.[citation needed]
Organisation[edit]
In common with many sports, it became formalised in the Victorian Era and the first organised clubs were established in cities such as Glasgow and London where there were thousands of Gaels resident.[11]
In 1887, a historic game was played between Glenurquhart Shinty Club and Strathglass Shinty Club in Inverness. This game was attended by thousands of people and was a major milestone in developing a set of common rules.[citation needed] This fixture was to be repeated on 12 January 2007 in Inverness as the opening centrepiece of the Highland 2007 celebrations in Scotland, but was postponed due to a waterlogged pitch.[12]
The modern sport is governed by the Camanachd Association (Scots Gaelic: Comann na Camanachd). The association came into being in the late Victorian era in as a means of formulating common rules to unite the various different codes and rules which differed between neighbouring glens. Its first meeting was held in Kingussie in 1893.
The Camanachd Association maintained its initial structure for much of its first century. The 'Future of Shinty' Report published in 1981 led to a compete restructuring of the way in which shinty was organised and managed. That led to the move away from a dependence on volunteers to govern the sport, to the Association's first salaried employees.[13]
Competitions[edit]




Map of Scotland showing North/South divide in shinty






North tactics






South tactics


There are shinty clubs in Aberdeen, Aberdour (Fife), Edinburgh, Glasgow, Perth, Cornwall, Oxford and even London. University Shinty is a popular section of the sport, with almost all Scotland's main universities possessing a team. Historically, Glasgow University, Aberdeen University and Edinburgh University have vied for supremacy, but in recent[when?] years, Strathclyde University, Robert Gordon's College, Dundee University, and the University of St. Andrews have risen to prominence. Clubs compete in various competitions, both cup and league, on a national and also North/South basis. While the top Premier Division has been played on a Scotland-wide basis since 1996, the lower leagues are based on geography. Many clubs run second teams that also compete in these leagues against clubs with only one senior side.
Season[edit]
Shinty was traditionally played through the winter, based around the tradition of the "Iomain Challainn", where New Year was marked by a game between neighbouring parishes. The summer was left free for seasonal work and friendly tournaments. The Winter season always ran over, however, and many teams would find themselves finishing the previous season only weeks before the next one would start.
In 2003, shinty clubs voted for a trial period of two years of a summer season from March to October, with a view to moving permanently to summer shinty if the experiment was judged to be a success. Despite opposition from the "Big Two", Kingussie and Newtonmore, and other small groups in the game, an EGM in November 2005 voted by an overwhelming majority (well over the required two thirds) to make summer shinty the basis upon which the game would proceed.[14]
There have been teething problems since the move to summer shinty, with a couple of teams being culpable for the season running over into November and December. Season 2010 saw the league season finished by the first weekend in October, almost on schedule.
Shinty does still get played during the winter, in University Shinty which teams compete for the second most valuable trophy in Scottish sport - the Littlejohn Vase - and in New Year fixtures, the most prestigious of which is the Lovat Cup, played between Beauly and Lovat.[15]
Leagues[edit]
For more information, see Shinty league system
League shinty was originally organised on a regional basis, with distinct competitions for the North District and at one time, two separate leagues for Argyll (the Dunn League) and the Southern League, for clubs in Glasgow and Edinburgh and the surrounding areas. Over time, there have been moves to amalgamate leagues and, since the 1980s, a push for national competition at the highest levels. In the modern era of league shinty, Kingussie have been unsurpassed in their domination of the sport; according to the Guinness Book of Records 2005, Kingussie is world sport's most successful sporting team of all time,[14] winning 20 consecutive league championships and going 4 years without losing a single fixture in the early 1990s. This unmatched run of dominance was ended on 2 September 2006 by rivals Newtonmore, who defeated Oban Camanachd 2-0 to ensure that Kingussie could not catch the team at the top of the Premier Division. However, Newtonmore were unable to replace their neighbours as champions, as the first post-Kingussie champions were confirmed as Fort William, who sealed the title on 30 September 2006 having won their games in hand over Newtonmore. Kingussie regained the title in 2007. Since 2010, Newtonmore has been the dominant league force.[citation needed]
Cup[edit]
Cup shinty has always been seen as being more important than league shinty and the premier national competition remains the Scottish Cup or the Camanachd Association Challenge Cup, the Camanachd Cup for short. Until 1983 the competition was designed to ensure the final was between the North and South. The cup has been dominated by Kingussie in the last twenty[when?] years.[citation needed] The other dominant team has been Newtonmore, Kingussie's near neighbours. These two teams met in the Camanachd Cup Final for the first time in 1984.[citation needed]
The Macaulay Cup still preserves a guaranteed North/South Final. There are national equivalents for the Camanachd Cup for intermediate and junior teams. There are regional cups for both senior and junior teams; the MacTavish Cup is the senior cup for the North and the Glasgow Celtic Society Cup is the one for the South. Many cups are played as annual events between two local rivals, of which the Lovat Cup between Lovat and Beauly is the most prestigious.[citation needed]
Shinty and hurling internationals[edit]
In recognition of shinty's shared roots with hurling, an annual international between the two codes from Scotland and Ireland is played on a home and away basis using composite rules. In recent years, the Irish have had the upper hand, but the Scots won the fixture narrowly in 2005 and again in 2006, this time at Croke Park, Dublin, albeit with the Irish fielding weaker players from the second tier Christy Ring Cup. Scotland made it four in a row when they won in 2008.
Outside Scotland[edit]
London Camanachd is a shinty club first established in the Victorian era. They do not play league matches but sometimes compete in the Bullough Cup. They have historically been attached to the South District. They went into abeyance in 1992, but were reconstituted in 2005. They played the first officially recognised shinty match outside Scotland in 80 years on 22 July 2006 against the Highlanders. They compete annually in the English Shinty Championships against rivals Cornwall as well as playing shinty-hurling matches and organising sporadic friendlies against visiting teams.[citation needed]
On 28 December 2010 Ireland held its first dedicated shinty match in Westmeath, with players who have played the Compromise rules Shinty/Hurling.[16]
A Cornwall Shinty Club was established in 2012 playing their first game on 21 April 2012 against London; the match finished a draw. They also entered the St Andrew's Sixes tournament in 2012. Following this, in December 2012, two more Cornish clubs were created; the first being the Combined Universities of Cornwall and the second being Mabe. These two teams put forward their best players to play for the Cornwall Shinty Club.
There was a team in Northallerton in the 1970s, which competed in six-a-sides; and on 1 August 2012 a re-vamped Northallerton Shinty Club was formed. The club is hoping to draw in a few former players, but wants to focus on raising awareness of the game in Yorkshire and bringing new local players into the game.
Shinty was previously played widely in England in the 19th century and early 20th century, with teams such as London Scots, Bolton Caledonian and Cottonopolis; Nottingham Forest F.C. was established by shinty players.[17]
Since 2012 London has hosted the annual "London Shinty Festival" which has been attended by Cornwall, London, Oxford, St Andrews university ladies team, and the Scots. It is an open tournament held in late September after the Shinty season is finished to allow any traveling teams the opportunity to attend,
Since 2013, a combined English Shinty Association side has entered the Bullough cup, being beaten in 2013 by Tayforth and then in 2014 by Ballachulish. Shinty is played in the British Army, with The Scots Shinty Club keeping alive the tradition of the game being played in the Forces.[citation needed]
Shinty is also spreading to North America; though originally played in the 18th and 19th century by Scottish immigrants, the sport died out. However, it is enjoying a revival; teams such as Northern California Camanachd Club (NCCC), Central California Cammanchd (CCC)), and Oregon Shinty-Camanachd (OSC) play at Highland Games and other venues across the USA.[18]
A small pocket of shinty has also started up in Russia as of 2014.
Media coverage[edit]
Local papers, such as the West Highland Free Press, The Buteman, the Oban Times and the Dunoon Observer and Argyllshire Standard, have in-depth shinty reports. The Inverness-based media reduce shinty coverage to one summary of the whole weekend's action as do national newspapers, such as the Sunday Herald and the Sunday Post. The only significant national press coverage is of the Camanachd Cup final.
The first ever shinty match broadcast live on television was the 1964 Celtic Society Cup Final in 1964.[19] Although Camanachd Cup finals and internationals have been shown over the years, 2006 marked the first ever regular TV deal for shinty with matches being shown on the BBC Sports show Spòrs. This was then followed by the STV show "An Caman".
2009 saw the Camanachd Association sign a deal with BBC Alba to broadcast all national finals as well as the Marine Harvest Festival. The MacAulay Cup and Camanachd Cup final were also shown on BBC Two. There is also an increasing amount of shinty on the internet, with various clips garnering attention on video sites such as YouTube. 2011 was a disappointing year for TV coverage outside of the usual games, but 2012 saw several games filmed live on BBC Alba.
The sport is given a lot of exposure on BBC Radio nan Gaidheal by the programme, Spòrs na Seachdain, although English-language radio interest is usually restricted to the big events in the year. Commentary on the Camanachd Cup Final is provided in both English and Gaelic.
In popular culture[edit]

Billy Connolly suggested in September 2009 that shinty should become Scotland's national sport because the Scotland football team's performances had been so bad.[20]
The Scottish Celtic rock band Runrig have referred to shinty in several songs, including "Recovery", "Pride of the Summer", and most explicitly in the song "Clash of the Ash", which is specifically about the sport.[citation needed]
The accordionist Gary Innes wrote 'The Caman Man' on his latest album ERA and has played shinty for Scotland fourteen times, captaining the side in 2010/11
The TV series Hamish MacBeth featured a shinty match as an integral part of the plot of the episode "More Than a Game", with real shinty players, Dallas Young of Kingussie and Neil "Ach" MacRae of Kinlochshiel Shinty Club, playing pivotal roles.[citation needed]
A shinty training session is shown in the second episode of the BBC series Monty Halls' Great Escape.[citation needed]
A shinty game is shown in episode 4, "The Gathering", of the Starz TV show Outlander.[citation needed]
A "shinty ball" is mentioned by Australian Celtic punk band The Rumjacks in their 2010 song "An Irish Pub Song". The song is a tongue-in-cheek commentary on the explosive popularity of "Irish pubs" in Australia.[citation needed]

See also[edit]

Women's shinty

References[edit]


^ Scottish Mining Website. "Mining Folk of Fife - Scottish Mining Website". Scottishmining.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-03-27. 
^ Shinty in England, pre-1893, The Sports Historian, 19:2(1999), 43–60
^ "Dictionary of the Scots Language :: SND :: Shinty n". Dsl.ac.uk. Retrieved 2016-09-10. 
^ BANDY - BY C. G. TEBBUTT
^ a b Hugh Dan MacLennan SHINTY'S PLACE AND SPACE IN WORLD The Sports Historian, No. 18, 1 (May 1998), pp. 1-23.
^ Shindy: The Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology. p.820
^ a b c d e http://www.shinty.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/Byelaw-1-20141.pdf
^ "Weather factor in shinty decision". BBC News. 30 November 2009. 
^ a b Rules of Play and Playing Season, Camanachd Association - Rules and Byelaws, February 2010
^ "Friday's Scottish gossip". BBC News. 18 February 2011. 
^ Wednesday 31 March 2010 (2010-03-31). "It's part of our city's history ... the most beautiful cup in the world". Evening Times. Retrieved 2013-01-20. 
^ Office, Chief Executives. "Camanachd Association confirms cancellation of Show Piece Game". 
^ "Shinty". Shinty. Retrieved 2013-01-20. 
^ a b "Sport - The Times". timesonline.co.uk. 
^ [1][dead link]
^ Kilkenny stars to feature in fundraising shinty game 23 December 2010, westmeathexaminer
^ Herbert, Ian (8 September 2006). "Top football clubs played host to Scots sport of shinty". The Independent. Retrieved 30 December 2016. 
^ http://www.uscamanachd.org
^ "2014 AJG Parcels Glasgow Celtic Society Cup Final 3 Days To Go". Skyecamanachd.com. 2014-06-28. Retrieved 2016-03-27. 
^ Lyons, Beverley (September 8, 2009). "Live last night: Billy Connolly @ Usher Hall, Edinburgh". Daily Record. Edinburgh. Retrieved 2013-01-20. 


External links[edit]

The Camanachd Association







v
t
e


Shinty



Senior teams



Aberdeen University
Aberdour
Ballachulish
Beauly
Boleskine
Bute
Caberfeidh
Col-Glen
Dunoon
Fort William
Glasgow Mid Argyll
Glengarry
Glenorchy
Glenurquhart
Inveraray
Inverness
Kilmallie
Kilmory
Kingussie
Kinlochshiel
Kyles Athletic
Lewis
Lochaber
Lochcarron
Lochside Rovers
Lovat
Newtonmore
Oban
Oban Celtic
Oban Lorn
Skye
Strachur & District
Strathglass
Strathspey
Tayforth
Taynuilt








Former teams



Edinburgh East Lothian
Forth
Furnace
Glasgow Cowal
Nairnshire
Naver Athletic
Strathclyde Police





Non-league and university teams



Ardnamurchan
Caithness
Cornwall
Dundee University
Edinburgh University
Glasgow University
Kincraig
Kinlochbervie
Kintyre
Lochbroom
London
Milngavie & Bearsden
Robert Gordon University
Scots
St Andrews University
Uist





Women's shinty



Aberdour
Ardnamurchan
Badenoch & Strathspey
Cowal and Bute
Inverness
Dunadd
Glasgow Mid Argyll
Glengarry
Lewis
Lochaber
Lovat
Oban Lorn
Strathglass
Strathspey
Skye
Tir Conaill Harps





Competitions



Camanachd Cup
Premier Division
League System
Grand Slam
Macaulay Cup
Sutherland Cup
Balliemore Cup
MacTavish Cup
Glasgow Celtic Society Cup
Strathdearn Cup
Bullough Cup
Mod Cup
Valerie Fraser Trophy
Women's League System
Lovat Cup
London Shield
Littlejohn Vase
Fingal Memorial Shield
Albert Smith Medal





See also



Camanachd Association
Composite rules shinty–hurling
Shinty/Hurling International Series
Shinty in the United States
English Shinty Association
Shinty in Russia
Scotland national shinty team
English Shinty Team
Alba
Schools Camanachd Association
Women's shinty
Clash of the Ash
Iomain
SWAGs
University shinty












v
t
e


Team sports






Sport
Governing bodies
Sportspeople
National sport





Basket sports



Basketball

beach
deaf
3x3
water
wheelchair


Cestoball
Korfball
Netball

Fast5
indoor
wheelchair


Rezball
Ringball
Slamball





Football codes







Association football

amputee
beach
freestyle
Futsal
indoor
Jorkyball
paralympic
powerchair
roller
street
walking


Australian rules football

AFLX
Lightning football
Metro footy
Nine-a-side
Rec footy


Gaelic football

Ladies'


Circle rules football





Gridiron codes



American football

eight-man
flag
nine-man
six-man
sprint
touch
wheelchair


Canadian football
Indoor American football

Arena football







Hybrid codes



Austus
Eton wall game
International rules football
Samoa rules
Speedball
Swedish football
Universal football
Volata





Medieval football codes



Ba game
Caid
Calcio fiorentino
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cuju
Harpastum
Kemari
Ki-o-rahi
Jegichagi
La soule
Lelo burti
Marn grook
Pasuckuakohowog
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and downies
Yubi lakpi





Rugby codes



Beach
Rugby league

masters
mod
nines
sevens
tag
wheelchair


Rugby union

American flag
mini
sevens
snow
tag
touch
tens


Touch
Wheelchair








Bat-and-ball games



Baseball
Brännboll
British baseball
Corkball
Cricket

One Day
Test
Twenty20


Danish longball
Indoor cricket
Kickball
Lapta
Matball
Oină
Over-the-line
Pesäpallo
Rounders
Softball

Fastpitch


Stickball
Stoolball
Town ball
Vigoro
Vitilla
Wiffle ball
Wireball





Stick and ball sports







Bando
Cammag
Hurling

Camogie
Super11s
Shinty–Hurling


Indigenous North American stickball
Iomain
Knattleikr
Knotty
Lacrosse

box/indoor
field
intercrosse
women's


Ritinis
Shinty

Shinty–Hurling







Hockey sports



Ball hockey
Bandy

rink


Broomball

Moscow


Field hockey

indoor


Floor hockey
Floorball
Ice hockey

pond
power
ice sledge
underwater


Ringette
Rinkball
Roller hockey

in-line
quad


Rossall hockey
Shinny
Street hockey
Underwater hockey
Unicycle hockey





Polo sports



Auto polo
Cowboy polo
Cycle polo
Elephant polo
Horseball
Motoball
Pato
Polo

Arena polo
chovgan
snow polo


Polocrosse
Segway polo
Yak polo








Net sports



Ball badminton
Beach tennis
Biribol
Bossaball
Fistball
Footbag net
Football tennis
Footvolley
Jianzi
Jokgu
Newcomb ball
Peteca
Sepak takraw
Throwball
Volleyball

beach
paralympic







Other sports



Airsoft
Angleball
Balle à la main
Ballon au poing
Basque pelota

frontenis
jai alai
xare


Bo-taoshi
Boules

Bocce
Bocce volo
Boccia
Bowls
Jeu provençal
Pétanque
Raffa


Buzkashi
Combat (juggling)
Curling

wheelchair


Cycle ball
Digor
Dodgeball
Flickerball
Gateball
Goalball
Guts
Handball

beach
Czech
field


Hornussen
Ice stock sport
Jereed
Kabaddi

indoor
beach


Kho kho
Kin-Ball
Lagori
Longue paume
Mesoamerican ballgame
Paintball
Pelota mixteca
Prisonball
Pushball
Quidditch
Rollball
Roller derby
Slahal
Snow snake
Synchronized skating
Synchronized swimming
Tamburello
Tchoukball

beach


Tejo
Tug of war
Ulama
Ultimate
Underwater football
Underwater rugby
Valencian pilota

Llargues


Water polo

canoe
inner tube
beach


Waboba
Whirlyball
Woodball
Yukigassen












v
t
e


Hybrid sports






Austus
Bossaball
Chess boxing
Composite rules shinty–hurling
Disc golf
Football tennis
Footgolf
Footvolley
International rules football
Iomain
Korfball
Padbol
Parahawking
Polocrosse
Samoa rules
Sepak takraw
Slamball
Tennis polo
Universal football
Volata












v
t
e


Sport in Scotland



By Sport



American Football
Association Football
Australian rules football
Baseball
Basketball
Cricket
Curling
Historical fencing
Futsal
Gaelic Games
Golf
Highland Games
Horseracing
Ice hockey
Lacrosse
Netball
Rugby union (Rugby sevens)
Rugby league
Shinty
Tennis
Governing bodies
National teams





International sporting competitions



Commonwealth Games
FIFA World Cup
Olympics

Campaign for a Scottish Olympic Team
Scottish Olympic medallists


Rugby World Cup
Cricket World Cup
Island Games











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shinty&oldid=807445434"					Categories: ShintySport in Highland (council area)Sports originating in ScotlandTeam sportsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from March 2016Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2015Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016Articles needing additional references from November 2016All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from December 2015Use dmy dates from October 2010