





This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (August 2016)







Side platform





Legend














































































































Station with two tracks and two side platforms







Side platforms with overpass between them






Jordanhill railway station, in Scotland, with two side platforms, and a footbridge connecting them.






View of Shimōsa-Manzaki Station, side platforms from the footbridge






Tsuen Wan Station, in Hong Kong, with two side platforms.


A side platform is a platform positioned to the side of a pair of tracks at a railway station, tram stop, or transitway. Dual side platform stations, one for each direction of travel, is the basic station design used for double-track railway lines (as opposed to, for instance, the island platform where a single platform lies between the tracks). Side platforms may result in a wider overall footprint for the station compared with an island platform where a single width of platform can be shared by riders using either track.[1][2]
In some stations, the two side platforms are connected by a footbridge running above and over the tracks.[1] While a pair of side platforms is often provided on a dual-track line, a single side platform is usually sufficient for a single-track line.
Layout[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Where the station is close to a level crossing (grade crossing) the platforms may either be on the same side of the crossing road or alternatively may be staggered in one of two ways. With the 'near-side platforms' configuration, each platform appears before the intersection and with 'far-side platforms' they are positioned after the intersection.
In some situations a single side platform can be served by multiple vehicles simultaneously with a scissors crossing provided to allow access mid-way along its length.
Most stations with two side platforms have an 'Up' platform which is used by trains heading towards the primary destination of the line, with the other platform being the 'Down' platform which takes trains heading the opposite way. Normally, the main facilities of the station are located on the 'Up' platform with the other platform accessed from a footbridge, subway or a track crossing. However, in many cases the station's main buildings are located on whichever side faces the town or village the station serves.
Larger stations may have two side platforms with several island platforms in between. Some are in a Spanish solution format, with two side platforms and an island platform in between, serving two tracks.
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Side platforms.



Railway station layout

References[edit]



^ a b "Railway Station Design". Railway Technical Web Pages. Retrieved August 19, 2016. 
^ "Railway Platform and Types". Railwaysysyem.net. Retrieved 2017-06-30. 









v
t
e


Railway track layouts



Running lines



Single track
Passing loop
Double track
Quadruple track
Crossover





Rail sidings



Balloon loop
Headshunt
Refuge siding
Rail yard
Classification yard





Junctions



Flying junction
Level junction
Double junction
Facing and trailing
Grand union
Wye
Switch / turnout / points
Swingnose crossing
Level crossing





Stations



Railway platform
Side platform
Island platform
Bay platform
Split platform
Terminal station
Balloon loop
Spanish solution
Cross-platform interchange
Interchange station





Hillclimbing



Horseshoe curve
Zig Zag / Switchback
Spiral





Track geometry



Track gauge
Ruling gradient
Minimum curve radius
Cant
Cant deficiency









This railroad station-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Side_platform&oldid=788247809"					Categories: Railway platformsRailway station stubsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2016All articles needing additional referencesAll stub articles