





This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (January 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



"Signal theory" redirects here. It is not to be confused with Signalling theory or Signalling (economics).




Signal transmission using electronic signal processing. Transducers convert signals from other physical waveforms to electric current or voltage waveforms, which then are processed, transmitted as electromagnetic waves, received and converted by another transducer to final form.











The signal on the left looks like noise, but the signal processing technique known as the Fourier transform (right) shows that it contains five well defined frequency components.


Signal processing concerns the analysis, synthesis, and modification of signals, which are broadly defined as functions conveying, "information about the behavior or attributes of some phenomenon",[1] such as sound, images, and biological measurements.[2] For example, signal processing techniques are used to improve signal transmission fidelity, storage efficiency, and subjective quality, and to emphasize or detect components of interest in a measured signal.[3]



Contents


1 History
2 Application fields
3 Typical devices
4 Mathematical methods applied
5 Categories

5.1 Analog signal processing
5.2 Continuous-time signal processing
5.3 Discrete-time signal processing
5.4 Digital signal processing
5.5 Nonlinear signal processing


6 See also
7 Notes and references
8 External links



History[edit]
According to Alan V. Oppenheim and Ronald W. Schafer, the principles of signal processing can be found in the classical numerical analysis techniques of the 17th century. Oppenheim and Schafer further state that the digital refinement of these techniques can be found in the digital control systems of the 1940s and 1950s.[4]
Application fields[edit]






This article is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this article to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (June 2017)







Seismic signal processing



Audio signal processing –  for electrical signals representing sound, such as speech or music
Digital signal processing
Speech signal processing –  for processing and interpreting spoken words
Image processing –  in digital cameras, computers and various imaging systems
Video processing –  for interpreting moving pictures
Wireless communication –  waveform generations, demodulation, filtering, equalization
Control systems
Array processing –  for processing signals from arrays of sensors
Process control –  a variety of signals are used, including the industry standard 4-20 mA current loop
Seismology
Financial signal processing –  analyzing financial data using signal processing techniques, especially for prediction purposes.
Feature extraction, such as image understanding and speech recognition.
Quality improvement, such as noise reduction, image enhancement, and echo cancellation.
(Source coding), including audio compression, image compression, and video compression.
Genomics, Genomic signal processing [5]

In communication systems, signal processing may occur at:

OSI layer 1 in the seven layer OSI model, the Physical Layer (modulation, equalization, multiplexing, etc.);
OSI layer 2, the Data Link Layer (Forward Error Correction);
OSI layer 6, the Presentation Layer (source coding, including analog-to-digital conversion and signal compression).

Typical devices[edit]






This article is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this article to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (June 2017)




Filters –  for example analog (passive or active) or digital (FIR, IIR, frequency domain or stochastic filters, etc.)
Samplers and analog-to-digital converters for signal acquisition and reconstruction, which involves measuring a physical signal, storing or transferring it as digital signal, and possibly later rebuilding the original signal or an approximation thereof.
Signal compressors
Digital signal processors (DSPs)

Mathematical methods applied[edit]






This article is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this article to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (June 2017)




Differential equations
Recurrence relation
Transform theory
Time-frequency analysis –  for processing non-stationary signals[6]
Spectral estimation –  for determining the spectral content (i.e., the distribution of power over frequency) of a time series[7]
Statistical signal processing –  analyzing and extracting information from signals and noise based on their stochastic properties
Linear time-invariant system theory, and transform theory
System identification and classification
Calculus
Vector spaces and Linear algebra
Functional analysis
Probability and stochastic processes
Detection theory
Estimation theory
Optimization
Numerical methods
Time series
Data mining –  for statistical analysis of relations between large quantities of variables (in this context representing many physical signals), to extract previously unknown interesting patterns

Categories[edit]
Analog signal processing[edit]
Main article: Analog signal processing
Analog signal processing is for signals that have not been digitized, as in legacy radio, telephone, radar, and television systems. This involves linear electronic circuits as well as non-linear ones. The former are, for instance, passive filters, active filters, additive mixers, integrators and delay lines. Non-linear circuits include compandors, multiplicators (frequency mixers and voltage-controlled amplifiers), voltage-controlled filters, voltage-controlled oscillators and phase-locked loops.
Continuous-time signal processing[edit]
Continuous-time signal processing is for signals that vary with the change of continuous domain(without considering some individual interrupted points).
The methods of signal processing include time domain, frequency domain, and complex frequency domain. This technology mainly discusses the modeling of linear time-invariant continuous system, integral of the system's zero-state response, setting up system function and the continuous time filtering of deterministic signals
Discrete-time signal processing[edit]
Discrete-time signal processing is for sampled signals, defined only at discrete points in time, and as such are quantized in time, but not in magnitude.
Analog discrete-time signal processing is a technology based on electronic devices such as sample and hold circuits, analog time-division multiplexers, analog delay lines and analog feedback shift registers. This technology was a predecessor of digital signal processing (see below), and is still used in advanced processing of gigahertz signals.
The concept of discrete-time signal processing also refers to a theoretical discipline that establishes a mathematical basis for digital signal processing, without taking quantization error into consideration.
Digital signal processing[edit]
Main article: Digital signal processing
Digital signal processing is the processing of digitized discrete-time sampled signals. Processing is done by general-purpose computers or by digital circuits such as ASICs, field-programmable gate arrays or specialized digital signal processors (DSP chips). Typical arithmetical operations include fixed-point and floating-point, real-valued and complex-valued, multiplication and addition. Other typical operations supported by the hardware are circular buffers and look-up tables. Examples of algorithms are the Fast Fourier transform (FFT), finite impulse response (FIR) filter, Infinite impulse response (IIR) filter, and adaptive filters such as the Wiener and Kalman filters.
Nonlinear signal processing[edit]
Nonlinear signal processing involves the analysis and processing of signals produced from nonlinear systems and can be in the time, frequency, or spatio-temporal domains.[8] Nonlinear systems can produce highly complex behaviors including bifurcations, chaos, harmonics, and subharmonics which cannot be produced or analyzed using linear methods.
See also[edit]

Audio filter
Dynamic range compression, companding, limiting, and noise gating
Information theory
Reverberation

Notes and references[edit]



^ Roland Priemer (1991). Introductory Signal Processing. World Scientific. p. 1. ISBN 9971509199. 
^ Sengupta, Nandini; Sahidullah, Md; Saha, Goutam (August 2016). "Lung sound classification using cepstral-based statistical features". Computers in Biology and Medicine. 75 (1): 118–129. doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.05.013. 
^ Alan V. Oppenheim and Ronald W. Schafer (1989). Discrete-Time Signal Processing. Prentice Hall. p. 1. ISBN 0-13-216771-9. 
^ Oppenheim, Alan V.; Schafer, Ronald W. (1975). Digital Signal Processing. Prentice Hall. p. 5. ISBN 0-13-214635-5. 
^ Anastassiou, D. (2001). Genomic signal processing. IEEE. 
^ Boashash, Boualem, ed. (2003). Time frequency signal analysis and processing a comprehensive reference (1 ed.). Amsterdam: Elsevier. ISBN 0-08-044335-4. 
^ Stoica, Petre; Moses, Randolph (2005). Spectral Analysis of Signals (PDF). NJ: Prentice Hall. 
^ Billings, S. A. (2013). Nonlinear System Identification: NARMAX Methods in the Time, Frequency, and Spatio-Temporal Domains. Wiley. ISBN 1119943590. 



External links[edit]

Signal Processing for Communications – free online textbook by Paolo Prandoni and Martin Vetterli (2008)
Scientists and Engineers Guide to Digital Signal Processing – free online textbook by Stephen Smith
Signal Processing Techniques for Determining Powerplant Characteristics
The IEEE Signal Processing Society
Bio-Medical Signal processing at a Glance




Authority control



GND: 4054947-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Signal_processing&oldid=814405176"					Categories: Media technologySignal processingTelecommunication theoryHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2017All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles needing cleanup from June 2017All pages needing cleanupArticles with sections that need to be turned into prose from June 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers