"Simple life" redirects here. For other uses, see Simple Life (disambiguation).




Mahatma Gandhi spinning yarn in 1942. Gandhi believed in a life of simplicity and self-sufficiency.


Simple living or voluntary poverty encompasses a number of different voluntary practices to simplify one's lifestyle. These may include, for example, reducing one's possessions, generally referred to as minimalism, or increasing self-sufficiency. Simple living may be characterized by individuals being satisfied with what they have rather than want.[1][2] Although asceticism generally promotes living simply and refraining from luxury and indulgence, not all proponents of simple living are ascetics.[3] Simple living is distinct from those living in forced poverty, as it is a voluntary lifestyle choice.
Adherents may choose simple living for a variety of personal reasons, such as spirituality, health, increase in quality time for family and friends, work–life balance, personal taste, frugality, or reducing stress. Simple living can also be a reaction to materialism and conspicuous consumption. Some cite socio-political goals aligned with the environmentalist, anti-consumerist or anti-war movements, including conservation, degrowth, social justice, and tax resistance.[4]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Religious and spiritual
1.2 Secular


2 Practices

2.1 Reducing consumption, work time, and possessions
2.2 Increasing self-sufficiency
2.3 Reconsidering technology
2.4 Simplifying diet


3 Politics and activism

3.1 Environmentalism
3.2 Anti-war
3.3 Art


4 Economics
5 See also
6 Notes and references
7 Further reading
8 External links



History[edit]
Religious and spiritual[edit]




Diogenes living in a clay wine jar.


A number of religious and spiritual traditions encourage simple living.[5] Early examples include the Sramana traditions of Iron Age India, Gautama Buddha, and biblical Nazirites (notably John the Baptist).[6] The biblical figure Jesus is said to have lived a simple life. He is said to have encouraged his disciples "to take nothing for their journey except a staff—no bread, no bag, no money in their belts—but to wear sandals and not put on two tunics."[7] Various notable individuals have claimed that spiritual inspiration led them to a simple living lifestyle, such as Benedict of Nursia, Francis of Assisi, Ammon Hennacy, Leo Tolstoy, Rabindranath Tagore, Albert Schweitzer, and Mohandas Gandhi.[8][9]
Simple living has traditions that stretch back to the Orient, resonating with leaders such as Zarathustra, Buddha, Laozi, and Confucius and was heavily stressed in both Greco-Roman culture and Judeo-Christian ethics.[9] Diogenes of Sinope, a major figure in the ancient Greek philosophy of Cynicism, claimed that a simple life was necessary for virtue, and was said to have lived in a wine jar.[10]
Plain people are Christian groups who have for centuries practiced lifestyles in which some forms of wealth or technology are excluded for religious or philosophical reasons. Groups include the Shakers, Mennonites, Amish, Hutterites, Amana Colonies, Bruderhof[11], Old German Baptist Brethren, Harmony Society, and some Quakers. There is a Quaker belief called Testimony of Simplicity that a person ought to live her or his life simply.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau strongly praised the simple life in many of his writings, especially in his Discourse on the Arts and Sciences (1750) and Discourse on Inequality (1754).[12]
See also: Sufism
Secular[edit]
Epicureanism, based on the teachings of the Athens-based philosopher Epicurus, flourished from about the fourth century BC to the third century AD. Epicureanism upheld the untroubled life as the paradigm of happiness, made possible by carefully considered choices. Specifically, Epicurus pointed out that troubles entailed by maintaining an extravagant lifestyle tend to outweigh the pleasure of partaking in it. He therefore concluded that what is necessary for happiness, bodily comfort, and life itself should be maintained at minimal cost, while all things beyond what is necessary for these should either be tempered by moderation or completely avoided.[13]




Reconstruction of Henry David Thoreau's cabin on the shores of Walden Pond


Henry David Thoreau, an American naturalist and author, is often considered to have made the classic secular statement advocating a life of simple and sustainable living in his book Walden (1854). Thoreau conducted a two-year experiment living a plain and simple life on the shores of Walden Pond.
In Victorian Britain, Henry Stephens Salt, an admirer of Thoreau, popularised the idea of "Simplification, the saner method of living".[14] Other British advocates of the simple life included Edward Carpenter, William Morris, and the members of "The Fellowship of the New Life".[15] C.R. Ashbee and his followers also practiced some of these ideas, thus linking simplicity with the Arts and Crafts Movement.[16] British novelist John Cowper Powys advocated the simple life in his 1933 book A Philosophy of Solitude.[17] John Middleton Murry and Max Plowman practised a simple lifestyle at their Adelphi Centre in Essex in the 1930s.[18] Irish poet Patrick Kavanagh championed a "right simplicity" philosophy based on ruralism in some of his work.[19]
George Lorenzo Noyes, a naturalist, mineralogist, development critic, writer, and artist, is known as the Thoreau of Maine. He lived a wilderness lifestyle, advocating through his creative work a simple life and reverence for nature. During the 1920s and 1930s, the Vanderbilt Agrarians of the Southern United States advocated a lifestyle and culture centered upon traditional and sustainable agrarian values as opposed to the progressive urban industrialism which dominated the Western world at that time.
Thorstein Veblen warned against the conspicuous consumption of the materialistic society with The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899); Richard Gregg coined the term "voluntary simplicity" in The Value of Voluntary Simplicity (1936). From the 1920s, a number of modern authors articulated both the theory and practice of living simply, among them Gandhian Richard Gregg, economists Ralph Borsodi and Scott Nearing, anthropologist-poet Gary Snyder, and utopian fiction writer Ernest Callenbach. E. F. Schumacher argued against the notion that "bigger is better" in Small Is Beautiful (1973); and Duane Elgin continued the promotion of the simple life in Voluntary Simplicity (1981). The Australian academic Ted Trainer practices and writes about simplicity, and established The Simplicity Institute[20] at Pigface Point, some 20 km from the University of New South Wales to which it is attached.[21] A secular set of nine values was developed with the Ethify Yourself project in Austria, having a simplified life style in mind and accompanied by an online book (2011). In the United States voluntary simplicity started to garner more public exposure through a movement in the late 1990s around a popular "simplicity" book, The Simple Living Guide[22] by Janet Luhrs[23]. Around the same time, minimalism (a similar movement) started to also show its light into the public eye.
Practices[edit]
Reducing consumption, work time, and possessions[edit]




Living simply in a small dwelling.




Simplicity boils down to two steps: Identify the essential. Eliminate the rest.

Leo Babauta
Some people practice simple living by reducing consumption. By lowering expenditure on goods or services, the time spent earning money can be reduced. The time saved may be used to pursue other interests, or help others through volunteering. Some may use the extra free time to improve their quality of life, for example pursuing creative activities such as art and crafts. Developing a detachment from money has led some individuals, such as Suelo and Mark Boyle, to live with no money at all.[24][25] Reducing expenses may also lead to increasing savings, which can lead to financial independence and the possibility of early retirement.[26]


You have succeeded in life when all you really want is only what you really need.

Vernon Howard
The 100 Thing Challenge is a grassroots movement to whittle down personal possessions to one hundred items, with the aim of decluttering and simplifying life.[27] The small house movement includes individuals who chose to live in small, mortgage-free, low-impact dwellings, such as log cabins or beach huts.[28]
Increasing self-sufficiency[edit]




Robert Hart's forest garden in Shropshire, England, UK.


One way to simplify life is to get back-to-the-land and grow your own food, as increased self-sufficiency reduces dependency on money and the economy. Tom Hodgkinson believes the key to a free and simple life is to stop consuming and start producing.[29] This is a sentiment shared by an increasing number of people, including those belonging to the millennial generation such as writer and eco blogger Jennifer Nini, who left the city to live off-grid, grow food, and "be a part of the solution; not part of the problem."[30]
Forest gardening, developed by simple living adherent Robert Hart, is a low-maintenance plant-based food production system based on woodland ecosystems, incorporating fruit and nut trees, shrubs, herbs, vines and perennial vegetables.[31] Hart created a model forest garden from a 0.12 acre orchard on his farm at Wenlock Edge in Shropshire.[32]
The idea of food miles, the number of miles a given item of food or its ingredients has travelled between the farm and the table, is used by simple living advocates to argue for locally grown food. This is now gaining mainstream acceptance, as shown by the popularity of books such as The 100-Mile Diet, and Barbara Kingsolver's Animal, Vegetable, Miracle: A Year of Food Life. In each of these cases, the authors devoted a year to reducing their carbon footprint by eating locally.[33]
City dwellers can also produce fresh home grown fruit and vegetables in pot gardens or miniature indoor greenhouses. Tomatoes, lettuce, spinach, Swiss chard, peas, strawberries, and several types of herbs can all thrive in pots. Jim Merkel says that a person "could sprout seeds. They are tasty, incredibly nutritious, and easy to grow... We grow them in wide mouthed mason jars with a square of nylon window screen screwed under a metal ring".[34] Farmer Matt Moore spoke on this issue: "How does it affect the consumer to know that broccoli takes 105 days to grow a head? [...] The supermarket mode is one of plenty — it's always stocked. And that changes our sense of time. How long it takes to grow food — that's removed in the marketplace. They don't want you to think about how long it takes to grow, because they want you to buy right now".[35] One way to change this viewpoint is also suggested by Mr. Moore. He placed a video installation in the produce section of a grocery store that documented the length of time it took to grow certain vegetables.[35] This aimed to raise awareness in people of the length of time actually needed for gardens.
The do it yourself ethic refers to the principle of undertaking necessary tasks oneself rather than having others, who are more skilled or experienced, complete them for you.
Reconsidering technology[edit]
People who practice simple living have diverse views on the role of technology. The American political activist Scott Nearing was skeptical about how humanity would use new technology, citing destructive inventions such as nuclear weapons.[36] Those who eschew all technology are often referred to as Luddites or neo-Luddites.[37] Although simple living is often a secular pursuit, it may still involve reconsidering personal definitions of appropriate technology, as Anabaptist groups such as the Amish or Mennonites have done.
Technological proponents see cutting-edge technologies as a way to make a simple lifestyle within mainstream culture easier and more sustainable. They argue that the internet can reduce an individual's carbon footprint through telecommuting and lower paper usage. Some have also calculated their energy consumption and have shown that one can live simply and in an emotionally satisfying way by using much less energy than is used in Western countries.[38] Technologies they may embrace include computers, photovoltaic arrays, wind and water turbines.
Technological interventions that appear to simplify living may actually induce side effects elsewhere or at a future point in time. Evgeny Morozov warns that tools like the internet can facilitate mass surveillance and political repression.[39] The book Green Illusions identifies how wind and solar energy technologies have hidden side effects and can actually increase energy consumption and entrench environmental harms over time.[40] Authors of the book Techno-Fix criticize technological optimists for overlooking the limitations of technology in solving agricultural problems.[41]
Advertising is criticised for encouraging a consumerist mentality. Many advocates of simple living tend to agree that cutting out, or cutting down on, television viewing is a key ingredient in simple living. Some see the Internet, podcasting, community radio, or pirate radio as viable alternatives.[citation needed]
Simplifying diet[edit]
Another practice is the adoption of a simplified diet. Diets that may simplify domestic food production and consumption include vegan diets and the Gandhi diet. In the United Kingdom, the Movement for Compassionate Living was formed by Kathleen and Jack Jannaway in 1984 to spread the vegan message and promote simple living and self-reliance as a remedy against the exploitation of humans, animals, and the Earth.
Politics and activism[edit]
Environmentalism[edit]
Simple living may be undertaken by environmentalists. For example, Green parties often advocate simple living as a consequence of their "four pillars" or the "Ten Key Values" of the Green Party of the United States. This includes, in policy terms, their rejection of genetic modification and nuclear power and other technologies they consider to be hazardous. The Greens' support for simplicity is based on the reduction in natural resource usage and environmental impact. This concept is expressed in Ernest Callenbach's "green triangle" of ecology, frugality and health.




The White House Peace Vigil, started by simple living adherent Thomas in 1981.


Many with similar views avoid involvement even with green politics as compromising simplicity, however, and advocate forms of green anarchism that attempt to implement these principles at a smaller scale, e.g. the ecovillage. Deep ecology, a belief that the world does not exist as a resource to be freely exploited by humans, proposes wilderness preservation, human population control and simple living.[42]
Anti-war[edit]
The alleged relationship between economic growth and war, when fought for control and exploitation of natural and human resources, is considered a good reason for promoting a simple living lifestyle. Avoiding the perpetuation of the resource curse is a similar objective of many simple living adherents.
Opposition to war has led peace activists, such as Ammon Hennacy and Ellen Thomas, to a form of tax resistance in which they reduce their income below the tax threshold by taking up a simple living lifestyle.[4][43] These individuals believe that their government is engaged in immoral, unethical or destructive activities such as war, and paying taxes inevitably funds these activities.[4]
Art[edit]
The term Bohemianism has been used to describe a long tradition of both voluntary and involuntary poverty by artists who devote their time to artistic endeavors rather than paid labor.
In May 2014, a story on NPR suggested that positive attitudes towards living in poverty for the sake of art are becoming less common among young American artists, and quoted one recent graduate of the Rhode Island School of Design as saying "her classmates showed little interest in living in garrets and eating ramen noodles." [44]
Economics[edit]
A new economics movement has been building since the UN conference on the environment in 1972,[45] and the publication that year of Only One Earth, The Limits to Growth, and Blueprint For Survival, followed in 1973 by Small Is Beautiful: Economics As If People Mattered.[46]
Recently, David Wann has introduced the idea of “simple prosperity” as it applies to a sustainable lifestyle. From his point of view, and as a point of departure for what he calls real sustainability, “it is important to ask ourselves three fundamental questions: what is the point of all our commuting and consuming? What is the economy for? And, finally, why do we seem to be unhappier now than when we began our initial pursuit for rich abundance?”[47] In this context, simple living is the opposite of our modern quest for affluence and, as a result, it becomes less preoccupied with quantity and more concerned about the preservation of cities, traditions and nature.
A reference point for this new economics can be found in James Robertson's A New Economics of Sustainable Development,[46] and the work of thinkers and activists, who participate in his Working for a Sane Alternative network and program. According to Robertson, the shift to sustainability is likely to require a widespread shift of emphasis from raising incomes to reducing costs.
The principles of the new economics, as set out by Robertson, are the following:

systematic empowerment of people (as opposed to making and keeping them dependent), as the basis for people-centred development
systematic conservation of resources and the environment, as the basis for environmentally sustainable development
evolution from a “wealth of nations” model of economic life to a one-world model, and from today's inter-national economy to an ecologically sustainable, decentralising, multi-level one-world economic system
restoration of political and ethical factors to a central place in economic life and thought
respect for qualitative values, not just quantitative values.

See also[edit]

Simple living advocates (category)
Affluenza
Asceticism
Anti-consumerism
Black Bear Ranch
Corporate poverty
Deep ecology
Degrowth
Epicurianism
Homesteading
Intentional living

Notes and references[edit]


^ Linda Breen Pierce (2000). Choosing Simplicity. ISBN 978-0-9672067-1-4. Rather than being consumed by materialism, we choose to surround ourselves with only those material possessions we truly need or genuinely cherish 
^ Vernon Howard. Quotes about Happiness. You have succeeded in life when all you really want is only what you really need 
^ Griffiths, Michael. B., Flemming Christiansen, and Malcolm Chapman. (2010) 'Chinese Consumers: The Romantic Reappraisal’. Ethnography, Sept 2010, 11, 331–57.
^ a b c "Low Income/Simple Living as War Tax Resistance". NWTRCC. 
^ Helena Echlin (December 2006) Yoga Journal, p. 92

Also see W. Bradford Swift (July/August 1996) Yoga Journal, p. 81


^ http://www.bibleserver.com/text/ESV/Mark1,6
^ http://www.bibleserver.com/text/ESV/Mark6,8
^ Slocock, N. (May 2004). "'Living a Life of Simplicity?' A Response to Francis of Assisi by Adrian House".
^ a b Shi, David. The Simple Life. University of Georgia Press (2001).
^ Parry, Richard. "Ancient Ethical Theory". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 16 September 2012. 
^ "Learning from the Bruderhof: An Intentional Christian Community". ChristLife. Retrieved 2017-05-23. 
^ Marshall, Peter. Nature's Web: Rethinking Our Place on Earth. M.E. Sharpe, 1996 (pp. 235, 239–44).
^ Smith, M.F. (2001). Lucretius: On the Nature of Things Archived 2006-03-01 at the Wayback Machine.. Introduction available online at Epicurius.info. Hackett Pub Co ISBN 978-0-87220-587-1
^ Salt quoted in Peter C. Gould, Early Green Politics, p. 22.
^ Gould, pp. 27–28
^ Fiona Maccarthy, The Simple Life: C.R. Ashbee in the Cotswolds (London, 1981).
^ A Philosophy of Solitude, London, 1933. See also David Goodway, Anarchist Seeds Beneath the Snow (Liverpool, 2006), pp. 48–49, 174, for Goodway's comparison of Powys' ideas of the Simple Life to Carpenter's.
^ Hardy, Dennis. Utopian England: Community Experiments 1900–1945 p. 42. Hardy's book details other simple living movements in the UK in this period.
^ "Kavanagh's Lessons for Simple Living". Irish Times. November 23, 2009. 
^ Simplicity Institute
^ Website of the Social Science Dept at UNSW
^ 'The Simple Living Guide
^ Janet Luhrs | Simple Living
^ Osborne, Hilary (23 July 2009). "Daniel Suelo: Free spirit or freeloader?". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 20 October 2011. 
^ Salter, Jessica (18 August 2010). "The man who lives without money". The Telegraph. UK. 
^ Robinson, Nancy (2 August 2012). "Retiring At Age 50 Is Realistic Using These Unorthodox Strategies". Forbes. US. Retrieved 20 August 2012. 
^ Lisa McClaughlin (June 5, 2008). "How to Live with Just 100 Things". Time. 
^ "Less is more: Simple living in small spaces". BBC News. 28 December 2011. 
^ Tom Hodgkinson (2006). How To Be Free. ISBN 9780241143216. 
^ Nini, Jennifer. "So You Think You Can Farm?". Retrieved 1 September 2014. 
^ Robert Hart (1996-09-01). Forest gardening: Cultivating an edible landscape. p. 97. ISBN 9781603580502. 
^ Robert Hart (1996). Forest Gardening. p. 45. ISBN 9781603580502. 
^ Taylor, K. (August 8, 2007). "The Year I Saved The World." New York: The Sun."
^ Merkel, Jim. Radical Simplicity. British Columbia: New Society, 2003. Print, 170–71.
^ a b Mark, Jason. "How Does Your Garden Grow? Watch and See" food.change.org. Sustainable Food. 26 Feb 2010. Web.
^ Scott Nearing (2006). Civilization and Beyond. p. 101. ISBN 9781406834970. 
^ Sale, K. (February 1997). "America's New Luddites." Le Monde diplomatique.
^ How to Live Simply and in a Sustainable Way
^ Evgeny Morozov (2011). The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom. 
^ Zehner, Ozzie (2012). Green Illusions: The Dirty Secrets of Clean Energy and the Future of Environmentalism. University of Nebraska Press. 
^ Huesemann, Michael H., and Joyce A. Huesemann (2011). Technofix: Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment, New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, British Columbia, Canada, ISBN 0865717044, 464 pp.
^ John Barry; E. Gene Frankland (2002). International Encyclopedia of Environmental Politics. Routledge. p. 161. ISBN 9780415202855. 
^ Picket Line Annual Report
^ Neda Ulaby (Director) (2014-05-15). "In Pricey Cities, Being A Bohemian Starving Artist Gets Old Fast". NPR. Retrieved 2014-05-31.  Missing or empty |series= (help)
^ United Nations Environment Program (1972) Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment Archived 2007-04-11 at the Library of Congress. Stockholm 1972. Retrieved on March 24, 2008
^ a b Robertson, James (2005) "The New Economics of Sustainable Development". A Briefing for Policy Makers. Report for the European Commission. ISBN 0-7494-3093-1
^ Wann, David. Simple Prosperity: Finding Real Wealth in a Sustainable Lifestyle. New York, St. Martin's Griffin, 2007. ISBN 978-0-312-36141-9


Further reading[edit]

Helen and Scott Nearing (1970) The Good Life: Helen and Scott Nearing's Sixty Years of Self-Sufficient Living, Schocken
Vernard Eller (1973) The Simple Life, ISBN 0-8028-1537-5
Dolly Freed (1978) Possum Living: How to Live Well Without a Job and with (Almost) No Money 2010 edition ISBN 0-9820539-3-2
Duane Elgin (1981, revised 1993 and 2010) Voluntary Simplicity, Harper, ISBN 978-0-06-177926-8
Charles Long (1986) How to Survive Without a Salary: Living the Conserver Lifestyle. 1996 edition ISBN 1-894622-37-5
Wendell Berry (1990) What Are People For?, North Point Press, ISBN 0-86547-437-0
Vicki Robin and Joe Dominguez (1992) Your Money or Your Life, Viking. Your Money or Your Life: Revised and Updated for the 21st Century, published by Penguin Books in December 2008 by Vicki Robin with Monique Tilford and contributor Mark Zaifman.
Edward Romney (1992) Living Well on Practically Nothing 2001 edition ISBN 1-58160-282-0
Janet Luhrs (1997) The Simple Living Guide: A Sourcebook for Less Stressful, More Joyful Living, ISBN 0-553-06796-6
Deborah Taylor-Hough (2000) A Simple Choice: A practical guide for saving your time, money and sanity, SourceBooks, ISBN 1891400495
Amy Dacyzyn (1998) The Complete Tightwad Gazette: Promoting Thrift as a Viable Alternative Lifestyle., ISBN 0-375-75225-0
John de Graaf, David Wann and Thomas H. Naylor (2002) Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic, ISBN 1-57675-199-6
Jacob Lund Fisker (2010) Early Retirement Extreme: A philosophical and practical guide to financial independence, ISBN 978-1453601211
Dave Bruno (2010) The 100 Thing Challenge, ISBN 978-0061787744
Marie Kondo (2014) The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up, ISBN 978-1607747307

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Simple living.



The Testament Of Quaker Simplicity
The Good Life: An International Perspective by Amitai Etzioni







v
t
e


Simple living



Practices



Barter
Cord-cutting
DIY ethic
Downshifting
Dry toilet
Forest gardening
Freeganism
Frugality
Gift economy
Intentional community
Local currency
Low-impact development
Minimalism
No frills
Off-the-grid
Permaculture
Self-sufficiency
Subsistence agriculture
Sustainable living
Sustainable sanitation
Veganism
Vegetarianism
War tax resistance
WWOOF





Religious and spiritual



Asceticism
Aparigraha
Cynicism
Detachment
Distributism
Jesus movement
Mendicant
Mindfulness
Monasticism
New Monasticism
Plain dress
Plain people
Quakers
Rastafari
Temperance
Testimony of simplicity
Tolstoyan movement





Secular movements



Back-to-the-land
Car-free
Compassionate living
Environmental
Hippie
Slow
Small house
Transition town
Open Source Ecology





Notable writers



Wendell Berry
Ernest Callenbach
G. K. Chesterton
Duane Elgin
Mahatma Gandhi
Richard Gregg
Tom Hodgkinson
Harlan Hubbard
Satish Kumar
Helen Nearing
Scott Nearing
Peace Pilgrim
Vicki Robin
Nick Rosen
Dugald Semple
E. F. Schumacher
Henry David Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy





Modern-day adherents



Mark Boyle
Jim Merkel
Suelo
Thomas





Media



"Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral"
Escape from Affluenza
The Good Life
The Moon and the Sledgehammer
Mother Earth News
The Power of Half
Small Is Beautiful
Walden





Related topics



Affluenza
Agrarianism
Anarcho-primitivism
Anti-consumerism
Appropriate technology
Bohemianism
Consumerism
Deep ecology
Degrowth
Ecological footprint
Food miles
Green anarchism
The good life
Global warming
Hedonophobia
Intentional living
Itinerant
Low-technology
Nonviolence
Peak oil
Sustainability
Work–life balance












v
t
e


Sustainability



Principles



Anthropocene
Earth system governance
Ecological modernization
Environmental governance
Environmentalism
Global catastrophic risk
Human impact on the environment
Planetary boundaries
Social sustainability
Stewardship
Sustainable development





Consumption



Anthropization
Anti-consumerism
Earth Overshoot Day
Ecological footprint
Ethical
Over-consumption
Simple living
Sustainability advertising
Sustainability brand
Sustainability marketing myopia
Sustainable
Systemic change resistance
Tragedy of the commons





Population



Birth control
Family planning
Control
Overpopulation
Zero growth





Technology



Appropriate
Environmental
Sustainable





Biodiversity



Biosecurity
Biosphere
Conservation biology
Deep ecology
Endangered species
Holocene extinction
Invasive species





Energy



Carbon footprint
Climate change mitigation
Conservation
Descent
Efficiency
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out
Peak oil
Renewable
Energy poverty





Food



Forest gardening
Local
Permaculture
Security
Sustainable agriculture
Sustainable fishery
Urban horticulture





Water



Conservation
Crisis
Efficiency
Footprint
Reclaimed





Accountability



Sustainability accounting
Sustainability measurement
Sustainability metrics and indices
Sustainability reporting
Standards and certification
Sustainable yield





Applications



Advertising
Architecture
Art
Business
City
College programs
Community
Design
Ecovillage
Education for Sustainable Development
Fashion
Gardening
Geopark
Green marketing
Industries
Landscape architecture
Living
Low-impact development
Sustainable market
Organizations
Packaging
Practices
Procurement
Tourism
Transport
Urban drainage systems
Urban infrastructure
Urbanism





Management



Environmental
Fisheries
Forest
Materials
Natural resource
Planetary
Waste





Agreements



UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972)
Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983)
Our Common Future (1987)
Earth Summit (1992)
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
Agenda 21 (1992)
Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
ICPD Programme of Action (1994)
Earth Charter
Lisbon Principles
UN Millennium Declaration (2000)
Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg)
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012)
Sustainable Development Goals








Category
Lists
Outline
Portal
Science
Studies
Degrees












v
t
e


Peak oil



Core issues



Peak oil
Mitigation of peak oil
Predicting the timing of peak oil
Hubbert peak theory
Olduvai theory








Results/responses



Hirsch report
Rimini protocol
Price of petroleum
2000s energy crisis
Energy crisis
Export Land Model
Food vs. fuel
Oil reserves
Pickens Plan
Simple living
Swing producer
Renewable energy commercialization
Permaculture





People



Albert Allen Bartlett
Colin J. Campbell
John Michael Greer
David Goodstein
Richard Heinberg
M. King Hubbert
James Kunstler
Jean Laherrère
Jeremy Leggett
Dale Allen Pfeiffer
Richard Rainwater
Michael C. Ruppert
Matthew Simmons
Richard C. Duncan
Kenneth S. Deffeyes





Books



The End of Oil
The Long Emergency
Out of Gas
The Party's Over
Power Down
Beyond Oil
Twilight in the Desert





Documentary films



A Crude Awakening
Collapse
The End of Suburbia
Oil Factor
PetroApocalypse Now?
How Cuba Survived Peak Oil
What a Way to Go
Gashole
Fuel (film)
Escape from Suburbia
Crude (2007 film)





Organizations



The Oil Drum
Energy Watch Group
ODAC
OPEC
OAPEC
IEA
IRENA
Post Carbon Institute
REN21
Transition town





Other peaks



Car
Coal
Copper
Food
Gas
Gold
Minerals
Phosphorus
Soil
Uranium
Water
Wheat
Wood












v
t
e


Global warming and climate change








Temperatures






Brightness temperature
Effective temperature
Geologic record
Hiatus
Historical climatology
Instrumental record
Paleoclimatology
Paleotempestology
Proxy data
Record of the past 1,000 years
Satellite measurements













Causes







Anthropogenic



Attribution of recent climate change
Aviation
Biofuel
Black carbon
Carbon dioxide
Deforestation
Earth's energy budget
Earth's radiation balance
Ecocide
Fossil fuel
Global dimming
Global warming potential
Greenhouse effect
(Infrared window)
Greenhouse gases
(Halocarbons)
Land use, land-use change and forestry
Radiative forcing
Tropospheric ozone
Urban heat island





Natural



Albedo
Bond events
Climate oscillations
Climate sensitivity
Cloud forcing
Cosmic rays
Feedbacks
Glaciation
Global cooling
Milankovitch cycles
Ocean variability

AMO
ENSO
IOD
PDO


Orbital forcing
Solar variation
Volcanism





Models



Global climate model
















History






History of climate change science
Atmospheric thermodynamics
Svante Arrhenius
James Hansen
Charles David Keeling













Opinion and climate change






Environmental ethics
Media coverage of climate change
Public opinion on climate change
(Popular culture)
Scientific opinion on climate change
Scientists opposing the mainstream assessment
Climate change denial
Global warming conspiracy theory
By country & region
(Africa
Arctic
Argentina
Australia
Bangladesh
Belgium
Canada
China
Europe
European Union
Finland
Grenada
Japan
Luxembourg
New Zealand
Norway
Russia
Scotland
South Korea
Sweden
Tuvalu
United Kingdom
United States)













Politics










Clean Power Plan
Climate change denial
(Manufactured controversy)
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
March for Science
People's Climate March
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC)
Global climate regime
















Potential effects and issues







General



Abrupt climate change
Anoxic event
Arctic dipole anomaly
Arctic haze
Arctic methane release
Climate change and agriculture
Climate change and ecosystems
Climate change and gender
Climate change and poverty
Current sea level rise
Drought
Economics of global warming
Effect on plant biodiversity
Effects on health
Effects on humans
Effects on marine mammals
Environmental migrant
Extinction risk from global warming
Fisheries and climate change
Forest dieback
Industry and society
Iris hypothesis
Megadrought
Ocean acidification
Ozone depletion
Physical impacts
Polar stratospheric cloud
Regime shift
Retreat of glaciers since 1850
Runaway climate change
Season creep
Shutdown of thermohaline circulation





By country



Australia
South Asia

India
Nepal


United States
















Mitigation







Kyoto Protocol



Clean Development Mechanism
Joint Implementation
Bali Road Map
2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference





Governmental



European Climate Change Programme
G8 Climate Change Roundtable
United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
Paris Agreement

United States withdrawal


Regional climate change initiatives in the United States
List of climate change initiatives





Emissions reduction



Carbon credit
Carbon-neutral fuel
Carbon offset
Carbon tax
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out





Carbon-free energy



Carbon capture and storage
Efficient energy use
Low-carbon economy
Nuclear power
Renewable energy





Personal



Individual action on climate change
Simple living





Other



Carbon dioxide removal
Carbon sink
Climate change mitigation scenarios
Climate engineering
Individual and political action on climate change
Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
Reforestation
Urban reforestation
Climate Action Plan
Climate action
















Proposed adaptations







Strategies



Damming glacial lakes
Desalination
Drought tolerance
Irrigation investment
Rainwater storage
Sustainable development
Weather modification





Programmes



Avoiding dangerous climate change
Land allocation decision support system














Glossary of climate change
Index of climate change articles
Category:Climate change
Category:Global warming
Portal:Global warming












v
t
e


Anti-war movement and peace




Opposition
to wars or
aspects of war




Afghan War
American Civil War
Iraq War
Landmines
Military action in Iran
Military intervention in Libya
Military taxation
Nuclear armament
Second Boer War
Sri Lankan Civil War
Vietnam War
War of 1812
War on Terror
World War I
World War II








Agents of
opposition



Anti-nuclear organizations
Anti-war movement
Anti-war organizations
Bed-In
Central Park be-ins
Conscientious objectors
Counterculture
Draft evasion
Human Be-In
List of peace activists
Peace and conflict studies
Peace camp
Peace churches
Peace commission
Peace education
Peace movement
Peace walk
Teach-in
War resisters
War tax resisters





Related
ideologies



Ahimsa
Anarcho-pacifism
Anarcho-punks
Anti-imperialism
Anti-nuclear movement
Antimilitarism
Appeasement
Christian anarchism
Direct action
Finvenkismo
Hippie
Isolationism
Non-interventionism
Nonkilling
Nonviolence
Pacificism
Pacifism
Satyagraha
Simple living
Socialism
Soviet influence on the peace movement





Media
and cultural



Art
Books
Films
International Day of Non-Violence
International Day of Peace
Dialogue Among Civilizations
List of places named Peace
"Make love, not war"
Monuments and memorials
Peace journalism

Peace News


Plays
Promoting Enduring Peace
Songs
Symbols
World Game





Countries



Canada
Germany
Israel
Netherlands
Spain
United Kingdom
United States












v
t
e


Tax resistance



Topics



Conscientious objection to military taxation
List of historical acts of tax resistance
List of tax resisters





Methods



Barter
Gift economy
Local currency
Rebellion
Self-sufficiency
Simple living
Tax avoidance
Tax evasion
Unreported employment





Organizations



Addiopizzo
Aide-toi, le ciel t'aidera
All Britain Anti-Poll Tax Federation
Anti-Poll Tax Unions
Association of Real Estate Taxpayers
Catalunya Diu Prou
Committee for Non-Violent Action
Δεν Πληρώνω
Fasci Siciliani
Irish National Land League
National Campaign for a Peace Tax Fund
National War Tax Resistance Coordinating Committee
Northern California War Tax Resistance
Pagal Panthis
Peace churches
Peacemakers
Planka.nu
Women's Tax Resistance League





Media



An Act of Conscience
Civil Disobedience
Clericis laicos
The Cold War and the Income Tax: A Protest
Vyborg Manifesto





Campaigns




1300s



Tuchin Revolt
Harelle
Peasants' Revolt





1400s



Cornish Rebellion of 1497





1500s



Croquant rebellions
Rappenkrieg
Revolt of the Pitauds





1600s



Angelets
Revolt of the papier timbré
Revolt of the va-nu-pieds
Salt Tax Revolt





1700s



Boston Tea Party
Fries's Rebellion
Gaspee Affair
No taxation without representation
Philadelphia Tea Party
Revolt of the Comuneros (New Granada)
War of the Regulation
Whiskey Rebellion
White Lotus Rebellion





1800s



Dog Tax War
Hut Tax War of 1898
Rebecca Riots
Saminism Movement
Tancament de Caixes
Tithe War





1900s



Agbekoya
Bambatha Rebellion
Bardoli Satyagraha
Beit Sahour
Bondelswarts affair
Champaran Satyagraha
Kheda Satyagraha
Johnson cult
Mau movement
Poll Tax Riots
Poplar Rates Rebellion
Turra Coo
Salt March
Women's War





2000s



Anti-austerity movement in Greece
Anti-Bin Tax Campaign
Bonnets Rouges
Campaign Against Home and Water Taxes
Movimento Passe Livre








Related topics



Civil disobedience
Conscientious objector
Direct action
Income tax threshold
Nonviolent resistance
Render unto Caesar
Tax noncompliance
Tax protester
Tax riot
Taxation as slavery
Taxation as theft












v
t
e


Veganism and vegetarianism



Perspectives




Veganism



Animal-free agriculture
Fruitarianism
History
Juice fasting
Low-carbon diet
Raw veganism
Nutrition
Vegan organic gardening





Vegetarianism



Economic vegetarianism
Environmental vegetarianism
History
Lacto vegetarianism
Ovo vegetarianism
Ovo-lacto vegetarianism
Cuisine
Vegetarian Diet Pyramid
Ecofeminism
Nutrition
By country





Semi-vegetarianism



Macrobiotic diet
Pescetarianism





Lists



Vegans
Vegetarians
Vegetarian festivals
Vegetarian organizations
Vegetarian restaurants








Ethics




Secular



Animal rights
Animal welfare
Carnism
Deep ecology
Environmental vegetarianism
Ethics of eating meat
Meat paradox
Nonviolence
Speciesism
Tirukkuṛaḷ





Religious



Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism

Sattvic
Ahimsa


Sikhism
Rastafari
Jainism
Judaism
Pythagorean diet








Food,
drink



Agar
Agave nectar
Meat analogue

List of meat substitutes


Miso
Mochi
Mock duck
Nutritional yeast
Plant cream
Plant milk
Quinoa
Quorn
Seitan
Soy yogurt
Tempeh
Tofu
Tofurkey
Cheese
Hot dog
Vegetarian mark
Sausage
Beer
Wine
Veggie burger





Groups,
events,
companies




Vegan



American Vegan Society
Beauty Without Cruelty
Food Empowerment Project
Go Vegan
Movement for Compassionate Living
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine
Plamil Foods
Vegan Awareness Foundation
Vegan flag
Vegan Ireland
Vegan Outreach
Vegan Prisoners Support Group
The Vegan Society
Veganz
World Vegan Day





Vegetarian



American Vegetarian Party
Boston Vegetarian Society
Christian Vegetarian Association
European Vegetarian Union
Hare Krishna Food for Life
International Vegetarian Union
Jewish Veg
Linda McCartney Foods
Meat-free days

Meatless Monday


Swissveg
Toronto Vegetarian Association
Vegetarian Society
Vegetarian Society (Singapore)
Veggie Pride
Viva! Health
World Esperantist Vegetarian Association
World Vegetarian Day








Books,
reports



Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian (1903)
The Benefits of Vegetarianism (1927)
Diet for a Small Planet (1971)
Moosewood Cookbook (1977)
Fit for Life (1985)
Diet for a New America (1987)
The China Study (2004)
Raw Food Made Easy for 1 or 2 People (2005)
Skinny Bitch (2005)
Livestock's Long Shadow (2006)
Eating Animals (2009)
The Kind Diet (2009)
Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows (2009)
Eat & Run (2012)
Meat Atlas (annual)





Films



Meet Your Meat (2002)
Peaceable Kingdom (2004)
Earthlings (2005)
A Sacred Duty (2007)
Fat, Sick and Nearly Dead (2010)
Planeat (2010)
Forks Over Knives (2011)
Vegucated (2011)
Live and Let Live (2013)
Cowspiracy (2014)
What the Health (2017)
Carnage (2017)





Magazines



Naked Food
Vegetarian Times
VegNews





Physicians,
academics



Neal D. Barnard
T. Colin Campbell
Caldwell Esselstyn
Gary L. Francione
Joel Fuhrman
Michael Greger
Melanie Joy
Michael Klaper
John A. McDougall
Reed Mangels
Dean Ornish
Richard H. Schwartz












v
t
e


Hippies



History of the
hippie movement



Etymology of 'hippie'
Beat Generation/Beatniks
Central Park be-in
Counterculture of the 1960s
Red Dog Experience
San Francisco Sound
Drop City
Sunset Strip curfew riots
Love Pageant Rally
Haight-Ashbury
Human Be-In
Mantra-Rock Dance
Summer of Love
Fantasy Fair
Monterey Pop Festival
Newport Pop Festival
Sky River Rock Festival
People's Park
Woodstock
Glastonbury Festival
The Farm
Piedra Roja
Festival Rock y Ruedas de Avándaro
Nambassa





People and groups



Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters

Further bus


Diggers
San Francisco Oracle
Haight Ashbury Free Clinics
Haight-Ashbury Switchboard
Yippies
Wavy Gravy and the Hog Farm Collective
Brotherhood of Eternal Love
Rainbow Family
Deadhead
New Age travellers
Radical Faeries





Politics and ethics



Free love
Anti-authoritarianism
Simple living
Environmentalism
Pacifism
Communalism
Counterculture
Bohemianism
Make love, not war
Turn on, tune in, drop out
Vegetarianism

Veganism







Culture and fashion



Psychedelia
Flower power
Hippie trail
Hippie exploitation films
Happening
Peace symbols
Bell-bottoms
Love beads
Long hair
Tie-dye
Intentional community

communal living


Free festival
Music festival
Flower child





Music



Folk music
Folk rock
Protest music
Psychedelic music
Psychedelic folk
Psychedelic rock
Psychedelic soul
Psychedelic pop
Psychedelic trance
Acid rock
Space rock
Progressive rock
Raga rock
World music
New-age music
Jam bands
List of jam band music festivals
List of historic rock festivals





Psychedelics
and other drugs



Cannabis
LSD
Magic mushrooms
Mescaline
Peyote





Related



List of films
List of books and other publications
Subculture

Cannabis culture
Cyberdelic
Head shop


Underground press

press syndicate
list


New Age movement
Legend of the Rainbow Warriors
Freak scene
Free Speech Movement
Anti-war movement
Civil Rights Movement
Protests of 1968
Chicago Seven
New Left
UK underground
La Onda
New social movements
Mánička
Post-materialism
Neotribalism
Hungry generation
Sexual revolution
Second Summer of Love
Neo-psychedelia








Sustainable development portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Simple_living&oldid=817973905"					Categories: Simple livingSubculturesPersonal financeWork–life balanceSustainabilityHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksPages with citations lacking titlesWebarchive template other archivesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2010