"Sinai" redirects here. For other uses, see Sinai (disambiguation).




Relief map of the Sinai Peninsula


The Sinai Peninsula or simply Sinai (/ˈsaɪnaɪ/;[1][2] Arabic: سيناء‎ Sīnāʼ ; Egyptian Arabic: سينا‎ Sīna, IPA: [ˈsiːnæ]; Hebrew: סיני‎ Sinai; Coptic: ⲥⲓⲛⲁ) is a peninsula in Egypt, the only part of the country located in Asia. It is situated between the Mediterranean Sea to the north and the Red Sea to the south, and is a land bridge between Asia and Africa. Sinai has a land area of about 60,000 km2 (23,000 sq mi) and a population of approximately 1,400,000 people. Administratively, the Sinai Peninsula is divided into two governorates: the South Sinai Governorate and the North Sinai Governorate. Three other governorates span the Suez Canal, crossing into African Egypt: Suez Governorate on the southern end of the Suez Canal, Ismailia Governorate in the center, and Port Said Governorate in the north.
The Sinai Peninsula has been a part of Egypt from the First Dynasty of ancient Egypt (c. 3100 BC). This comes in stark contrast to the region north of it, the Levant (present-day territories of Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Israel and Palestine), which, due largely to its strategic geopolitical location and cultural convergences, has historically been the centre of conflict between Egypt and various states of Mesopotamia and Asia Minor. In periods of foreign occupation, the Sinai was, like the rest of Egypt, also occupied and controlled by foreign empires, in more recent history the Ottoman Empire (1517–1867) and the United Kingdom (1882–1956). Israel invaded and occupied Sinai during the Suez Crisis (known in Egypt as the Tripartite Aggression due to the simultaneous coordinated attack by the UK, France and Israel) of 1956, and during the Six-Day War of 1967. On 6 October 1973, Egypt launched the Yom Kippur War to retake the peninsula, which was the site of fierce fighting between Egyptian and Israeli forces. By 1982, as a result of the Israel–Egypt Peace Treaty of 1979, Israel had withdrawn from all of the Sinai Peninsula except the contentious territory of Taba, which was returned after a ruling by a commission of arbitration in 1989.
Today, Sinai has become a tourist destination due to its natural setting, rich coral reefs, and biblical history. Mount Sinai is one of the most religiously significant places in the Abrahamic faiths.



Contents


1 Name
2 Geography

2.1 Climate


3 History

3.1 Ancient Egypt
3.2 Assyrian Period
3.3 Achaemenid Persian Period
3.4 Hellenistic Period
3.5 Roman and Byzantine Periods
3.6 Early Muslim Period
3.7 Ayyubid Period
3.8 Mamluk and Ottoman Periods
3.9 British control
3.10 Wars with Israel (1948, 56, 67, 67–70, 73)
3.11 1979 Peace Treaty with Israel and aftermath
3.12 Early 21st Century security issues


4 Demographics
5 Economy
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Name[edit]




Mount Sinai (Gabal Musa)


The name Sinai may have been derived from the ancient moon-god Sin[3] or from the Hebrew word Seneh (Hebrew: סֶ֫נֶּה‎ Senneh)[4] The peninsula acquired the name due to the assumption that a mountain near Saint Catherine's Monastery is the Biblical Mount Sinai. However this assumption is contested.[5]
In addition to its formal name, Egyptians also refer to it as Arḍ ul-Fairūz (أرض الفيروز "the land of turquoise"). The ancient Egyptians called it Ta Mefkat, or "land of turquoise".[6]
Geography[edit]




Image from Gemini 11 spacecraft, featuring part of Egypt and the Sinai Peninsula in the foreground and the Levant in the background


Sinai is triangular in shape, with northern shore lying on the southern Mediterranean Sea, and southwest and southeast shores on Gulf of Suez and Gulf of Aqaba of the Red Sea. It is linked to the African continent by the Isthmus of Suez, 125 kilometres (78 mi) wide strip of land, containing the Suez Canal. The eastern isthmus, linking it to the Asian mainland, is around 200 kilometres (120 mi) wide. The peninsula's eastern shore separates the Arabian plate from the African plate.[7]
The southernmost tip is the Ras Muhammad National Park.
Most of the Sinai Peninsula is divided among the two governorates of Egypt: South Sinai (Ganub Sina) and North Sinai (Shamal Sina).[8] Together, they comprise around 60,000 square kilometres (23,000 sq mi) and have a population (January 2013) of 597,000. Three more governates span the Suez Canal, crossing into African Egypt: Suez (el-Sewais) is on the southern end of the Suez Canal, Ismailia (el-Isma'ileyyah) in the centre, and Port Said in the north.
The largest city of Sinai is Arish, capital of the North Sinai, with around 160,000 residents. Other larger settlements include Sharm el-Sheikh and El-Tor, on the southern coast. Inland Sinai is arid, mountainous and sparsely populated, the largest settlements being Saint Catherine and Nekhel.[8]
Climate[edit]
Sinai is one of the coldest provinces in Egypt because of its high altitudes and mountainous topographies. Winter temperatures in some of Sinai's cities and towns reach −16 °C (3 °F).[citation needed]
History[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Sinai Peninsula in hieroglyphs






































Biau
Bj3w[9]
"Mining country"[9]





Ancient Egypt[edit]
Sinai was called Mafkat or "country of turquoise" by the ancient Egyptians [10][11] From the time of the First Dynasty or before, the Egyptians mined turquoise in Sinai at two locations, now called by their Egyptian Arabic names Wadi Magharah and Serabit El Khadim. The mines were worked intermittently and on a seasonal basis for thousands of years. Modern attempts to exploit the deposits have been unprofitable. These may be the first historically attested mines.[citation needed]
Assyrian Period[edit]
Achaemenid Persian Period[edit]
At the end of the time of Darius I, the Great (521–486 BCE) Sinai was part of the Persian province of Abar-Nahra, which means "beyond the river [Euphrates].[12]
Cambyses successfully managed the crossing of the hostile Sinai Desert, traditionally Egypt's first and strongest line of defence, and brought the Egyptians under Psamtik III, son and successor of Ahmose, to battle at Pelusium. The Egyptians lost and retired to Memphis; the city fell to the Persian control and the Pharaoh was carried off in captivity to Susa in mainland Persia.
Hellenistic Period[edit]
Roman and Byzantine Periods[edit]




St. Catherine's Monastery is the oldest working Christian monastery in the world and the most popular tourist attraction on the peninsula.


After the death of the last Nabatean king, Rabbel II Soter, in 106,[13] the Roman emperor Trajan faced practically no resistance and conquered the kingdom on 22 March 106. With this conquest, the Roman Empire went on to control all shores of the Mediterranean Sea. The Sinai Peninsula became part of the Roman province of Arabia Petraea.[14]
Saint Catherine's Monastery on the foot of Mount Sinai was constructed by order of the Emperor Justinian between 527 and 565. Most of the Sinai Peninsula became part of the province of Palaestina Salutaris in the 6th century.
Early Muslim Period[edit]
Ayyubid Period[edit]
During the Crusades it was under control of Fatimid Caliphate. Later, Saladin abolished the Fatimid Caliphate in Egypt and took this region under his control too. It was the military route from Cairo to Damascus during the Crusades.[citation needed]
Mamluk and Ottoman Periods[edit]
The peninsula was governed as part of Egypt under the Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt from 1260 until 1517, when the Ottoman Sultan, Selim the Grim, defeated the Egyptians at the Battles of Marj Dabiq and al-Raydaniyya, and incorporated Egypt into the Ottoman Empire. From then until 1906, Sinai was administered by the Ottoman provincial government of the Pashalik of Egypt, even following the establishment of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty's rule over the rest of Egypt in 1805.




The wilderness of Sinai, 1862


British control[edit]
In 1906, the Ottoman Porte formally transferred administration of Sinai to the Egyptian government, which essentially meant that it fell under the control of the United Kingdom, who had occupied and largely controlled Egypt since 1882. The border imposed by the British runs in an almost straight line from Rafah on the Mediterranean shore to Taba on the Gulf of Aqaba. This line has served as the eastern border of Egypt ever since.
Wars with Israel (1948, 56, 67, 67–70, 73)[edit]




Canadian and Panamanian UNEF UN peacekeepers in Sinai, 1974


At the beginning of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, Egyptian forces entered the former British Mandate of Palestine from Sinai to support Palestinian and other Arab forces against the newly declared State of Israel. For a period during the war, Israeli forces entered the north-eastern corner of Sinai.[15] With the exception of Palestine's Gaza Strip, which came under the administration of the All-Palestine Government,[16] the western frontier of the former Mandate of Palestine became the Egyptian–Israeli frontier under the 1949 Armistice Agreement. In 1958, the Gaza Strip came under direct Egyptian military administration, though it was governed separately from Sinai, and was never annexed by Egypt. The Egyptian government maintained that Egyptian administration would be terminated upon the end of the conflict with Israel.
In 1956, Egypt nationalised the Suez Canal,[17] a waterway marking the boundary between Egyptian territory in Africa and the Sinai Peninsula. Thereafter, Israeli ships were prohibited from using the Canal,[18] owing to the state of war between the two states. Egypt also prohibited ships from using Egyptian territorial waters on the eastern side of the peninsula to travel to and from Israel, effectively imposing a blockade on the Israeli port of Eilat. Subsequently, in what is known in Egypt as the Tripartite Aggression, Israeli forces, aided by Britain, and France (which sought to reverse the nationalisation and regain control over the Suez Canal), invaded Sinai and occupied much of the peninsula within a few days. Several months later Israel withdrew its forces from Sinai, following strong pressure from the United States and the Soviet Union. Thereafter, the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) was stationed in Sinai to prevent any further conflict in the Sinai.
In 1967, Egypt reinforced its military presence in Sinai and on 16 May ordered the UNEF out of Sinai with immediate effect.[19] Secretary-General U Thant eventually complied and ordered the withdrawal without Security Council authorisation. In the course of the Six-Day War that broke out shortly thereafter, Israel captured the entire Sinai Peninsula, and Gaza Strip from Egypt, the West Bank (including East Jerusalem) from Jordan (which it had ruled since 1949), and the Golan Heights from Syria. The Suez Canal, the east bank of which was now occupied by Israel, was closed. Israel commenced efforts at large scale Israeli settlement in the peninsula.
Following the Israeli conquest of Sinai, Egypt launched the War of Attrition (1967–70) aimed at forcing Israel to withdraw from Egyptian territory. The war saw protracted conflict in the Suez Canal Zone, ranging from limited to large scale combat. Israeli shelling of the cities of Port Said, Ismailia, and Suez on the west bank of the canal, led to high civilian casualties (including the virtual destruction of Suez), and contributed to the flight of 700,000[20] Egyptian internal refugees. Ultimately, the war concluded in 1970 with no change in the front line.[21]
On 6 October 1973, Egypt commenced Operation Badr to retake the Sinai, while Syria launched a simultaneous operation to retake the Golan Heights,[citation needed] thereby beginning the Yom Kippur War (known in Egypt as the October War). Egyptian engineering forces built pontoon bridges to cross the Suez Canal, and stormed the Bar-Lev Line, Israel's defensive line along the canal. Though the Egyptians maintained control of most of the east bank of the Canal, in the later stages of the war, the Israeli military crossed the southern section of Canal, cutting off the Egyptian 3rd Army, and occupied a section of the west bank. The war ended following a mutually agreed-upon ceasefire. After the war, as part of the subsequent Sinai Disengagement Agreements, Israel withdrew from the Canal, with Egypt agreeing to permit passage of Israeli ships. The canal was reopened in 1975, with President Sadat leading the first convoy through the canal aboard an Egyptian destroyer.
1979 Peace Treaty with Israel and aftermath[edit]




Egypt-Israel border. Looking north from the Eilat Mountains


In 1979, Egypt and Israel signed a peace treaty in which Israel agreed to withdraw from the entirety of Sinai. Israel subsequently withdrew in several stages, ending in 1982. The Israeli pull-out involved dismantling almost all Israeli settlements, including the settlement of Yamit in north-eastern Sinai. The exception was the coastal city of Sharm el-Sheikh, which the Israelis had founded as Ofira during the period of their occupation. The Treaty allows monitoring of Sinai by the Multinational Force and Observers, and limits the number of Egyptian military forces in the peninsula.
Early 21st Century security issues[edit]
Since the early 2000s, Sinai has been the site of several terror attacks against tourists, the majority of whom are Egyptian. Investigations have shown that these were mainly motivated by a resentment of the poverty faced by many Bedouin in the area. Attacking the tourist industry was viewed as a method of damaging the industry so that the government would pay more attention to their situation.[22] (See 2004 Sinai bombings, 2005 Sharm El Sheikh bombings and 2006 Dahab bombings). Since the 2011 Egyptian Revolution, unrest has become more prevalent in the area including the 2012 Egyptian-Israeli border attack in which 16 Egyptian soldiers were killed by militants. (See Sinai insurgency).
Also on the rise are kidnappings of refugees. According to Meron Estifanos, Eritrean refugees are often kidnapped by Bedouin in the northern Sinai, tortured, raped, and only released after receiving a large ransom.[23][24]
Under President el-Sisi, Egypt has implemented a rigorous policy of controlling the border to the Gaza Strip, including the dismantling of tunnels between Gaza and Sinai.[25]
Demographics[edit]




Two young Bedouins making bread in the desert


The two governorates of North and South Sinai have a total population of 597,000 (January 2013). This figure rises to 1,400,000 by including Western Sinai, the parts of the Port Said, Ismailia and Suez Governorates lying east of the Suez Canal. Port Said alone has a population of roughly 500,000 people (January 2013). Portions of the populations of Ismailia and Suez live in west Sinai, while the rest live on the western side of the Suez Canal.
Population of Sinai has largely consisted of desert-dwelling Bedouins with their colourful traditional costumes and significant culture.[26] Large numbers of Egyptians from the Nile Valley and Delta moved to the area to work in tourism, but development adversely affected the native Bedouin population.[citation needed] In order to help alleviate their problems, various NGOs began to operate in the region, including the Makhad Trust, a UK charity that assists the Bedouin in developing a sustainable income while protecting Sinai's natural environment, heritage and culture.[citation needed]
Economy[edit]




Dahab in Southern Sinai is a popular beach and diving resort


See also: Tourism in Egypt
Since the Israeli–Egyptian peace treaty, Sinai's scenic spots (including coral reefs offshore) and religious structures have become important to the tourism industry. The most popular tourist destination in Sinai are Mount Sinai (Jabal Musa) and St Catherine's Monastery, which is considered to be the oldest working Christian monastery in the world, and the beach resorts of Sharm el-Sheikh, Dahab, Nuweiba and Taba. Most tourists arrive at Sharm el-Sheikh International Airport, through Eilat, Israel and the Taba Border Crossing, by road from Cairo or by ferry from Aqaba in Jordan.[citation needed]

See also[edit]





Isthmus of Suez
Operation Eagle
Multinational Force and Observers
Negev Bedouin


Natural places


Desert of Paran
Mitla Pass




Manmade structures


Biblical Mount Sinai
Nawamis


Wildlife


Sinai leopard





References[edit]



^ "Definition of Sinai". The Free Dictionary. Retrieved 2014-05-03. 
^ "Define Sinayi". Dictionary.com. Retrieved 2014-05-03. 
^ "Sinai Peninsula (peninsula, Egypt) - Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Britannica.com. Retrieved 14 January 2012. 
^ "Sinai, Mount". JewishEncyclopedia.com. Retrieved 14 January 2012. 
^ See Biblical Mount Sinai for a fuller discussion.
^ "Étude de la turquoise : de ses traitements et imitations" Archived 15 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine., thesis by Claire Salanne, Université de Nantes, 2009.
^ Homberg, Catherine and Martina Bachmann, Evolution of the Levant Margin and Western Arabia Platform Since the Mesozoic, The Geological Society of London, 2010, p 65 ISBN 978-1862393066
^ a b Ned Greenwood (1 January 2010). The Sinai: A Physical Geography. University of Texas Press. pp. 4–. ISBN 978-0-292-77909-9. 
^ a b The translation "mining country" is not certain, see also Rainer Hannig: Großes Handwörterbuch Ägyptisch-Deutsch : (2800 - 950 v. Chr.). p. 1135.
^ http://www.egyptsearch.com/forums/ultimatebb.cgi?ubb=print_topic;f=8;t=008397
^ Joseph Davidovits and Ralph Davidovits (2007). "Why Djoser's blue Egyptian faience tiles are not blue? Manufacturing Djoser's faience tiles at temperatures as low as 250 °C?". In Jean Claude Goyon, Christine Cardin. Proceedings of the ninth International Congress of Egyptologists (PDF). 1. Louvain/Paris/Dudley. p. 375. 
^ Iranchamber
^ Schürer, Emil; Millar, Fergus; Vermes, Geza (26 March 2015). The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ:. Bloomsbury Academic. p. 583. ISBN 978-0-567-50161-5. 
^ Taylor, Jane: Petra And the Lost Kingdom of the Nabataeans. I. B. Tauris 2001, ISBN 1860645089, p. 73-74 (online copy, p. 73, at Google Books)
^ Rogan, Eugene L. and Avi Shlaim, eds. The War for Palestine: Rewriting the History of 1948. 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, p. 99, 2007
^ Shlaim, Avi (2001). Israel and the Arab Coalition. In Eugene Rogan and Avi Shlaim (eds.). The War for Palestine (pp. 97). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-79476-3
^ http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/egypt-nationalizes-the-suez-canal
^ "1956: Egypt Seizes Suez Canal". BBC. 26 July 1956. 
^ Samir A. Mutawi (18 July 2002). Jordan in the 1967 War. Cambridge University Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-0-521-52858-0. Although Eshkol denounced the Egyptians, his response to this development was a model of moderation. His speech on 21 May demanded that Nasser withdraw his forces from Sinai but made no mention of the removal of UNEF from the Straits nor of what Israel would do if they were closed to Israeli shipping. The next day Nasser announced to an astonished world that henceforth the Straits were, indeed, closed to all Israeli ships 
^ Spencer, Tucker. Encyclopedia or the Arab-Israeli Conflict. p. 175. 
^ "War of Attrition". 
^ Serene Assir (23 July 2005). "Shock in Sharm". Al-Ahram Weekly. Retrieved 29 March 2014. 
^ Meron Stefanos on the torture houses in north Sinai
^ Sound of Torture documentary
^ http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2015/04/egypt-sinai-gaza-tunnels-sanctions-sisi-terrorist.html#
^ Leonard, William R. and Michael H. Crawford, The Human Biology of Pastoral Populations, Cambridge University Press, 2002, p. 67 ISBN 978-0521780162



Further reading[edit]

Gardner, Ann. "At Home in South Sinai". Nomadic Peoples 2000. Vol. 4, Iss. 2; pp. 48–67. Detailed account of Bedouin women
H. J. L. Beadnell (May 1926). "Central Sinai". Geographical Journal. 67 (5): 385–398. doi:10.2307/1782203. JSTOR 1782203. 
C. W. Wilson (1873). "Recent Surveys in Sinai and Palestine". Journal of the Royal Geographical Society of London. 43: 206–240. doi:10.2307/1798627. JSTOR 1798627. 
Jacobs, Jessica (2006). "Tourist Places and Negotiating Modernity: European Women and Romance Tourism in the Sinai". In Minca, Claudio; Oakes, Tim. Travels in Paradox: Remapping Tourism. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-2876-5. Retrieved 7 January 2010. 
Teague, Matthew; Moyer, Matt (March 2009). "The Sinai's Separate Peace". National Geographic Magazine. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society. 215 (3): 99–121. ISSN 0027-9358. Retrieved 7 January 2010. 
Jarvis, C.S.,Yesterday and To-day in Sinai (Edinburgh/London: W. Blackwood & Sons, 1931).
New terrorist challenges in the Sinai peninsula, prominent jihadists organisations, Strategic Impact (52), issue: 3 / 2014, pp. 39-47

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sinai Peninsula.





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Sinai Peninsula.



Guide to Sinai, covering background information on history, flora, fauna, desert, Bedouin, safaris and geology of Sinai
Sinai Local Magazine
The Complete Guide To: The Sinai, The Independent, 15 March 2008.
Sinai in ancient Egypt
Broadcasting videos from Sinai
Images of the Sinai Desert
IRIN humanitarian news: EU grant to tackle rural poverty in South Sinai
Sinai trekking and safari: route maps and photo archive







v
t
e


Geography of Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


People and things in the Quran








Characters



Non-humans



Allâh ("The God")

Names of Allah found in the Quran


Beings in Jannah (Paradise, literally 'Garden')

Ghilman & Wildan
Houri


Zaqqum




Animals




Related



Cattle of Israelites

A real baqarah (cow) that was slaughtered for a purpose
The ‘ijl (golden calf statue)


The dhi’b (wolf) that Jacob feared could attack Joseph
The hud-hud (hoopoe) of Solomon
The kalb (dog) of the sleepers of the cave
The nūn (fish or whale) of Jonah
The nāqaṫ (she-camel) of Saleh
The fīl (elephant) of the Abyssinians)





Non-related



Ḥimār (domesticated donkey or wild ass)
Qaswarah ('Lion', 'Beast of prey' or 'Hunter')








Jinns



Iblīs the Devil
Ifrit
Marid
Qareen








Prophets




Mentioned



Ādam (Adam)
Al-Yasa‘ (Elisha)
Ayyūb (Job)
Dāwūd (David)
Dhūl-Kifl (Ezekiel?)
Hārūn (Aaron)
Hūd (Eber?)
Idrīs (Enoch?)
Ilyās (Elijah)
‘Imrān (Joachim the father of Maryam)
Is-ḥāq (Isaac)
Ismā‘īl (Ishmael)

Dhabih Ullah


Isma'il Ṣādiq al-Wa‘d (Fulfiller of the Promise)
Lūṭ (Lot)
Ṣāliḥ
Shu‘ayb (Jethro, Reuel or Hobab?)
Sulaymān ibn Dāwūd (Solomon son of David)
‘Uzair (Ezra?)
Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyyā (John the Baptist the son of Zechariah)
Ya‘qūb (Jacob)

Isrâ’îl (Israel)


Yūnus (Jonah)

Dhūn-Nūn ("He of the Fish (or Whale)" or "Owner of the Fish (or Whale)")
Ṣāḥib al-Ḥūṫ ("Companion of the Whale")


Yūsuf ibn Ya‘qūb (Joseph son of Jacob)
Zakariyyā (Zechariah)




Ulu-l-‘Azm



Muḥammad

Aḥmad
Other names and titles of Muhammad


ʿĪsā (Jesus)

Al-Masīḥ (The Messiah)
Ibn Maryam (Son of Mary)


Mūsā Kalīmullāh (Moses He who spoke to God)
Ibrāhīm Khalīlullāh (Abraham Friend of God)
Nūḥ (Noah)





Debatable ones



Dhūl-Qarnain (Cyrus the Great?)
Luqmân
Maryam (Mary)
Ṭâlûṫ (Saul or Gideon?)








Implied



Ermia/Jeremiah
Ṣamû’îl (Samuel)
Yusha' ibn Nūn/Joshua (companion and successor of Musa)








People of Prophets




Mentioned evil ones



Āzar (possibly Terah)
Fir'aun (Pharaoh of Moses)
Hāmān
Jâlûṫ (Goliath)
Qarun/Korah (cousin of Musa/Moses)
As-Sāmirī
Abu Lahab





Specified good ones



Zechariah's wife
Adam's immediate relatives

Martyred son
Wife


Women of Moses

Moses' mother
Sister
Wife
Sister-in-law


Isaac's mother
Zayd





Non-specified good ones



Abiona/Amtelai daughter of Karnebo (mother of Ibrahim)
Bathsheba (wife of Dawud, mother of Sulayman)
Hājar/Hagar (wife of Ibrahim, mother of Isma'il)
Hannah/Anne daughter of Faquz (mother of Maryam, wife of Imran)
Imran/Amram (father of Musa)
Lamech (father of Nuh)
Rāhil/Rachel (wife of Ya'qub, mother of Yūsuf)
Rahma/Dinah (wife of Ayyub)
Shamkha bint Anush/Betenos (mother of Nuh)
Son of Luqman





Implied



Asiyah bint Muzahim/Bithiah (wife of Fir'aun)
Asif ibn Barkhiya (vizier and successor of Sulayman)
Bilquis (Queen of Saba/Sheba)
Believer of Fir'aun Family (Hizbil/Hizqil ibn Sabura)
Benyamin/Benjamin
Habib the Carpenter (believer of Ya-Sin)
Kaleb/Caleb (companion of Yusha')
Khidr
Magicians of Fir'aun
Simon Cephas/Simon Peter
Abrahah
Bal'am/Balaam
Barsisa
Nebuchadnezzar II
Nimrod
Potiphar (Al-Aziz)
Shaddad
Simeon (son of Ya'qub)
Slayers of Saleh's she-camel (Qaddar ibn Salif and Musda' ibn Dahr)
Valid ibn Rayyan (king of Egypt in the account of Yūsuf)
Zuleikha (wife of al-Aziz)








Groups




Mentioned



A‘rāb (Arabs or Bedouins)
Aş-ḥāb al-Jannah

People of Paradise
People of the Burnt Garden


Aş-ḥāb as-Sabṫ (Companions of the Sabbath)
Christian apostles

Disciples of Jesus


Companions of Noah's Ark
Aş-ḥāb al-Kahf war-Raqīm (Companions of the Cave and Al-Raqaim?
Companions of the Elephant
People of al-Ukhdūd
People of the City (People of Ya-Sin)
People of Yathrib or Medina
Folk of Dawud
Folk of Lut
Folk of Musa and Harun
Nation of Nuh




Tribes, ethnicities or families



'Ād (people of Hud)
Arab & Ajam
Children of Israel/Israelites
Companions of the Rass
People of Ibrahim
People of Ilyas
People of Lut (Mu'tafikat)
People of Nuh
People of Saba'/Sheba
People of Shuaib

Ahl Madyan People of Madyan)
Aṣ-ḥāb al-Aykah ("Companions of the Wood")


Qawm Tubba‘ (People of Tubba)
Qawm Yûnus (People of Jonah)
Quraysh
Rûm (literally 'Romans')
Thamûd (people of Saleh)

Aṣ-ḥâb al-Ḥijr ("Companions of the Stoneland")


Ya'juj and Ma'juj/Gog and Magog
Ahl al-Bayṫ ("People of the Household")

Household of Abraham

Brothers of Yūsuf
Daughters of Abraham's nephew Lot (Ritha, Za'ura, et al.)
Progeny of Imran
Household of Moses
Household of Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim

Daughters of Muhammad
Wives of Muhammad




Household of Salih


People of Fir'aun
Current Ummah of Islam (Ummah of Muhammad)
Hezbollah
Aṣ-ḥāb Muḥammad (Companions of Muhammad)

Muhajirun (Emigrants)
Anṣār Muslims of Medina who helped Muhammad and his Meccan followers, literally 'Helpers')


People of Mecca
Children of Ayyub
Dead son of Sulaiman
Qabil/Cain (son of Adam)
Umm Jamil (wife of Abu Lahab)
Wali'ah or Wa'ilah/Waala (wife of Nuh)
Walihah or Wahilah (wife of Lut)
Yam or Kan'an (son of Nuh)








Implicitly
mentioned



Amalek
Ahl al-Suffa (People of the Verandah)
Banu Nadir
Banu Qaynuqa
Banu Qurayza
Iranian people
Umayyad Dynasty
Aus & Khazraj
People of Quba





Religious groups



Ahl al-dhimmah (Dhimmi)
Kâfirûn (Infidels)
Zoroastrians
Munafiqun (Hypocrites)
Muslims
People of the Book (Ahl al-Kiṫāb)

Christian (People of the Injil)

Ruhban (Christian monks)
Qissis (Christian priest)


Jews

Ahbār (Jewish scholars)
Rabbani/Rabbi


Sabians


Polytheists

Meccan polytheists at the time of Muhammad
Mesopotamian polytheists at the time of Abraham and Lot










Locations




Mentioned



Al-Aḥqāf ("The Sandy Plains," or "the Wind-curved Sand-hills")
Al-Arḍ Al-Mubārakah ("The Land The Blessed")

Al-Arḍ Al-Muqaddasah ("The Land The Holy")


Al-Jūdiyy

Munzalanm-Mubārakan ("Place-of-Landing Blessed")


Al-Madīnah (formerly Yathrib)
Al-Wād Al-Muqaddas Ṭuwan (The Holy Valley of Tuwa)
‘Arafāṫ
Bābil (Babylon)
Badr
Door of Hittah
Al-Ḥijr (Hegra)
Ḥunayn
Iram dhāṫ al-‘Imād (Iram of the Pillars)
Ka'bah/Kaaba (Bayt al-Harām/Sacred House, Bayt al-'Atīq/Ancient House)
Madyan (Midian)
Majma' al-Bahrain
Makkah (Mecca)

Bakkah


Maqām Ibrāhīm (Station of Abraham)
Miṣr (Mainland Egypt)
Sinai Region or Tīh Desert

Al-Wādil-Ayman (The valley on the 'righthand' side of the Valley of Tuwa and Mount Sinai)
Mount Sinai or Mount Tabor


Mu'tafikat (Sodom)
Qaryaṫ Yūnus ("Township of Jonah," that is Nineveh)
Rass
Saba’ (Sheba)
Safa and Marwah





Implied



Antioch

Antakya


Ayla
Barrier of Dhul-Qarnayn
Bayt al-Muqaddas & 'Ariha
Bilād ar-Rāfidayn (Mesopotamia)
Canaan
Cave of Hira & Ghar al-Thawr (Cave of the Bull)
Cave of Seven Sleepers
Dār al-Nadwa
Al-Ḥijāz (literally "The Barrier")

Black Stone (Al-Ḥajar al-Aswad) & Al-Hijr of Isma'il
Ta'if


Hudaybiyyah
Jordan River
Ma'rib Dam
Nile River
Palestine River
Paradise of Shaddad





Religious locations



Bay'a (Church)
Mihrab
Monastery
Masjid (Mosque, literally "Place of Prostration")

Al-Mash‘ar Al-Ḥarām ("The Monument the Sacred")
Al-Masjid Al-Aqṣā (Al-Aqsa Mosque, literally "The Place-of-Prostration The Farthest")
Al-Masjid Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred Mosque of Mecca)
Masjid al-Dirar
A Mosque in the area of Medina, possibly:

Masjid Qubâ’ (Quba Mosque)
The Prophet's Mosque




Salat (Synagogue)








Non-human
physical
entities




Religious texts



Al-Injîl (The Gospel of Jesus)
Al-Qur’ân (The book of Muhammad)
Ṣuḥuf-i Ibrâhîm (Scroll(s) of Abraham)
Aṫ-Ṫawrâṫ (The Torah)

Ṣuḥuf-i-Mûsâ (Scroll(s) of Moses)
Tablets of Stone


Az-Zabûr (The Psalms of David)





Related objects



Forbidden fruit of Adam
Heavenly Food of Christian Apostles
Noah's Ark
Staff of Musa
Tabut al-Sakina (Casket of Shekhinah)
Throne of Bilqis
Trumpet of Israfil





Mentioned idols
(cult images)



Baal
Lāt, 'Uzza and Manāt
Wadd, Suwa', Yaghuth, Ya'uq and Nasr
Jibt and Taghut
Ansāb








Events



Battle of al-Aḥzāb ("the Confederates")
Battle of Badr
Battle of Hunayn
Battle of Khaybar
Battle of Tabouk
Battle of Uhud
Conquest of Mecca
Hadith of the Pond of Khumm
Incident of Ifk
Laylat al-Mabit
Mubahala
The Farewell Pilgrimage (Hujja al-Wada')
Treaty of Hudaybiyyah
Umrah al-Qaza
Yawm al-Dār









Note: The names are sorted alphabetically. Standard form: Islamic name / Biblical name (title or relationship)







Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 162783451
GND: 4104369-8
NDL: 00628596






Coordinates: 29°30′N 33°50′E﻿ / ﻿29.500°N 33.833°E﻿ / 29.500; 33.833





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sinai_Peninsula&oldid=816580927"					Categories: Sinai PeninsulaPeninsulas of AsiaPeninsulas of EgyptGeography of Western AsiaLandforms of the Middle EastLandforms of Western AsiaNorth Sinai GovernorateSouth Sinai GovernorateBiblical placesHistory of IsraelHistory of the Middle EastLandforms of the Red SeaSuez CanalWestern AsiaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from August 2012Articles containing Arabic-language textArticles containing Egyptian Arabic-language textArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles containing Coptic-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2014Articles needing additional references from March 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2017Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersCoordinates on Wikidata