"Ski station" redirects here. For the railway station at Ski in Norway, see Ski Station.






This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (June 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Ski resorts in the World by country


A ski resort is a resort developed for skiing, snowboarding, and other winter sports. In Europe, most ski resorts are towns or villages in or adjacent to a ski area – a mountainous area with pistes (ski trails) and a ski lift system. In North America, it is more common for ski areas to exist well away from towns, so ski resorts usually are destination resorts, often purpose-built and self-contained, where skiing is the main activity.



Contents


1 Types
2 Facilities and amenities
3 Environmental impacts of ski resorts

3.1 Primary (direct) impact of resort development
3.2 Secondary (indirect) impact of resort development


4 Gallery
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Types[edit]




Ski resort Jasná in Slovakia






Cerro Catedral Ski Resort, Argentina






Skiresort can be situated also on a volcano like this one on the Etna in Sicily






Gambarie, the skiresort over the Strait of Messina


The ski industry has identified advancing generations[1][2] of ski resorts:

First generation
Developed around a well-established summer resort or village (e.g. Davos, St. Moritz, Kitzbühel, Chamonix, Megève, Val Gardena).
Second generation
Created from a non-tourist village or pasture (e.g. St. Anton, Lech, Courchevel, L'Alpe d'Huez, Aspen, Breckenridge).
Third generation or integrated
Designed from scratch on virgin territory to be a purpose-built ski resort, all the amenities and services nearby (e.g. Sestrière, Flaine, La Plagne, Isola 2000).
Fourth generation or village resorts
Created from virgin territory or around an existing village, but more concerned with traditional uses (e.g. resorts built since 1975 like Shahdag Mountain Resort, Azerbaijan).

The term ski station is also used, particularly in Europe, for a skiing facility which is not located in or near a town or village. A ski resort which is also open for summer activities is often referred to as a mountain resort.
Facilities and amenities[edit]
Ski areas have marked paths for skiing known as runs, trails or pistes. Ski areas typically have one or more chairlifts for moving skiers rapidly to the top of hills, and to interconnect the various trails. Rope tows can also be used on short slopes (usually beginner hills or bunny slopes). Larger ski areas may use gondolas or aerial trams for transportation across longer distances within the ski area.
Ski areas usually have at least a basic first aid facility, and some kind of ski patrol service to ensure that injured skiers are rescued. The ski patrol is usually responsible for rule enforcement, marking hazards, closing individual runs (if a sufficient level of hazard exists), and removing (dismissing) dangerous participants from the area.
Some ski resorts offer lodging options on the slopes themselves, with ski-in and ski-out access allowing guests to ski right up to the door. Ski resorts often have other activities, such as snowmobiling, sledding, horse-drawn sleds, dog-sledding, ice-skating, indoor or outdoor swimming, and hot tubbing, game rooms, and local forms of entertainment, such as clubs, cinema, theaters and cabarets. Après-ski (French: after skiing) is a term for entertainment, nightlife or social events that occur specifically at ski resorts.[3][4] These add to the enjoyment of resort-goers and provide something to do besides skiing and snowboarding. The culture originated in the Alps, where it is most popular and where skiers often stop at bars on their last run of the day while still wearing all their ski gear.[5]
Though the word ‘ski’ is a derivation of the Old Norse ‘skíð’ via Norwegian, the choice of French is likely attributed to the early popularity of such activities in the French Alps, with which it was then linked.[6]
Environmental impacts of ski resorts[edit]
The process of resort development have progressed since the birth of the skiing industry. As the economic role of the skiing industry grew, the environmental impact of resort development has also caused environmental burdens on the natural ecosystem including mountain water levels of lakes, streams, and wildlife.[7] Amenities and infrastructure such as concrete buildings, ski-lifts, gondolas, access roads, parking lots, and railways have contributed to the urbanization of mountainous zones.
Primary (direct) impact of resort development[edit]
In recent years, the use of snow cannons has increased due to the fall in the volume of snow. In order to obtain good quality snow, dust or bacteria is mixed with the water in the process of snow making to form better snowflakes. Not only that the manufacture of artificial snow is costly and uses large amounts of water, but sometimes the creation of artificial lakes is necessary for the snow-making process. Snow cannons redistribute a large amount of water unnaturally over the land and freezes the ground vegetation late into spring, preventing growth and leaving pistes bare.[7] With enough excess water, the likelihood of landslides and avalanches may be drastically higher.
Secondary (indirect) impact of resort development[edit]
The required space for hotels, flats and secondary residences has increased the amount of space occupied by roads and buildings.[7] While a large number of people requires special water, sewage and electricity systems, a great deal of construction work is needed. Access roads and the treatment of salt are responsible for high amounts of erosion at ski resorts. In some cases natural lakes must be tapped or reservoirs built to cater for the population demand. The urbanization of mountainous areas have increased the space of impervious surface, and prevents the natural flow of water into the ground. Resulting in a disturbed water table and potential cause of erosion in undesired places. Lastly, when building ski lifts, its line of operation must be shaped and drained, and large concrete blocks must be set down for pylons.[7] If the pylons are not carefully placed, it could cause damage to surface vegetation.
Gallery[edit]







Valle Nevado, Chile









Małe Ciche, Poland









Perisher Ski Resort, Australia









Sierra Nevada Ski Station, Spain









Shahdag Mountain Resort, Azerbaijan




See also[edit]

List of ski areas and resorts
Private ski area (North America)
Environmental impact of ski resorts

References[edit]



^ R. Knaffou (1978) Les Stations intégrées de sports d'hiver dans les Alpes françaises, Paris: Masson ISBN 9782225494123
^ Heller, Mark F., editor (1979) The Skier's Encyclopedia Paddington Press ISBN 9780448224282 pg 15–18, 140–145, 157–159
^ "Definition of après-ski". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 26 November 2012. 
^ Flower, Raymond (1976) The History of Skiing and Other Winter Sports; Toronto, New York: Methuen Inc. ISBN 0-458-92780-5 pp 132-141
^ Lund, Morton (March 2007). "Tea Dance To Disco. Après-Ski Through the Ages". Skiing Heritage Journal. 19 (1): 6–12. Retrieved 26 November 2012. 
^ Harper, Douglas. "ski (n.)". Etymology Online. Retrieved 21 November 2014. 
^ a b c d Chivers, John (1994). "Effects of the Skiing Industry on the Environment" (PDF). School of International Studies and Law, Coventry University. 



External links[edit]

 Media related to Ski resorts at Wikimedia Commons







v
t
e


Skiing and snowboarding



Nordic




Competitive



Cross-country
Nordic combined
Paralympic cross-country
Ski jumping
Ski flying
Ski marathon
Ski-orienteering





Recreational



Cross-country
Roller
Ski touring
Skijoring








Alpine



Combined
Downhill
Extreme
Giant slalom
Heliskiing
Para-alpine
Slalom
Speed
Super-G





Other skiing



Biathlon
Telemark
Ski archery
Ski mountaineering





Snowboarding and freestyle



Aerial
Alpine snowboarding
Boardercross
Half-pipe skiing
Mogul
Ski cross
Slopestyle





Technique



Carve turn
Jump turn
Parallel turn
Pivot turn
Snowplough
Stem
Stem christie





Equipment



Skis
Bindings
Boots
Helmet
Monoski
Poles
Skins
Snowboard
Suit
Wax





Resorts and amenities



Après-ski
Chairlift
Cross-country skiing trail
Dry ski slope
Glade skiing
Gondola lift
Indoor skiing
Night skiing
Piste
Ski lift
Ski school
Ski tunnel
Snow grooming
Snowmaking
Surface lift












v
t
e


Tourism



Types



Accessible
Adventure
Agritourism
Alternative
Atomic
Birth
Business
Culinary

Enotourism


Cultural

Archaeological
Bookstore
Heritage

Militarism heritage


Literary

Tolkien


Music
Pop-culture


Dark

Holocaust


Disaster
Domestic
Drug
Ecotourism

Shark


Extreme
Factory Tourism
Garden
Genealogy
Geotourism
Honeymoon
Jihadi
Jungle
Justice
LGBT
Medical

Dental


Moon
Nautical
Rail
Religious

Christian
Halal
Kosher


Rural
Sacred
Safaris
Sex

Child sex
Female sex


Slum
Space
Sports
Stag party
Suicide
Sustainable
Vacation
Volunteer travel
War
Water
Wellness
Wildlife





Hospitality
industry



Bed and breakfast
Boutique hotel
Conference and resort hotels
Convention center
Destination spa
Front desk
General manager
Homestay
Hospitality management studies
Hospitality services
Hostel
Hotel
Hotel manager
Inn
Island resort
Motel
Referral chain
Resort
Resort town
Restaurant
Seaside resort
Ski resort





Terminology



Campus tour
Convention (meeting)
Gift shop
Grand Tour
Holiday (vacation)
Hypermobility
Package tour
Passport
Perpetual traveler
Road trip
Roadside attraction
Souvenir
Staycation
Sunday drive
Tour guide
Tour operator
Tourism geography
Tourism minister
Tourism region
Tourist attraction
Tourist gateway
Tourist trap
Touron
Transport
Travel
Travel agency
Travel behavior
Travel document
Travel insurance
Travel literature
Travel medicine
Travel survey
Travel technology
Travel warning
Travel website
Trip planner
Visa
Visitor center





Industry organizations,
rankings and events



American Bus Association
American Hotel and Lodging Association
American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute
BEST Education Network
Caribbean Tourism Organization
Destination marketing organization
European Travel Commission
Historical archive on tourism
South-East Asian Tourism Organisation
Tourism Radio
Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report
Wikivoyage
World Tourism Day
World Tourism Organization
World Tourism rankings
World Travel and Tourism Council
World Travel Monitor





Lists



Adjectival tourisms
Attractions
Bibliography
Casino hotels
Casinos
Convention and exhibition centers
Hotels
Largest hotels in the world
Motels
Travel magazines
UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists
World Heritage Sites by country








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ski_resort&oldid=814470290"					Categories: Ski areas and resortsHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2014All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles containing French-language text