"Pustule" redirects here. It is not to be confused with Boil.
See also: List of cutaneous conditions


Cutaneous condition


Classification and external resources


Specialty
Dermatology



[edit on Wikidata]



A cutaneous condition is any medical condition that affects the integumentary system—the organ system that encloses the body and includes skin, hair, nails, and related muscle and glands.[1] The major function of this system is as a barrier against the external environment.[2]
Conditions of the human integumentary system constitute a broad spectrum of diseases, also known as dermatoses, as well as many nonpathologic states (like, in certain circumstances, melanonychia and racquet nails).[3][4] While only a small number of skin diseases account for most visits to the physician, thousands of skin conditions have been described.[5] Classification of these conditions often presents many nosological challenges, since underlying causes and pathogenetics are often not known.[6][7] Therefore, most current textbooks present a classification based on location (for example, conditions of the mucous membrane), morphology (chronic blistering conditions), cause (skin conditions resulting from physical factors), and so on.[8][9]
Clinically, the diagnosis of any particular skin condition is made by gathering pertinent information regarding the presenting skin lesion(s), including the location (such as arms, head, legs), symptoms (pruritus, pain), duration (acute or chronic), arrangement (solitary, generalized, annular, linear), morphology (macules, papules, vesicles), and color (red, blue, brown, black, white, yellow).[10] The diagnosis of many conditions often also requires a skin biopsy which yields histologic information[11][12] that can be correlated with the clinical presentation and any laboratory data.[13][14] The introduction of cutaneous ultrasound has allowed the detection of cutaneous tumors, inflammatory processes, nail disorders and hair diseases.[15]



Contents


1 Layer of skin involved

1.1 Epidermis
1.2 Dermis
1.3 Subcutaneous tissue


2 Diseases of the skin
3 History
4 Diagnoses
5 Lesions

5.1 Primary lesions
5.2 Secondary lesions
5.3 Configuration
5.4 Distribution
5.5 Other related terms


6 Histopathology
7 References



Layer of skin involved[edit]
Main article: Integumentary system
The skin weighs an average of 4 kg (8.8 lb), covers an area of 2 m2 (22 sq ft), and is made of three distinct layers: the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue.[1] The two main types of human skin are glabrous skin, the nonhairy skin on the palms and soles (also referred to as the "palmoplantar" surfaces), and hair-bearing skin.[16] Within the latter type, hairs in structures called pilosebaceous units have a hair follicle, sebaceous gland, and associated arrector pili muscle.[17] In the embryo, the epidermis, hair, and glands are from the ectoderm, which is chemically influenced by the underlying mesoderm that forms the dermis and subcutaneous tissues.[18][19][20]
Epidermis[edit]
Main article: Epidermis (skin)
The epidermis is the most superficial layer of skin, a squamous epithelium with several strata: the stratum corneum, stratum lucidum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, and stratum basale.[21] Nourishment is provided to these layers via diffusion from the dermis, since the epidermis is without direct blood supply.[22] The epidermis contains four cell types: keratinocytes, melanocytes, Langerhans cells, and Merkel cells. Of these, keratinocytes are the major component, constituting roughly 95% of the epidermis.[16] This stratified squamous epithelium is maintained by cell division within the stratum basale, in which differentiating cells slowly displace outwards through the stratum spinosum to the stratum corneum, where cells are continually shed from the surface.[16] In normal skin, the rate of production equals the rate of loss; about two weeks are needed for a cell to migrate from the basal cell layer to the top of the granular cell layer, and an additional two weeks to cross the stratum corneum.[23]
Dermis[edit]
Main article: Dermis
The dermis is the layer of skin between the epidermis and subcutaneous tissue, and comprises two sections, the papillary dermis and the reticular dermis.[24] The superficial papillary dermis interdigitates with the overlying rete ridges of the epidermis, between which the two layers interact through the basement membrane zone.[24] Structural components of the dermis are collagen, elastic fibers, and ground substance also called extra fibrillar matrix.[24] Within these components are the pilosebaceous units, arrector pili muscles, and the eccrine and apocrine glands.[21] The dermis contains two vascular networks that run parallel to the skin surface—one superficial and one deep plexus—which are connected by vertical communicating vessels.[21][25] The function of blood vessels within the dermis is fourfold: to supply nutrition, to regulate temperature, to modulate inflammation, and to participate in wound healing.[26][27]
Subcutaneous tissue[edit]
Main article: Subcutaneous tissue
The subcutaneous tissue is a layer of fat between the dermis and underlying fascia.[5] This tissue may be further divided into two components, the actual fatty layer, or panniculus adiposus, and a deeper vestigial layer of muscle, the panniculus carnosus.[16] The main cellular component of this tissue is the adipocyte, or fat cell.[5] The structure of this tissue is composed of septal (i.e. linear strands) and lobular compartments, which differ in microscopic appearance.[21] Functionally, the subcutaneous fat insulates the body, absorbs trauma, and serves as a reserve energy source.[5]
Diseases of the skin[edit]
For a comprehensive list, see List of cutaneous conditions.




Skin diseases deaths per million persons in 2012

  0–2
  3–4
  5–8
  9–13
  14–17
  18–21
  22–27
  28–34
  35–47
  48–106




Diseases of the skin include skin infections and skin neoplasms (including skin cancer).[28]
History[edit]
In 1572, Geronimo Mercuriali of Forlì, Italy, completed De morbis cutaneis (translated "On the diseases of the skin"). It is considered the first scientific work dedicated to dermatology.
Diagnoses[edit]
The physical examination of the skin and its appendages, as well as the mucous membranes, forms the cornerstone of an accurate diagnosis of cutaneous conditions.[29] Most of these conditions present with cutaneous surface changes termed "lesions," which have more or less distinct characteristics.[30] Often proper examination will lead the physician to obtain appropriate historical information and/or laboratory tests that are able to confirm the diagnosis.[29] Upon examination, the important clinical observations are the (1) morphology, (2) configuration, and (3) distribution of the lesion(s).[29] With regard to morphology, the initial lesion that characterizes a condition is known as the "primary lesion," and identification of such a lesions is the most important aspect of the cutaneous examination.[30] Over time, these primary lesions may continue to develop or be modified by regression or trauma, producing "secondary lesions."[1] However, with that being stated, the lack of standardization of basic dermatologic terminology has been one of the principal barriers to successful communication among physicians in describing cutaneous findings.[21] Nevertheless, there are some commonly accepted terms used to describe the macroscopic morphology, configuration, and distribution of skin lesions, which are listed below.[30]
Lesions[edit]
Primary lesions[edit]




Chigger bites on human skin showing characteristic welts



Macule and patch



Papule and plaque



Nodules



Vesicles and bulla



Fissures, erosions and ulcers



A pustule on the cheek




Macule: A macule is a change in surface color, without elevation or depression and, therefore, nonpalpable, well or ill-defined,[31] variously sized, but generally considered less than either 5[31] or 10 mm in diameter at the widest point.[30]
Patch: A patch is a large macule equal to or greater than either 5 or 10 mm across,[30] depending on one's definition of a macule.[1] Patches may have some subtle surface change, such as a fine scale or wrinkling, but although the consistency of the surface is changed, the lesion itself is not palpable.[29]
Papule: A papule is a circumscribed, solid elevation of skin with no visible fluid, varying in size from a pinhead to less than either 5[31] or 10 mm in diameter at the widest point.[30]
Plaque: A plaque has been described as a broad papule, or confluence of papules equal to or greater than 1 cm,[30] or alternatively as an elevated, plateau-like lesion that is greater in its diameter than in its depth.[29]
Nodule: A nodule is morphologically similar to a papule in that it is also a palpaple spherical lesion less than 1 cm in diameter. However, it is differentiated by being centered deeper in the dermis or subcutis.
Tumour: Similar to a nodule but larger than 1 cm in diameter.
Vesicle: A vesicle is small blister,[32] a circumscribed, fluid-containing, epidermal elevation generally considered less than either 5[31] or 10 mm in diameter at the widest point.[30] The fluid is clear serous fluid.
Bulla: A bulla is a large blister,[32] a rounded or irregularly shaped blister containing serous or seropurulent fluid, equal to or greater than either 5[31] or 10 mm,[30] depending on one's definition of a vesicle.[1]



Pustule: A pustule is a small elevation of the skin containing cloudy[29] or purulent material (pus) usually consisting of necrotic inflammatory cells.[30] These can be either white or red.
Cyst: A cyst is an epithelial-lined cavity containing liquid, semi-solid, or solid material.[31]
Erosion: An erosion is a discontinuity of the skin exhibiting incomplete loss of the epidermis,[33] a lesion that is moist, circumscribed, and usually depressed.[21]
Ulcer: An ulcer is a discontinuity of the skin exhibiting complete loss of the epidermis and often portions of the dermis and even subcutaneous fat.[33]
Fissure: A fissure is a crack in the skin that is usually narrow but deep.[29]
Wheal: A wheal is a rounded or flat-topped, pale red papule or plaque that is characteristically evanescent, disappearing within 24 to 48 hours. The temporary raised bubble of taut skin on the site of a properly-delivered intradermal injection is also called a welt, with the ID injection process itself frequently referred to as simply "raising a wheal" in medical texts.[31]
Telangiectasia: A telangiectasia represents an enlargement of superficial blood vessels to the point of being visible.[29]
Burrow: A burrow appears as a slightly elevated, grayish, tortuous line in the skin, and is caused by burrowing organisms.[29][30]

Secondary lesions[edit]

Scale: dry or greasy laminated masses of keratin[30] that represent thickened stratum corneum.[29]
Crust: dried sebum, pus, or blood usually mixed with epithelial and sometimes bacterial debris.[31]
Lichenification: epidermal thickening characterized by visible and palpable thickening of the skin with accentuated skin markings.[1]
Excoriation: a punctate or linear abrasion produced by mechanical means (often scratching), usually involving only the epidermis, but commonly reaching the papillary dermis.[30]
Induration: dermal thickening causing the cutaneous surface to feel thicker and firmer.[29]
Atrophy: refers to a loss of tissue, and can be epidermal, dermal, or subcutaneous.[30] With epidermal atrophy, the skin appears thin, translucent, and wrinkled.[29] Dermal or subcutaneous atrophy is represented by depression of the skin.[29]
Maceration: softening and turning white of the skin due to being consistently wet.
Umbilication: formation of a depression at the top of a papule, vesicle, or pustule.[34]
Phyma: A tubercle on any external part of the body, such as in phymatous rosacea

Configuration[edit]
"Configuration" refers to how lesions are locally grouped ("organized"), which contrasts with how they are distributed (see next section).


Agminate: in clusters
Annular or circinate: ring-shaped
Arciform or arcuate: arc-shaped
Digitate: with finger-like projections
Discoid or nummular: round or disc-shaped
Figurate: with a particular shape
Guttate: resembling drops
Gyrate: coiled or spiral-shaped
Herpetiform: resembling herpes
Linear
Mammillated: with rounded, breast-like projections
Reticular or reticulated: resembling a net
Serpiginous: with a wavy border
Stellate: star-shaped
Targetoid: resembling a bullseye
Verrucous: wart-like


Distribution[edit]
"Distribution" refers to how lesions are localized. They may be confined to a single area (a patch) or may exist in several places. Some distributions correlate with the means by which a given area becomes affected. For example, contact dermatitis correlates with locations where allergen has elicited an allergic immune response. Varicella zoster virus is known to recur (after its initial presentation as chicken pox) as herpes zoster ("shingles"). Chicken pox appears nearly everywhere on the body, but herpes zoster tends to follow one or two dermatomes; for example, the eruptions may appear along the bra line, on either or both sides of the patient.


Generalized
Symmetric: one side mirrors the other
Flexural: on the front of the fingers
Extensor: on the back of the fingers
Intertriginous: in an area where two skin areas may touch or rub together
Morbilliform: resembling measles
Palmoplantar: on the palm of the hand or bottom of the foot
Periorificial: around an orifice such as the mouth
Periungual/subungual: around or under a fingernail or toenail
Blaschkoid: following the path of Blaschko's lines in the skin
Photodistributed: in places where sunlight reaches
Zosteriform or dermatomal: associated with a particular nerve


Other related terms[edit]


Collarette
Comedo
Confluent
Eczema (a type of dermatitis)
Evanescent (lasting less than 24 hours)
Granuloma
Livedo
Purpura
Erythema (redness)
Horn (a cell type)
Poikiloderma


Histopathology[edit]


Hyperkeratosis
Parakeratosis
Hypergranulosis
Acanthosis
Papillomatosis
Dyskeratosis
Acantholysis
Spongiosis
Hydropic swelling
Exocytosis
Vacuolization
Erosion
Ulceration
Lentiginous



References[edit]



^ a b c d e f Miller, Jeffrey H.; Marks, James G. (2006). Lookingbill and Marks' Principles of Dermatology. Saunders. ISBN 1-4160-3185-5. 
^ Lippens, S; Hoste, E; Vandenabeele, P; Agostinis, P; Declercq, W (April 2009). "Cell death in the skin". Apoptosis. 14 (4): 549–69. doi:10.1007/s10495-009-0324-z. PMID 19221876. 
^ King, L.S. (1954). "What Is Disease?". Philosophy of Science. 21 (3): 193–203. doi:10.1086/287343. 
^ Bluefarb, Samuel M. (1984). Dermatology. Upjohn Co. ISBN 0-89501-004-6. 
^ a b c d Lynch, Peter J. (1994). Dermatology. Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 0-683-05252-7. 
^ Tilles G, Wallach D (1989). "[The history of nosology in dermatology]". Ann Dermatol Venereol (in French). 116 (1): 9–26. PMID 2653160. 
^ Lambert WC, Everett MA (October 1981). "The nosology of parapsoriasis". J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 5 (4): 373–95. doi:10.1016/S0190-9622(81)70100-2. PMID 7026622. 
^ Jackson R (1977). "Historical outline of attempts to classify skin diseases". Can Med Assoc J. 116 (10): 1165–68. PMC 1879511 . PMID 324589. 
^ Copeman PW (February 1995). "The creation of global dermatology". J R Soc Med. 88 (2): 78–84. PMC 1295100 . PMID 7769599. 
^ Fitzpatrick, Thomas B.; Klauss Wolff; Wolff, Klaus Dieter; Johnson, Richard R.; Suurmond, Dick; Richard Suurmond (2005). Fitzpatrick's color atlas and synopsis of clinical dermatology. McGraw-Hill Medical Pub. Division. ISBN 0-07-144019-4. 
^ Werner B (August 2009). "[Skin biopsy and its histopathologic analysis: Why? What for? How? Part I]". An Bras Dermatol (in Portuguese). 84 (4): 391–95. PMID 19851671. 
^ Werner B (October 2009). "[Skin biopsy with histopathologic analysis: why? what for? how? part II]". An Bras Dermatol (in Portuguese). 84 (5): 507–13. doi:10.1590/S0365-05962009000500010. PMID 20098854. 
^ Xiaowei Xu; Elder, David A.; Rosalie Elenitsas; Johnson, Bernett L.; Murphy, George E. (2008). Lever's Histopathology of the Skin. Hagerstwon, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 0-7817-7363-6. 
^ Weedon's Skin Pathology, 2-Volume Set: Expert Consult – Online and Print. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone. 2009. ISBN 0-7020-3941-1. 
^ Fernando Alfageme, Cerezo E, Roustan G. "Real-Time Elastography in Inflammatory Skin Diseases: A Primer Ultrasound" in Medicine & Biology, Volume 41, Issue 4, Supplement, April 2015, pp. S82–S83
^ a b c d Burns, Tony; et al. (2006) Rook's Textbook of Dermatology CD-ROM. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 1-4051-3130-6.
^ Paus R, Cotsarelis G (1999). "The biology of hair follicles". N Engl J Med. 341 (7): 491–97. doi:10.1056/NEJM199908123410706. PMID 10441606. 
^ Goldsmith, Lowell A. (1983). Biochemistry and physiology of the skin. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-261253-0. 
^ Fuchs E (February 2007). "Scratching the surface of skin development". Nature. 445 (7130): 834–42. doi:10.1038/nature05659. PMC 2405926 . PMID 17314969. 
^ Fuchs E, Horsley V (April 2008). "More than one way to skin". Genes Dev. 22 (8): 976–85. doi:10.1101/gad.1645908. PMC 2732395 . PMID 18413712. 
^ a b c d e f Wolff, Klaus Dieter; et al. (2008). Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine. McGraw-Hill Medical. ISBN 0-07-146690-8. 
^ "Skin Anatomy". Medscape. Retrieved 3 June 2013. 
^ Bolognia, Jean L.; et al. (2007). Dermatology. St. Louis: Mosby. ISBN 1-4160-2999-0. 
^ a b c Rapini, Ronald P. (2005). Practical dermatopathology. Elsevier Mosby. ISBN 0-323-01198-5. 
^ Grant-Kels, JM (2007). Color Atlas of Dermatopathology (Dermatology: Clinical & Basic Science). Informa Healthcare. p. 163. ISBN 0-8493-3794-1. 
^ Ryan, T (1991). "Cutaneous Circulation". In Goldsmith, Lowell A. Physiology, biochemistry, and molecular biology of the skin (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. p. 1019. ISBN 0-19-505612-4. 
^ Swerlick, RA; Lawley, TJ (January 1993). "Role of microvascular endothelial cells in inflammation". J. Invest. Dermatol. 100 (1): 111S–115S. doi:10.1038/jid.1993.33. PMID 8423379. 
^ "ecognizing Neoplastic Skin Lesions: A Photo Guide". American Family Physician. Retrieved 3 June 2013. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Callen, Jeffrey (2000). Color atlas of dermatology. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders. ISBN 0-7216-8256-1. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n James, William D.; et al. (2006). Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology. Saunders Elsevier. ISBN 0-7216-2921-0. 
^ a b c d e f g h Fitzpatrick, Thomas B.; Klauss Wolff; Wolff, Klaus Dieter; Johnson, Richard R.; Suurmond, Dick; Richard Suurmond (2005). Fitzpatrick's color atlas and synopsis of clinical dermatology. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical Pub. Division. ISBN 0-07-144019-4. 
^ a b Elsevier, Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, Elsevier. 
^ a b Cotran, Ramzi S.; Kumar, Vinay; Fausto, Nelson; Nelso Fausto; Robbins, Stanley L.; Abbas, Abul K. (2005). Robbins and Cotran pathologic basis of disease. St. Louis, Mo: Elsevier Saunders. ISBN 0-7216-0187-1. 
^ "Description of Skin Lesions". The Merk Manual. Retrieved 3 June 2013. 









v
t
e


Dermatitis and eczema (L20–L30, 690–693,698)



Atopic dermatitis



Besnier's prurigo





Seborrheic dermatitis



Pityriasis simplex capillitii
Cradle cap





Contact dermatitis
(allergic, irritant)



plants: Urushiol-induced contact dermatitis
African blackwood dermatitis
Tulip fingers


other: Abietic acid dermatitis
Diaper rash
Airbag dermatitis
Baboon syndrome
Contact stomatitis
Protein contact dermatitis





Eczema



Autoimmune estrogen dermatitis
Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis


Breast eczema
Ear eczema
Eyelid dermatitis
Topical steroid addiction
Hand eczema

Chronic vesiculobullous hand eczema
Hyperkeratotic hand dermatitis




Autosensitization dermatitis/Id reaction

Candidid
Dermatophytid
Molluscum dermatitis


Circumostomy eczema
Dyshidrosis
Juvenile plantar dermatosis
Nummular eczema
Nutritional deficiency eczema
Sulzberger–Garbe syndrome
Xerotic eczema





Pruritus/Itch/
Prurigo



Lichen simplex chronicus/Prurigo nodularis


by location: Pruritus ani
Pruritus scroti
Pruritus vulvae
Scalp pruritus


Drug-induced pruritus

Hydroxyethyl starch-induced pruritus


Senile pruritus
Aquagenic pruritus

Aquadynia




Adult blaschkitis
due to liver disease

Biliary pruritus
Cholestatic pruritus


Prion pruritus
Prurigo pigmentosa
Prurigo simplex
Puncta pruritica
Uremic pruritus





Other



substances taken internally: Bromoderma
Fixed drug reaction


Nummular dermatitis
Pityriasis alba
Papuloerythroderma of Ofuji












v
t
e


Disorders of skin appendages (L60–L75, 703–706)



Nail



thickness: Onychogryphosis
Onychauxis


color: Beau's lines
Yellow nail syndrome
Leukonychia
Azure lunula


shape: Koilonychia
Nail clubbing


behavior: Onychotillomania
Onychophagia


other: Ingrown nail
Anonychia


ungrouped: Paronychia

Acute
Chronic


Chevron nail
Congenital onychodysplasia of the index fingers
Green nails
Half and half nails
Hangnail
Hapalonychia
Hook nail
Ingrown nail
Lichen planus of the nails
Longitudinal erythronychia
Malalignment of the nail plate
Median nail dystrophy
Mees' lines
Melanonychia
Muehrcke's lines
Nail–patella syndrome
Onychoatrophy
Onycholysis
Onychomadesis
Onychomatricoma
Onychomycosis
Onychophosis
Onychoptosis defluvium
Onychorrhexis
Onychoschizia
Platonychia
Pincer nails
Plummer's nail
Psoriatic nails
Pterygium inversum unguis
Pterygium unguis
Purpura of the nail bed
Racquet nail
Red lunulae
Shell nail syndrome
Splinter hemorrhage
Spotted lunulae
Staining of the nail plate
Stippled nails
Subungual hematoma
Terry's nails
Twenty-nail dystrophy





Hair




Hair loss/
Baldness



noncicatricial alopecia: Alopecia

areata
totalis
universalis
Ophiasis




Androgenic alopecia (male-pattern baldness)
Hypotrichosis
Telogen effluvium
Traction alopecia
Lichen planopilaris
Trichorrhexis nodosa
Alopecia neoplastica
Anagen effluvium
Alopecia mucinosa


cicatricial alopecia: Pseudopelade of Brocq
Central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia
Pressure alopecia
Traumatic alopecia
Tumor alopecia
Hot comb alopecia
Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens et suffodiens
Graham-Little syndrome
Folliculitis decalvans


ungrouped: Triangular alopecia
Frontal fibrosing alopecia
Marie Unna hereditary hypotrichosis





Hypertrichosis



Hirsutism
Acquired

localised
generalised
patterned


Congenital

generalised
localised
X-linked


Prepubertal





Acneiform
eruption




Acne



Acne vulgaris
Acne conglobata
Acne miliaris necrotica
Tropical acne
Infantile acne/Neonatal acne
Excoriated acne
Acne fulminans
Acne medicamentosa (e.g., steroid acne)
Halogen acne

Iododerma
Bromoderma
Chloracne


Oil acne
Tar acne
Acne cosmetica
Occupational acne
Acne aestivalis
Acne keloidalis nuchae
Acne mechanica
Acne with facial edema
Pomade acne
Acne necrotica
Blackhead
Lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei





Rosacea



Perioral dermatitis

Granulomatous perioral dermatitis


Phymatous rosacea

Rhinophyma
Blepharophyma
Gnathophyma
Metophyma
Otophyma


Papulopustular rosacea
Lupoid rosacea
Erythrotelangiectatic rosacea
Glandular rosacea
Gram-negative rosacea
Steroid rosacea
Ocular rosacea
Persistent edema of rosacea
Rosacea conglobata
variants

Periorificial dermatitis
Pyoderma faciale







Ungrouped



Granulomatous facial dermatitis
Idiopathic facial aseptic granuloma
Periorbital dermatitis
SAPHO syndrome








Follicular cysts



"Sebaceous cyst"

Epidermoid cyst
Trichilemmal cyst


Steatocystoma

simplex
multiplex


Milia





Inflammation



Folliculitis

Folliculitis nares perforans
Tufted folliculitis


Pseudofolliculitis barbae


Hidradenitis

Hidradenitis suppurativa
Recurrent palmoplantar hidradenitis
Neutrophilic eccrine hidradenitis







Ungrouped



Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica of Bazex
Acroosteolysis
Bubble hair deformity
Disseminate and recurrent infundibulofolliculitis
Erosive pustular dermatitis of the scalp
Erythromelanosis follicularis faciei et colli
Hair casts
Hair follicle nevus
Intermittent hair–follicle dystrophy
Keratosis pilaris atropicans
Kinking hair
Koenen's tumor
Lichen planopilaris
Lichen spinulosus
Loose anagen syndrome
Menkes kinky hair syndrome
Monilethrix
Parakeratosis pustulosa
Pili (Pili annulati
Pili bifurcati
Pili multigemini
Pili pseudoannulati
Pili torti)
Pityriasis amiantacea
Plica neuropathica
Poliosis
Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome
Setleis syndrome
Traumatic anserine folliculosis
Trichomegaly
Trichomycosis axillaris
Trichorrhexis (Trichorrhexis invaginata
Trichorrhexis nodosa)
Trichostasis spinulosa
Uncombable hair syndrome
Wooly hair
Wooly hair nevus








Sweat
glands




Eccrine



Miliaria

Colloid milium
Miliaria crystalline
Miliaria profunda
Miliaria pustulosa
Miliaria rubra
Occlusion miliaria
Postmiliarial hypohidrosis


Granulosis rubra nasi
Ross’ syndrome
Anhidrosis
Hyperhidrosis

Generalized
Gustatory
Palmoplantar







Apocrine



Body odor
Chromhidrosis
Fox–Fordyce disease





Sebaceous



Sebaceous hyperplasia















v
t
e


Diseases of the skin and appendages by morphology



Growths




Epidermal



wart
callus
seborrheic keratosis
acrochordon
molluscum contagiosum
actinic keratosis
squamous-cell carcinoma
basal-cell carcinoma
Merkel-cell carcinoma
nevus sebaceous
trichoepithelioma





Pigmented



Freckles
lentigo
melasma
nevus
melanoma





Dermal and
subcutaneous



epidermal inclusion cyst
hemangioma
dermatofibroma (benign fibrous histiocytoma)
keloid
lipoma
neurofibroma
xanthoma
Kaposi's sarcoma
infantile digital fibromatosis
granular cell tumor
leiomyoma
lymphangioma circumscriptum
myxoid cyst








Rashes




With
epidermal
involvement




Eczematous



contact dermatitis
atopic dermatitis
seborrheic dermatitis
stasis dermatitis
lichen simplex chronicus
Darier's disease
glucagonoma syndrome
langerhans cell histiocytosis
lichen sclerosus
pemphigus foliaceus
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome
Zinc deficiency





Scaling



psoriasis
tinea (corporis
cruris
pedis
manuum
faciei)
pityriasis rosea
secondary syphilis
mycosis fungoides
systemic lupus erythematosus
pityriasis rubra pilaris
parapsoriasis
ichthyosis





Blistering



herpes simplex
herpes zoster
varicella
bullous impetigo
acute contact dermatitis
pemphigus vulgaris
bullous pemphigoid
dermatitis herpetiformis
porphyria cutanea tarda
epidermolysis bullosa simplex





Papular



scabies
insect bite reactions
lichen planus
miliaria
keratosis pilaris
lichen spinulosus
transient acantholytic dermatosis
lichen nitidus
pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta





Pustular



acne vulgaris
acne rosacea
folliculitis
impetigo
candidiasis
gonococcemia
dermatophyte
coccidioidomycosis
subcorneal pustular dermatosis





Hypopigmented



tinea versicolor
vitiligo
pityriasis alba
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
tuberous sclerosis
idiopathic guttate hypomelanosis
leprosy
hypopigmented mycosis fungoides








Without
epidermal
involvement




Red




Blanchable
Erythema




Generalized



drug eruptions
viral exanthems
toxic erythema
systemic lupus erythematosus





Localized



cellulitis
abscess
boil
erythema nodosum
carcinoid syndrome
fixed drug eruption





Specialized



urticaria
erythema (multiforme
migrans
gyratum repens
annulare centrifugum
ab igne)








Nonblanchable
Purpura




Macular



thrombocytopenic purpura
actinic/solar purpura





Papular



disseminated intravascular coagulation
vasculitis











Indurated



scleroderma/morphea
granuloma annulare
lichen sclerosis et atrophicus
necrobiosis lipoidica











Miscellaneous
disorders




Ulcers





Hair



telogen effluvium
androgenic alopecia
alopecia areata
systemic lupus erythematosus
tinea capitis
loose anagen syndrome
lichen planopilaris
folliculitis decalvans
acne keloidalis nuchae





Nail



onychomycosis
psoriasis
paronychia
ingrown nail





Mucous
membrane



Aphthous stomatitis
oral candidiasis
lichen planus
leukoplakia
pemphigus vulgaris
mucous membrane pemphigoid
cicatricial pemphigoid
herpesvirus
coxsackievirus
syphilis
systemic histoplasmosis
squamous-cell carcinoma














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cutaneous_condition&oldid=808661086#Lesions"					Categories: Cutaneous conditionsHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)Infobox medical condition