





This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Slavic


Ethnicity
Slavs


Geographic
distribution
Throughout Central and Eastern Europe and Russia


Linguistic classification
Indo-European

Balto-Slavic

Slavic






Proto-language
Proto-Slavic


Subdivisions


East Slavic
South Slavic
West Slavic




ISO 639-2 / 5
sla


Linguasphere
53= (phylozone)


Glottolog
slav1255[1]



Political map of Europe with countries where a Slavic language is a national language marked in shades of green. Wood green represents East Slavic languages, pale green represents West Slavic languages, and sea green represents South Slavic languages.



The Slavic languages (also called Slavonic languages) are the Indo-European languages spoken by the Slavic peoples, originally from Eastern Europe. They are thought to descend from a proto-language called Proto-Slavic spoken during the Early Middle Ages, which in turn is thought to have descended from the earlier Proto-Balto-Slavic language, linking the Slavic languages to the Baltic languages in a Balto-Slavic group within the Indo-European family.
The Slavic languages are divided intro three subgroups: East, West, and South, which together constitute more than twenty languages. Of these, ten have at least one million speakers and official status as the national languages of the countries in which they are predominantly spoken: Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian (of the East group), Polish, Czech and Slovak (of the West group) and Slovene, Serbo-Croatian, Macedonian and Bulgarian (of the South group).
The current geographic distribution of natively spoken Slavic languages covers Eastern Europe, the Balkans, Central Europe and all of the territory of Russia, which includes northern and north-central Asia. Furthermore, the diasporas of many Slavic peoples have established isolated minorities of speakers of their languages all over the world. The number of speakers of all Slavic languages together is estimated to be 315 million.[2][3][unreliable source?] Despite the large extent, the individual Slavic languages are considerably less differentiated than Germanic and Romance languages.



Contents


1 Branches
2 History

2.1 Common roots and ancestry
2.2 Evolution
2.3 Differentiation
2.4 Linguistic history


3 Features

3.1 Consonants
3.2 Vowels
3.3 Length, accent, and tone
3.4 Grammar
3.5 Selected cognates


4 Influence on neighboring languages
5 Detailed list
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links



Branches




Slavic language tree.


Scholars traditionally divide Slavic languages on the basis of geographical and genealogical principle into three main branches, some of which feature subbranches:

East Slavic




Belarusian
Russian
Ukrainian
Rusyn






West Slavic




Czech–Slovak

Czech
Slovak


Lechitic

Polish, Silesian
Pomeranian
Kashubian


Sorbian

Upper Sorbian
Lower Sorbian









South Slavic




Eastern

Bulgarian
Macedonian
Church Slavonic


Western

Serbo-Croatian

Serbian
Croatian
Bosnian
Montenegrin
Burgenland Croatian


Slovene







Some linguists speculate that a North Slavic branch has existed as well. The Old Novgorod dialect may have reflected some idiosyncrasies of this group. Mutual intelligibility also plays a role in determining the West, East, and South branches. Speakers of languages within the same branch will in most cases be able to understand each other at least partially, but they are generally unable to across branches (for which it would be comparable to a native English speaker trying to understand any other Germanic language).
The most obvious differences between the East, West and Slavic branches are in the orthography of the standard languages: West Slavic languages (and Western South Slavic languages - Croatian and Slovene) are written in the Latin script, and have had more Western European influence due to their proximity and speakers being historically Roman Catholic, whereas the East Slavic and Eastern South Slavic languages are written in Cyrillic and, with Eastern Orthodox or Uniate faithful, have had more Greek influence. East Slavic languages such as Russian have, however, during and after Peter the Great's Europeanization campaign, absorbed many words of Latin, French, German, and Italian origin.
The tripartite division of the Slavic languages does not take into account the spoken dialects of each language. Of these, certain so-called transitional dialects and hybrid dialects often bridge the gaps between different languages, showing similarities that do not stand out when comparing Slavic literary (i.e. standard) languages. For example, Slovak (West Slavic) and Ukrainian (East Slavic) are bridged by the Rusyn language/dialect of Eastern Slovakia and Western Ukraine.[4] Similarly, the Croatian Kajkavian dialect is more similar to Slovene than to the standard Croatian language.
Although the Slavic languages diverged from a common proto-language later than any other group of the Indo-European language family, enough differences exist between the various Slavic dialects and languages to make communication between speakers of different Slavic languages difficult. Within the individual Slavic languages, dialects may vary to a lesser degree, as those of Russian, or to a much greater degree, as those of Slovene.
History


Part of a series on


Indo-European topics







Languages



List of Indo-European languages



Historical


Albanian
Armenian
Balto-Slavic

Baltic
Slavic


Celtic
Germanic
Hellenic

Greek


Indo-Iranian

Indo-Aryan
Iranian


Italic

Romance




Extinct


Anatolian
Tocharian
Paleo-Balkan
Dacian
Illyrian
Liburnian
Messapian
Mysian
Paeonian
Phrygian
Thracian



Reconstructed


Proto-Indo-European language

Phonology: Sound laws, Accent, Ablaut





Hypothetical


Daco-Thracian
Graeco-Armenian
Graeco-Aryan
Graeco-Phrygian
Indo-Hittite
Italo-Celtic
Thraco-Illyrian



Grammar


Vocabulary
Root
Verbs
Nouns
Pronouns
Numerals
Particles



Other


Proto-Anatolian
Proto-Armenian
Proto-Germanic (Proto-Norse)
Proto-Celtic
Proto-Italic
Proto-Greek
Proto-Balto-Slavic (Proto-Slavic)
Proto-Indo-Iranian (Proto-Iranian)








Philology


Hittite texts
Hieroglyphic Luwian
Linear B
Rigveda
Avesta
Homer
Behistun
Gaulish epigraphy
Latin epigraphy
Runic epigraphy
Ogam
Gothic Bible
Armenian Bible
Slanting Brahmi
Old Irish glosses








Origins


Homeland
Proto-Indo-Europeans
Society
Religion



Mainstream


Kurgan hypothesis
Indo-European migrations
Eurasian nomads



Alternative and fringe


Anatolian hypothesis
Armenian hypothesis
Indigenous Aryans
Baltic homeland
Paleolithic Continuity Theory








Archaeology


Chalcolithic (Copper Age)

Pontic Steppe

Domestication of the horse
Kurgan
Kurgan culture
Steppe cultures

Bug-Dniester
Sredny Stog
Dnieper-Donets
Samara
Khvalynsk
Yamna

Mikhaylovka culture





Caucasus

Maykop

East-Asia

Afanasevo

Eastern Europe

Usatovo
Cernavodă
Cucuteni

Northern Europe

Corded ware

Baden
Middle Dnieper





Bronze Age

Pontic Steppe

Chariot
Yamna
Catacomb
Multi-cordoned ware
Poltavka
Srubna

Northern/Eastern Steppe

Abashevo culture
Andronovo
Sintashta

Europe

Globular Amphora
Corded ware
Beaker
Unetice
Trzciniec
Nordic Bronze Age
Terramare
Tumulus
Urnfield
Lusatian

South-Asia

BMAC
Yaz
Gandhara grave



Iron Age

Steppe

Chernoles

Europe

Thraco-Cimmerian
Hallstatt
Jastorf

Caucasus

Colchian

India

Painted Grey Ware
Northern Black Polished Ware








Peoples and societies


Bronze Age


Anatolians
Armenians
Mycenaean Greeks
Indo-Iranians


Iron Age

Indo-Aryans

Indo-Aryans

Iranians

Iranians

Scythians
Persians
Medes



Europe

Celts

Gauls
Celtiberians
Insular Celts


Hellenic peoples
Italic peoples
Germanic peoples
Paleo-Balkans/Anatolia:

Thracians
Dacians
Illyrians
Phrygians




Middle Ages

East-Asia

Tocharians

Europe

Balts
Slavs
Albanians
Medieval Europe

Indo-Aryan

Medieval India

Iranian

Greater Persia








Religion and mythology


Reconstructed


Proto-Indo-European religion
Proto-Indo-Iranian religion



Historical


Hittite

Indian

Vedic

Hinduism


Buddhism
Jainism

Iranian

Persian

Zoroastrianism


Kurdish

Yazidism
Yarsanism


Scythian

Ossetian



Other

Armenian

Europe

Paleo-Balkans
Greek
Roman
Celtic

Irish
Scottish
Breton
Welsh
Cornish


Germanic

Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse


Baltic

Latvian
Lithuanian


Slavic
Albanian


Practices


Fire-sacrifice
Horse sacrifice
Sati
Winter solstice/Yule








Indo-European studies


Scholars


Marija Gimbutas
J.P. Mallory


Institutes


Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European


Publications


Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture
The Horse, the Wheel and Language
Journal of Indo-European Studies
Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch
Indo-European Etymological Dictionary









v
t
e





Main article: History of the Slavic languages
See also: Proto-Slavic language, History of Proto-Slavic, and Proto-Balto-Slavic language
Common roots and ancestry




Area of Balto-Slavic dialectic continuum (purple) with proposed material cultures correlating to speakers Balto-Slavic in Bronze Age (white). Red dots = archaic Slavic hydronyms


Slavic languages descend from Proto-Slavic, their immediate parent language, ultimately deriving from Proto-Indo-European, the ancestor language of all Indo-European languages, via a Proto-Balto-Slavic stage. During the Proto-Balto-Slavic period a number of exclusive isoglosses in phonology, morphology, lexis, and syntax developed, which makes Slavic and Baltic the closest related of all the Indo-European branches. The secession of the Balto-Slavic dialect ancestral to Proto-Slavic is estimated on archaeological and glottochronological criteria to have occurred sometime in the period 1500–1000 BCE.[5]
A minority of Baltists maintain the view that the Slavic group of languages differs so radically from the neighboring Baltic group (Lithuanian, Latvian, and the now-extinct Old Prussian), that they could not have shared a parent language after the breakup of the Proto-Indo-European continuum about five millennia ago. Substantial advances in Balto-Slavic accentology that occurred in the last three decades, however, make this view very hard to maintain nowadays, especially when one considers that there was most likely no "Proto-Baltic" language and that West Baltic and East Baltic differ from each other as much as each of them does from Proto-Slavic.[6]




Baška tablet, 11th century, Krk, Croatia.


Evolution






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The imposition of Church Slavonic on Orthodox Slavs was often at the expense of the vernacular. Says WB Lockwood, a prominent Indo-European linguist, "It (O.C.S) remained in use to modern times but was more and more influenced by the living, evolving languages, so that one distinguishes Bulgarian, Serbian, and Russian varieties. The use of such media hampered the development of the local languages for literary purposes, and when they do appear the first attempts are usually in an artificially mixed style." (148)
Lockwood also notes that these languages have "enriched" themselves by drawing on Church Slavonic for the vocabulary of abstract concepts. The situation in the Catholic countries, where Latin was more important, was different. The Polish Renaissance poet Jan Kochanowski and the Croatian Baroque writers of the 16th century all wrote in their respective vernaculars (though Polish itself had drawn amply on Latin in the same way Russian would eventually draw on Church Slavonic).




14th-century Novgorodian children were literate enough to send each other letters written on birch bark.


Although Church Slavonic hampered vernacular literatures, it fostered Slavonic literary activity and abetted linguistic independence from external influences. Only the Croatian vernacular literary tradition nearly matches Church Slavonic in age. It began with the Vinodol Codex and continued through the Renaissance until the codifications of Croatian in 1830, though much of the literature between 1300 and 1500 was written in much the same mixture of the vernacular and Church Slavonic as prevailed in Russia and elsewhere.
The most important early monument of Croatian literacy is the Baška tablet from the late 11th century. It is a large stone tablet found in the small Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor on the Croatian island of Krk, containing text written mostly in Čakavian dialect in angular Croatian Glagolitic script. The independence of Dubrovnik facilitated the continuity of the tradition.




10th–11th century Codex Zographensis, canonical monument of Old Church Slavonic.


More recent foreign influences follow the same general pattern in Slavic languages as elsewhere and are governed by the political relationships of the Slavs. In the 17th century, bourgeois Russian (delovoi jazyk) absorbed German words through direct contacts between Russians and communities of German settlers in Russia. In the era of Peter the Great, close contacts with France invited countless loan words and calques from French, a significant fraction of which not only survived but also replaced older Slavonic loans. In the 19th century, Russian influenced most literary Slavic languages by one means or another.
Differentiation
The Proto-Slavic language existed until around AD 500. By the 7th century, it had broken apart into large dialectal zones.
There are no reliable hypotheses about the nature of the subsequent breakups of West and South Slavic. East Slavic is generally thought to converge to one Old Russian or Old East Slavonic language, which existed until at least the 12th century.
Linguistic differentiation was accelerated by the dispersion of the Slavic peoples over a large territory, which in Central Europe exceeded the current extent of Slavic-speaking majorities. Written documents of the 9th, 10th, and 11th centuries already display some local linguistic features. For example, the Freising manuscripts show a language that contains some phonetic and lexical elements peculiar to Slovene dialects (e.g. rhotacism, the word krilatec). The Freising manuscripts are the first Latin-script continuous text in a Slavic language.
The migration of Slavic speakers into the Balkans in the declining centuries of the Byzantine Empire expanded the area of Slavic speech, but the pre-existing writing (notably Greek) survived in this area. The arrival of the Hungarians in Pannonia in the 9th century interposed non-Slavic speakers between South and West Slavs. Frankish conquests completed the geographical separation between these two groups, also severing the connection between Slavs in Moravia and Lower Austria (Moravians) and those in present-day Styria, Carinthia, East Tyrol in Austria, and in the provinces of modern Slovenia, where the ancestors of the Slovenes settled during first colonisation.
Linguistic history
Main article: Historical development of the Slavic languages up to the Proto-Slavic
See also: Proto-Slavic
The following is a summary of the main changes from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) leading up to the Common Slavic (CS) period immediately following the Proto-Slavic language (PS).

Satem sound changes:

PIE *ḱ, *ǵ, *ǵʰ → *ś, *ź, *źʰ (→ CS *s, *z, *z)
PIE *kʷ, *gʷ, *gʷʰ → *k, *g, *gʰ


Ruki rule: Following *r, *u, *k or *i, PIE *s → *š (→ CS *x)
Loss of voiced aspirates: PIE *bʰ, *dʰ, *gʰ → *b, *d, *g
Merger of *o and *a: PIE *a/*o, *ā/*ō → PS *a, *ā (→ CS *o, *a)
Law of open syllables: All closed syllables (syllables ending in a consonant) are eventually eliminated, in the following stages:

Nasalization: With *N indicating either *n or *m not immediately followed by a vowel: PIE *aN, *eN, *iN, *oN, *uN → *ą, *ę, *į, *ǫ, *ų (→ CS *ǫ, *ę, *ę, *ǫ, *y). (NOTE: *ą *ę etc. indicates a nasalized vowel.)
In a cluster of obstruent (stop or fricative) + another consonant, the obstruent is deleted unless the cluster can occur word-initially.
(occurs later, see below) Monophthongization of diphthongs.
(occurs much later, see below) Elimination of liquid diphthongs (e.g. *er, *ol when not followed immediately by a vowel).


First palatalization: *k, *g, *x → CS *č, *ž, *š (pronounced [tʃ], [ʒ], [ʃ] respectively) before a front vocalic sound (*e, *ē, *i, *ī, *j).
Iotation: Consonants are palatalized by an immediately following *j:

*sj, *zj → CS *š, *ž
*nj, *lj, *rj → CS *ň, *ľ, *ř (pronounced [nʲ lʲ rʲ] or similar)
*tj, *dj → CS *ť, *ď (probably palatal stops, e.g. [c ɟ], but developing in different ways depending on the language)
*bj, *pj, *mj, *wj → *bľ, *pľ, *mľ, *wľ (the lateral consonant *ľ is mostly lost later on in West Slavic)


Vowel fronting: After *j or some other palatal sound, back vowels are fronted (*a, *ā, *u, *ū, *ai, *au → *e, *ē, *i, *ī, *ei, *eu). This leads to hard/soft alternations in noun and adjective declensions.
Prothesis: Before a word-initial vowel, *j or *w is usually inserted.
Monophthongization: *ai, *au, *ei, *eu, *ū → *ē, *ū, *ī, *jū, *ȳ [ɨː]
Second palatalization: *k, *g, *x → CS *c [ts], *dz, *ś before new *ē (from earlier *ai). *ś later splits into *š (West Slavic), *s (East/South Slavic).
Progressive palatalization (or "third palatalization"): *k, *g, *x → CS *c, *dz, *ś after *i, *ī in certain circumstances.
Vowel quality shifts: All pairs of long/short vowels become differentiated as well by vowel quality:

*a, *ā → CS *o, *a
*e, *ē → CS *e, *ě (originally a low-front sound [æ] but eventually raised to [ie] in most dialects, developing in divergent ways)
*i, *u → CS *ь, *ъ (also written *ĭ, *ŭ; lax vowels as in the English words pit, put)
*ī, *ū, *ȳ → CS *i, *u, *y


Elimination of liquid diphthongs: Liquid diphthongs (sequences of vowel plus *l or *r, when not immediately followed by a vowel) are changed so that the syllable becomes open:

*or, *ol, *er, *el → *ro, *lo, *re, *le in West Slavic.
*or, *ol, *er, *el → *oro, *olo, *ere, *olo in East Slavic.
*or, *ol, *er, *el → *rā, *lā, *re, *le in South Slavic.
Possibly, *ur, *ul, *ir, *il → syllabic *r, *l, *ř, *ľ (then develops in divergent ways).


Development of phonemic tone and vowel length (independent of vowel quality): Complex developments (see History of accentual developments in Slavic languages).

Features
The Slavic languages are a relatively homogeneous family, compared with other families of Indo-European languages (e.g. Germanic, Romance, and Indo-Iranian). As late as the 10th century AD, the entire Slavic-speaking area still functioned as a single, dialectally differentiated language, termed Common Slavic. Compared with most other Indo-European languages, the Slavic languages are quite conservative, particularly in terms of morphology (the means of inflecting nouns and verbs to indicate grammatical differences). Most Slavic languages have a rich, fusional morphology that conserves much of the inflectional morphology of Proto-Indo-European.[7]
Consonants
The following table shows the inventory of consonants of Late Common Slavic:[8]

Consonants of Late Proto-Slavic


Labial
Coronal
Palatal
Velar


Nasal
m
n
nʲ



Plosive
p
b
t
d
tʲː
dʲː
k
ɡ


Affricate

ts
dz
tʃ




Fricative

s
z
ʃ, (sʲ1)
ʒ
x



Trill

r
rʲ



Lateral

l
lʲ



Approximant
ʋ

j



1The sound /sʲ/ did not occur in West Slavic, where it had developed to /ʃ/.
This inventory of sounds is quite similar to what is found in most modern Slavic languages. The extensive series of palatal consonants, along with the affricates *ts and *dz, developed through a series of palatalizations that happened during the Proto-Slavic period, from earlier sequences either of velar consonants followed by front vowels (e.g. *ke, *ki, *ge, *gi, *xe, and *xi), or of various consonants followed by *j (e.g. *tj, *dj, *sj, *zj, *rj, *lj, *kj, and *gj, where *j is the palatal approximant ([j], the sound of the English letter "y" in "yes" or "you").
The biggest change in this inventory results from a further general palatalization occurring near the end of the Common Slavic period, where all consonants became palatalized before front vowels. This produced a large number of new palatalized (or "soft") sounds, which formed pairs with the corresponding non-palatalized (or "hard") consonants[7] and absorbed the existing palatalized sounds *lʲ *rʲ *nʲ *sʲ. These sounds were best preserved in Russian but were lost to varying degrees in other languages (particularly Czech and Slovak). The following table shows the inventory of modern Russian:

Consonant phonemes of Russian


Labial
Dental &
Alveolar
Post-
alveolar/
Palatal
Velar


hard
soft
hard
soft
hard
soft
hard
soft


Nasal
m
mʲ
n
nʲ




Stop
p   b
pʲ   bʲ
t   d
tʲ   dʲ

k   ɡ
kʲ   ɡʲ


Affricate

t͡s
(t͡sʲ)
 
t͡ɕ



Fricative
f   v
fʲ   vʲ
s   z
sʲ   zʲ
ʂ   ʐ
ɕː   ʑː
x    
xʲ  


Trill

r
rʲ




Approximant

l
lʲ
 
j



This general process of palatalization did not occur in Serbo-Croatian and Slovenian. As a result, the modern consonant inventory of these languages is nearly identical to the Late Common Slavic inventory.
Late Common Slavic tolerated relatively few consonant clusters. However, as a result of the loss of certain formerly present vowels (the weak yers), the modern Slavic languages allow quite complex clusters, as in the Russian word взблеск [vzblʲesk] ("flash"). Also present in many Slavic languages are clusters rarely found cross-linguistically, as in Russian ртуть [rtutʲ] ("mercury") or Polish mchu [mxu] ("moss", gen. sg.). The word for "mercury" with the initial rt- cluster, for example, is also found in the other East and West Slavic languages, although Slovak retains an epenthetic vowel (ortuť).
Vowels
A typical vowel inventory is as follows:



Front
Central
Back


Close
i
(ɨ)
u


Mid
e

o


Open

a



The sound [ɨ] occurs only in some languages (Russian and Belarusian), and even in these languages, it is unclear whether it is its own phoneme or an allophone of /i/. Nonetheless, it is a quite prominent and noticeable characteristic of the languages in which it is present.

Russian мышь  [mɨʂ] (help·info) and Polish mysz  [mɨʂ] "mouse"

Common Slavic also had two nasal vowels: *ę [ẽ] and *ǫ [õ]. However, these are preserved only in modern Polish (along with a few lesser-known dialects and microlanguages; see Yus for more details).

Polish wąż  /vɔ̃ʐ/ and węże  /vɛ̃ʐɛ/ "snake, snakes"

Other phonemic vowels are found in certain languages (e.g. the schwa /ǝ/ in Bulgarian and Slovenian, distinct high-mid and low-mid vowels in Slovenian, and the lax front vowel /ɪ/ in Ukrainian).
Length, accent, and tone
An area of great difference among Slavic languages is that of prosody (i.e. syllabic distinctions such as vowel length, accent, and tone). Common Slavic had a complex system of prosody, inherited with little change from Proto-Indo-European. This consisted of phonemic vowel length and a free, mobile pitch accent:

All vowels could occur either short or long, and this was phonemic (it could not automatically be predicted from other properties of the word).
There was (at most) a single accented syllable per word, distinguished by higher pitch (as in modern Japanese) rather than greater dynamic stress (as in English).
Vowels in accented syllables could be pronounced with either a rising or falling tone (i.e. there was pitch accent), and this was phonemic.
The accent was free in that it could occur on any syllable and was phonemic.
The accent was mobile in that its position could potentially vary among closely related words within a single paradigm (e.g. the accent might land on a different syllable between the nominative and genitive singular of a given word).
Even within a given inflectional class (e.g. masculine i-stem nouns), there were multiple accent patterns in which a given word could be inflected. For example, most nouns in a particular inflectional class could follow one of three possible patterns: Either there was consistent accent on the root (pattern A), predominant accent on the ending (pattern B), or accent that moved between root and ending (pattern C). In patterns B and C, the accent in different parts of the paradigm shifted not only in location but also type (rising vs. falling). Each inflectional class had its own version of patterns B and C, which might differ significantly from one inflectional class to another.

The modern languages vary greatly in the extent to which they preserve this system. On one extreme, Serbo-Croatian preserves the system nearly unchanged (even more so in the conservative Chakavian dialect); on the other, Macedonian has basically lost the system in its entirety. Between them are found numerous variations:

Slovenian preserves most of the system but has shortened all unaccented syllables and lengthened non-final accented syllables so that vowel length and accent position largely co-occur.
Russian and Bulgarian have eliminated distinctive vowel length and tone and converted the accent into a stress accent (as in English) but preserved its position. As a result, the complexity of the mobile accent and the multiple accent patterns still exists (particularly in Russian because it has preserved the Common Slavic noun inflections, while Bulgarian has lost them).
Czech and Slovak have preserved phonemic vowel length and converted the distinctive tone of accented syllables into length distinctions. Phonemic accent is otherwise lost, but the former accent patterns are echoed to some extent in corresponding patterns of vowel length/shortness in the root. Paradigms with mobile vowel length/shortness do exist but only in a limited fashion, usually only with the zero-ending forms (nom. sg., acc. sg., and/or gen. pl., depending on inflectional class) having a different length from the other forms. (Czech has a couple of other "mobile" patterns, but they are rare and can usually be substituted with one of the "normal" mobile patterns or a non-mobile pattern.)
Old Polish had a system very much like Czech. Modern Polish has lost vowel length, but some former short-long pairs have become distinguished by quality (e.g. [o oː] > [o u]), with the result that some words have vowel-quality changes that exactly mirror the mobile-length patterns in Czech and Slovak.

Grammar




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (February 2013)



Similarly, Slavic languages have extensive morphophonemic alternations in their derivational and inflectional morphology,[7] including between velar and postalveolar consonants, front and back vowels, and between a vowel and no vowel.[9]
Selected cognates
Main article: Slavic vocabulary
The following is a very brief selection of cognates in basic vocabulary across the Slavic language family, which may serve to give an idea of the sound changes involved. This is not a list of translations: cognates have a common origin, but their meaning may be shifted and loanwords may have replaced them.


Proto-Slavic
Russian
Ukrainian
Belarusian
Polish
Czech
Slovak
Slovene
Serbo-Croatian
Bulgarian
Macedonian


*uxo (ear)
ухо (úkho)
вухо (vúkho)
вуха (vúkha)
ucho
ucho
ucho
uho
уво / uvo; uho
ухо (ukhó)
уво (úvo)


*ognь (fire)
огонь (ogónʹ)
вогонь (vohónʹ)
агонь (ahónʹ)
ogień
oheň
oheň
ogenj
огањ / oganj
огън (ógǎn)
оган/огин (ógan/ógin)


*ryba (fish)
рыба (rýba)
риба (rýba)
рыба (rýba)
ryba
ryba
ryba
riba
риба / riba
риба (ríba)
риба (ríba)


*gnězdo (nest)
гнездо (gnezdó)
гнiздо (hnizdó)
гняздо (hnyazdó)
gniazdo
hnízdo
hniezdo
gnezdo
гн(иј)ездо / gn(ij)ezdo
гнездо (gnezdó)
гнездо (gnézdo)


*oko (eye)
око (óko) (dated, poetic or in set expressions)
modern: глаз (glaz)
око (óko)
вока (vóka)
oko
oko
oko
oko
око / oko
око (óko)
око (óko)


*golva (head)
голова (golová)
глава (glavá) "chapter or chief, leader, head"
голова (holová)
галава (halavá)
głowa
hlava
hlava
glava
глава / glava
глава (glavá)
глава (gláva)


*rǫka (hand)
рука (ruká)
рука (ruká)
рука (ruká)
ręka
ruka
ruka
roka
рука / ruka
ръка (rǎká)
рака (ráka)


*noktь (night)
ночь (nočʹ)
ніч (nič)
ноч (noč)
noc
noc
noc
noč
ноћ / noć
нощ (nosht)
ноќ (noḱ)


Influence on neighboring languages




West Slav tribes in 9th–10th centuries


Most languages of the former Soviet Union and of some neighbouring countries (for example, Mongolian) are significantly influenced by Russian, especially in vocabulary. The Romanian, Albanian, and Hungarian languages show the influence of the neighboring Slavic nations, especially in vocabulary pertaining to urban life, agriculture, and crafts and trade—the major cultural innovations at times of limited long-range cultural contact. In each one of these languages, Slavic lexical borrowings represent at least 20% of the total vocabulary. However, Romanian has much lower influence from Slavic than Albanian or Hungarian[citation needed]. This is because Slavic tribes crossed and partially settled the territories inhabited by ancient Illyrians and Vlachs on their way to the Balkans.
Although also spoken in neighbouring lands, the Germanic languages show less significant Slavic influence, partly because Slavic migrations were mostly headed south rather than west. Slavic tribes did push westwards into Germanic territory, but borrowing for the most part seems to have been from Germanic to Slavic rather than the other way: for instance, the now-extinct Polabian language was heavily influenced by German, far more than any living Slavic language today. The Slavic contributions to Germanic languages remains a moot question, though Max Vasmer, a specialist in Slavic etymology, has claimed that there were no Slavic loans into Proto-Germanic. The only Germanic languages that shows significant Slavic influence are Yiddish and the historical colonial dialects of German that were spoken East of the Oder–Neisse line, such as Silesian German (formerly spoken in Silesia and South of East Prussia) and the Eastern varieties of East Low German, with the exception of Low Prussian, which had a strong Baltic substratum. Modern Dutch slang, especially the Amsterdam dialect, borrowed much from Yiddish in turn. However, there are isolated Slavic loans (mostly recent) into other Germanic languages. For example, the word for "border" (in modern German Grenze, Dutch grens) was borrowed from the Common Slavic granica. There are, however, many cities and villages of Slavic origin in Eastern Germany, the largest of which are Berlin, Leipzig and Dresden. English derives quark (a kind of cheese, not the subatomic particle) from the German Quark, which in turn is derived from the Slavic tvarog, which means "curd". Many German surnames, particularly in Eastern Germany and Austria, are Slavic in origin. Swedish also has torg (market place) from Old Russian tъrgъ or Polish targ,[10] tolk (interpreter) from Old Slavic tlŭkŭ,[11] and pråm (barge) from West Slavonic pramŭ.[12]
The Czech word robot is now found in most languages worldwide, and the word pistol, probably also from Czech,[citation needed] is found in many Indo-European languages, including Greek (πιστόλι, pistóli).
A well-known Slavic word in almost all European languages is vodka, a borrowing from Russian водка (vodka) – which itself was borrowed from Polish wódka (lit. "little water"), from common Slavic voda ("water", cognate to the English word) with the diminutive ending "-ka".[13][14] Owing to the medieval fur trade with Northern Russia, Pan-European loans from Russian include such familiar words as sable.[15] The English word "vampire" was borrowed (perhaps via French vampire) from German Vampir, in turn derived from Serbian vampir, continuing Proto-Slavic *ǫpyrь,[16][17] although Polish scholar K. Stachowski has argued that the origin of the word is early Slavic *vąpěrь, going back to Turkic oobyr.[18] Several European languages, including English, have borrowed the word polje (meaning "large, flat plain") directly from the former Yugoslav languages (i.e. Slovene, Croatian, and Serbian). During the heyday of the USSR in the 20th century, many more Russian words became known worldwide: da, Soviet, sputnik, perestroika, glasnost, kolkhoz, etc. Also in the English language borrowed from Russian is samovar (lit. "self-boiling") to refer to the specific Russian tea urn.
Detailed list
The following tree for the Slavic languages derives from the Ethnologue report for Slavic languages.[19] It includes the ISO 639-1 and ISO 639-3 codes where available.
East Slavic languages:

Ruthenian section

Belarusian: ISO 639-1 code: be; ISO 639-3 code: bel;
Ukrainian: ISO 639-1 code: uk; ISO 639-3 code: ukr

Rusyn (a language or a dialect of Ukrainian): ISO 639-3 code: rue;




Russian: ISO 639-1 code: ru; ISO 639-3 code: rus

West Slavic languages:

Sorbian section (also known as Wendish): ISO 639-3 code: wen

Lower Sorbian (also known as Lusatian): ISO 639-3 code: dsb;
Upper Sorbian: ISO 639-3 code: hsb


Lechitic section

Polish: ISO 639-1 code: pl; ISO 639-3 code: pol

Silesian (see footnote above): ISO 639-3 code: szl


Pomeranian

Kashubian: ISO 639-2 code: csb;

Slovincian (a language or a dialect of Kashubian)—extinct




Polabian—extinct: ISO 639-3 code: pox


Czech-Slovak section

Czech: ISO 639-1 code: cs; ISO 639-3 ces
Knaanic or Judeo Slavic—extinct: ISO 639-3 code: czk
Slovak: ISO 639-1 code: sk; ISO 639-3 code: slk



South Slavic languages:

Western Section

Serbo-Croatian

Bosnian: ISO 639-1 code: bs; ISO 639-3 code: bos
Croatian: ISO 639-1 code: hr; ISO 639-3 code: hrv
Serbian: ISO 639-1 code: sr; ISO 639-3 code: srp
Montenegrin (not regulated but official in Montenegro)


Slovene: ISO 639-1 code: sl; ISO 639-3 code: slv


Eastern Section

Bulgarian: ISO 639-1 code: bg; ISO 639-3 code: bul
Macedonian: ISO 639-1 code: mk; ISO 639-3 code: mkd
Old Church Slavonic—extinct: ISO 639-1 code: cu; ISO 639-3 code: chu



Para- and supranational languages

Church Slavonic language, derived from Old Church Slavonic, but with significant replacement of the original vocabulary by forms from the Old Russian language and other regional forms. The Bulgarian Orthodox Church, Russian Orthodox Church, Polish Orthodox Church, Macedonian Orthodox Church, Serbian Orthodox Church, and even some Roman Catholic Churches in Croatia continue to use Church Slavonic as a liturgical language. While not used in modern times, the text of a Church Slavonic Roman Rite Mass survives in Croatia and the Czech Republic, which is best known through Janáček's musical setting of it (the Glagolitic Mass).

See also

Slavic microlanguages
Slavistics
Slavic names
Language families and languages
False Friends of the Slavist

Notes


^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Slavic". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ Britannica - Slavic languages
^ According to the data taken from Anatole V. Lyovin, An Introduction to the Languages of the World, Oxford University Press, New York – Oxford, 1997.
^ Encyclopedia of Rusyn history and culture, p 274, Paul R. Magocsi, Ivan Ivanovich Pop, University of Toronto Press, 2002
^ cf. Novotná & Blažek (2007) with references. "Classical glottochronology" conducted by Czech Slavist M. Čejka in 1974 dates the Balto-Slavic split to −910±340 BCE, Sergei Starostin in 1994 dates it to 1210 BCE, and "recalibrated glottochronology" conducted by Novotná & Blažek dates it to 1400–1340 BCE. This agrees well with Trziniec-Komarov culture, localized from Silesia to Central Ukraine and dated to the period 1500–1200 BCE.
^ Kapović (2008, p. 94) "Kako rekosmo, nije sigurno je li uopće bilo prabaltijskoga jezika. Čini se da su dvije posvjedočene, preživjele grane baltijskoga, istočna i zapadna, različite jedna od druge izvorno kao i svaka posebno od praslavenskoga".
^ a b c Comrie & Corbett (2002:6)
^ Schenker (2002:82)
^ Comrie & Corbett (2002:8)
^ Hellquist, Elof (1922). "torg". Svensk etymologisk ordbok (in Swedish). Project Runeberg. Retrieved 2006-12-27. 
^ Hellquist, Elof (1922). "tolk". Svensk etymologisk ordbok (in Swedish). Project Runeberg. Retrieved 2006-12-27. 
^ Hellquist, Elof (1922). "pråm". Svensk etymologisk ordbok (in Swedish). Project Runeberg. Retrieved 2006-12-27. 
^ Harper, Douglas. "vodka". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2007-05-18. 
^ Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary. Retrieved 28 April 2008
^ Harper, Douglas. "sable". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2007-05-18. 
^ cf.: Deutsches Wörterbuch von Jacob Grimm und Wilhelm Grimm. 16 Bde. [in 32 Teilbänden. Leipzig: S. Hirzel 1854–1960.], s.v. Vampir; Trésor de la Langue Française informatisé; Dauzat, Albert, 1938. Dictionnaire étymologique. Librairie Larousse; Wolfgang Pfeifer, Етymologisches Woerterbuch, 2006, p. 1494; Petar Skok, Etimologijski rjecnk hrvatskoga ili srpskoga jezika, 1971–1974, s.v. Vampir; Tokarev, S.A. et al. 1982. Mify narodov mira. ("Myths of the peoples of the world". A Russian encyclopedia of mythology); Russian Etymological Dictionary by Max Vasmer.
^ Harper, Douglas. "vampire". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2007-09-21. 
^ Stachowski, Kamil. 2005. Wampir na rozdrożach. Etymologia wyrazu upiór – wampir w językach słowiańskich. W: Rocznik Slawistyczny, t. LV, str. 73–92
^ "Indo-European, Slavic". Language Family Trees. Ethnologue. 2006. Retrieved 2006-12-27. 


References


Comrie, Bernard; Corbett, Greville. G. (2002). "Introduction". In Comrie, Bernard; Corbett, Greville. G. The Slavonic Languages. London: Routledge. pp. 1–19. ISBN 0-415-28078-8. 
Lockwood, W.B. A Panorama of Indo-European Languages. Hutchinson University Library, 1972. ISBN 0-09-111020-3 hardback, ISBN 0-09-111021-1 paperback.
Marko Jesensek, The Slovene Language in the Alpine and Pannonian Language Area, 2005. ISBN 83-242-0577-2
Kapović, Mate (2008). "Uvod u indoeuropsku lingvistiku" (in Serbo-Croatian). Zagreb: Matica hrvatska. ISBN 978-953-150-847-6. 
Novotná, Petra; Blažek, Václav (2007). "Glottochronolgy and its application to the Balto-Slavic languages" (PDF). Baltistica. XLII (2): 185–210. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 October 2008. 
Schenker, Alexander M. (2002). "Proto-Slavonic". In Comrie, Bernard; Corbett, Greville. G. The Slavonic Languages. London: Routledge. pp. 60–124. ISBN 0-415-28078-8. 


External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Slavic languages.



Slavic dictionaries on Slavic Net
Slavistik-Portal The Slavistics Portal (Germany)
Swadesh lists of Slavic basic vocabulary words (from Wiktionary's Swadesh-list appendix)
 Leo Wiener (1920). "Slavic Languages". Encyclopedia Americana. 







v
t
e


Slavic languages



History



Proto-Balto-Slavic
Up to Proto-Slavic
Proto-Slavic (Accent)
Old Church Slavonic
Modern languages
Cyril and Methodius
Cyrillic script
Glagolitic alphabet





West



Czech
Kashubian
Polabian
Middle Polish
Old Polish
Polish
Pomeranian
Slovak
Slovincian
Lower Sorbian
Upper Sorbian





East



Belarusian
Iazychie
Old East Slavic
Old Novgorodian
Russian
Ruthenian
Ukrainian





South



Bulgarian
Macedonian
Serbo-Croatian

Bosnian
Croatian
Montenegrin
Serbian


Slovene





Constructed languages



Church Slavonic
Pan-Slavic language

Interslavic
Slovio


Slavonic-Serbian





Separate Slavic dialects
and microlanguages



Balachka
Banat Bulgarian
Burgenland Croatian
Carpathian Rusyn
Canadian Ukrainian
Chakavian
Cieszyn Silesian
Czechoslovak
Eastern Slovak
Kajkavian
Knaanic
Lach
Lesser Polish
Masovian
Masurian
Moravian
Molise Croatian
Pannonian Rusyn
Podhale
Prekmurje Slovene
Resian
Shtokavian
Silesian
Slavic dialects of Greece
Surzhyk
Torlakian
Trasianka
West Polesian





Historical phonology



Slavic first palatalization
Slavic second palatalization
Slavic liquid metathesis and pleophony
Dybo's law
Havlík's law
Hirt's law
Illič-Svityč's law
Ivšić's law
Meillet's law
Pedersen's law
Ruki sound law
Winter's law






Italics indicate extinct languages.







Authority control



LCCN: sh85123361
GND: 4120036-6
SUDOC: 027236331
BNF: cb11932225v (data)
BNE: XX527448











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Slavic_languages&oldid=817913904"					Categories: Fusional languagesSlavic languagesHidden categories: CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesArticles needing additional references from May 2010All articles needing additional referencesAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from February 2015Articles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciationsArticles to be expanded from February 2013All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015CS1 Serbo-Croatian-language sources (sh)Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource referenceUse dmy dates from November 2011Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers