For other uses, see Smoke signal (disambiguation).




Native Americans on a painting by Frederic Remington


The smoke signal is one of the oldest forms of long-distance communication. It is a form of visual communication used over long distance. In general smoke signals are used to transmit news, signal danger, or gather people to a common area.



Contents


1 History and usage
2 Examples

2.1 Native Americans

2.1.1 Yámana


2.2 Noon Gun
2.3 Aboriginal Australians
2.4 Aviation


3 Notes
4 References
5 External links



History and usage[edit]
In ancient China, soldiers stationed along the Great Wall would alert each other of impending enemy attack by signaling from tower to tower. In this way, they were able to transmit a message as far away as 750 kilometres (470 mi)[citation needed] in just a few hours.
Abuse of the smoke signal is known to have contributed to the fall of the Western Zhou Dynasty in the 8th century BCE. King You of Zhou had a habit of fooling his warlords with false warning beacons in order to amuse Bao Si, his concubine who was known as one of four ancient beauties of China. When an actual rebellion occurred, no one came to the aid of the king.[citation needed]
Polybius, a Greek historian, devised a more complex system of alphabetical smoke signals around 150 BCE, which converted Greek alphabetic characters into numeric characters. It enabled messages to be easily signaled by holding sets of torches in pairs. This idea, known as the "Polybius square", also lends itself to cryptography and steganography. This cryptographic concept has been used with Japanese Hiragana and the Germans in the later years of the First World War.
The North American indigenous peoples also communicated via smoke signal. Each tribe had its own signaling system and understanding. A signaler started a fire on an elevation typically using damp grass, which would cause a column of smoke to rise. The grass would be taken off as it dried and another bundle would be placed on the fire. Reputedly the location of the smoke along the incline conveyed a meaning. If it came from halfway up the hill, this would signify all was well, but from the top of the hill it would signify danger.[citation needed]
Smoke signals remain in use today. In Rome, the College of Cardinals uses smoke signals to indicate the selection of a new Pope during a papal conclave. Eligible cardinals conduct a secret ballot until someone receives a vote of two-thirds plus one. The ballots are burned after each vote. Black smoke indicates a failed ballot, while white smoke means a new Pope has been elected.
Smoke signals may also refer to smoke-producing devices used to send distress signals.[1][2]
Examples[edit]
Native Americans[edit]
Lewis and Clark's journals cite several occasions when they adopted the Native American method of setting the plains on fire to communicate the presence of their party or their desire to meet with local tribes.[3][4]
Yámana[edit]
Yámanas of South America used fire to send messages by smoke signals, for instance if a whale drifted ashore.[5] The large amount of meat required notification of many people, so that it would not decay.[6] They might also have used smoke signals on other occasions, thus it is possible that Magellan saw such fires (which inspired him to name the landscape Tierra del Fuego) but he may have seen the smoke or lights of natural phenomena.[7][8]
Noon Gun[edit]
Noon Gun time signalling was used to set marine chronometers in Table Bay.[citation needed]
Aboriginal Australians[edit]
Aboriginal Australians in the Western Desert would send up smoke to notify others of their presence, particularly when entering lands which were not their own.[9] "Putting up a smoke" would often result in nearby individuals or groups replying with their own signals.[10]
Aviation[edit]
Modern avionics has made skywriting possible.[citation needed]
Notes[edit]



^ Pyrotechnic device (US3120183 A), Feb 4, 1964, retrieved 2017-02-01 
^ Smoke signal (US3354829 A), Nov 28, 1967, retrieved 2017-02-01 
^ "Nation Park Service Fire History Timeline". 
^ "Lewis and Clark Journals, July 20, 1805". 
^ Gusinde 1966:137–139, 186
^ Itsz 1979:109
^ "The Patagonian Canoe". Pages.interlog.com. Retrieved 2013-02-19. 
^ Extracts from the following book. E. Lucas Bridges: Uttermost Part of the Earth. Indians of Tierra del Fuego. 1949, reprinted by Dover Publications, Inc (New York, 1988).
^ Myers, 1986: 100
^ "Report on Patrol to Lake Mackay Area June/July 1957". National Archives of Australia. Retrieved 2014-01-31. 



References[edit]

Gusinde, Martin (1966). Nordwind—Südwind. Mythen und Märchen der Feuerlandindianer (in German). Kassel: E. Röth. 
Itsz, Rudolf (1979). "A kihunyt tüzek földje". Napköve. Néprajzi elbeszélések (in Hungarian). Budapest: Móra Könyvkiadó. pp. 93–112.  Translation of the original: Итс, Р.Ф. (1974). Камень солнца (in Russian). Ленинград: Detskaya Literatura.  Title means: “Stone of sun”; chapter means: “The land of burnt-out fires”. (Leningrad: "Children's Literature" Publishing.)
Myers, Fred (1986). Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self. USA: Smithsonian Institution. 

External links[edit]



Look up smoke signal in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.








v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Smoke_signal&oldid=810368351"					Categories: History of telecommunicationsHistory of ancient ChinaNative American cultureNative American historySmokeOptical communicationsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2013Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010CS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu)CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru)CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)