



A Facebook page on a mobile phone.


Social media are computer-mediated technologies that facilitate the creation and sharing of information, ideas, career interests and other forms of expression via virtual communities and networks. The variety of stand-alone and built-in social media services currently available introduces challenges of definition; however, there are some common features:[1]

Social media are interactive Web 2.0 Internet-based applications.[1][2]
User-generated content, such as text posts or comments, digital photos or videos, and data generated through all online interactions, is the lifeblood of social media.[1][2]
Users create service-specific profiles for the website or app that are designed, and maintained by the social media organization.[1][3]
Social media facilitate the development of online social networks by connecting a user's profile with those of other individuals or groups.[1][3]

Users typically access social media services via web-based technologies on desktop, computers, and laptops, or download services that offer social media functionality to their mobile devices (e.g., smartphones and tablet computers). When engaging with these services, users can create highly interactive platforms through which individuals, communities and organizations can share, co-create, discuss, and modify user-generated content or pre-made content posted online. They introduce substantial and pervasive changes to communication between businesses, organizations, communities and individuals.[4] Social media changes the way individuals and large organizations communicate. These changes are the focus of the emerging fields of technoself studies. Social media differ from paper-based media (e.g., magazines and newspapers) or traditional electronic media such as TV broadcasting in many ways, including quality,[5] reach, frequency, interactivity, usability, immediacy, and permanence. Social media outlets operate in a dialogic transmission system (many sources to many receivers).[6] This is in contrast to traditional media which operates under a monologic transmission model (one source to many receivers), such as a paper newspaper which is delivered to many subscribers, or a radio station which broadcasts the same programs to an entire city. Some of the most popular social media websites are Baidu Tieba, Facebook (and its associated Facebook Messenger), Gab, Google+, MySpace, Instagram, LinkedIn, Pinterest, Reddit, Tumblr, Twitter, Viber, VK, WeChat, Weibo, WhatsApp, Wikia, Snapchat and YouTube. These social media websites have more than 100,000,000 registered users.
In America, a survey reported that 84 percent of adolescents in America have a Facebook account.[7] Over 60% of 13 to 17-year-olds have at least one profile on social media, with many spending more than two hours a day on social networking sites.[8] According to Nielsen, Internet users continue to spend more time on social media sites than on any other type of site. At the same time, the total time spent on social media sites in the U.S. across PCs as well as on mobile devices increased by 99 percent to 121 billion minutes in July 2012 compared to 66 billion minutes in July 2011.[9] For content contributors, the benefits of participating in social media have gone beyond simply social sharing to building a reputation and bringing in career opportunities and monetary income.[10]
Observers have noted a range of positive and negative impacts of social media use. Social media can help to improve individuals' sense of connectedness with real or online communities, and social media can be an effective communication (or marketing) tool for corporations, entrepreneurs, nonprofit organizations, including advocacy groups and political parties and governments. At the same time, concerns have been raised about possible links between heavy social media use and depression, and even the issues of cyberbullying, online harassment and "trolling". Currently, about half of young adults have been cyberbullied and of those, 20 percent said that they have been cyberbullied regularly.[11] Another survey was carried out among 7th grade students in America, which is known as the Precaution Process Adoption Model. According to this study, 69 percent of 7th grade students claim to have experienced cyberbullying and they also said that it is worse than face to face bullying.[12] However both the bully and the victim are negatively affected, the intensity, duration and frequency are the three aspects that increase the negative effects on both of them[13]



Contents


1 Definition and classification
2 Distinction from other media

2.1 Viral content
2.2 Mobile use
2.3 Business potential

2.3.1 Business performance




3 Monitoring, tracking and analysis
4 Social media automation

4.1 Bots and social media marketing
4.2 Cyborgs


5 Building "social authority" and vanity
6 Data mining
7 Global usage

7.1 Most popular services
7.2 Effects of usage for news purposes
7.3 History and memory effects


8 Criticisms

8.1 Disparity
8.2 Trustworthiness
8.3 Passive participation
8.4 Reliability
8.5 Ownership of social media content
8.6 Privacy
8.7 Effects on interpersonal relationships
8.8 Commercialization

8.8.1 Launching new campaign through social media


8.9 Selective exposure


9 Harmful effects
10 Impact on health
11 Beneficial effects
12 Impact on job seeking
13 College admission
14 Political effects

14.1 Beneficial versus harmful effects of Twitter
14.2 Use by militant groups


15 Patents
16 In the classroom

16.1 Wikipedia
16.2 Facebook and the classroom
16.3 Twitter
16.4 Impact of retweeting on Twitter
16.5 YouTube
16.6 LinkedIn


17 Advertising

17.1 Use of social media personalities in advertising
17.2 Tweets containing advertising


18 Censorship incidents
19 Effects on youth communication
20 See also
21 References
22 Further reading



Definition and classification[edit]
The variety of evolving stand-alone and built-in social media services introduces a challenge of definition.[1] The idea that social media are defined by their ability to bring people together has been seen as too broad a definition, as this would suggest that the telegraph and telephone were also social media – not the technologies scholars are intending to describe.[14] The terminology is unclear, with some referring to social media as social networks.[3]
A 2015 paper[1] reviewed the prominent literature in the area and identified four commonalities unique to then-current social media services:

social media are Web 2.0 Internet-based applications,[1][2]
user-generated content (UGC) is the lifeblood of the social media organism,[1][2]
users create service-specific profiles for the site or app that are designed and maintained by the social media organization,[1][3]
social media facilitate the development of online social networks by connecting a user's profile with those of other individuals or groups.[1][3]

In 2016, Merriam-Webster defined social media as "Forms of electronic communication (such as Web sites) through which people create online communities to share information, ideas, personal messages, etc."[15]




Classification of social media and overview of how important different types of social media (e.g. blogs) are for each of a company's operational functions (e.g. marketing)[16]


The term social media is usually used to describe social networking sites such as:

Facebook – an online social networking site that allows users to create their personal profiles, share photos and videos, and communicate with other users
Twitter – an internet service that allows users to post "tweets" for their followers to see updates in real-time
LinkedIn – a networking website for the business community that allows users to create professional profiles, post resumes, and communicate with other professionals and job-seekers.
Pinterest – an online community that allows users to display photos of items found on the web by "pinning" them and sharing ideas with others.[17]
Snapchat – an app for mobile devices that allows users to send and share photos of themselves doing their daily activities.[18]

Social media technologies take many different forms including blogs, business networks, enterprise social networks, forums, microblogs, photo sharing, products/services review, social bookmarking, social gaming, social networks, video sharing, and virtual worlds.[16] The development of social media started off with simple platforms such as sixdegrees.com.[19] Unlike instant messaging clients such as ICQ and AOL's AIM, or chat clients like IRC, iChat or Chat Television, sixdegrees.com was the first online business that was created for real people, using their real names. However, the first social networks were short-lived because their users lost interest. The Social Network Revolution has led to the rise of the networking sites. Research[20] shows that the audience spends 22 percent of their time on social networking sites, thus proving how popular social media platforms have become. This increase is because of the smart phones that are now in the daily lives of most humans.[21]
Distinction from other media[edit]
Viral content[edit]
Some social media sites have greater potential for content that is posted there to spread virally over social networks. This is an analogy to the concept of a viral infectious disease in biology, some of which can spread rapidly from an infected person to another person. In a social media context, content or websites that are "viral" (or which "go viral") are those with a greater likelihood that users will reshare content posted (by another user) to their social network, leading to further sharing. In some cases, posts containing controversial content (e.g., Kim Kardashian's nude photos that "broke the Internet" and crashed servers) or fast-breaking news have been rapidly shared and re-shared by huge numbers of users. Many social media sites provide specific functionality to help users reshare content – for example, Twitter's retweet button, Pinterest's pin function, Facebook's share option or Tumblr's reblog function. Businesses have a particular interest in viral marketing tactics because such a campaign can achieve widespread advertising coverage (particularly if the "viral" reposting itself makes the news) for a fraction of the cost of a traditional marketing campaign (e.g., billboard ads, television commercials, magazine ads, etc.). Nonprofit organizations and activists may have similar interests in posting content online with the hopes that it goes viral. The social news website Slashdot, sometimes has news stories that, once posted on its website, "go viral"; the Slashdot effect refers to this situation.
Mobile use[edit]




Young people have high usage rates of smartphones, which enables this demographic to be significant users of social media websites.


Mobile social media refers to the use of social media on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers. This is a group of mobile marketing applications that allow the creation, exchange and circulation of user-generated content.[22] Due to the fact that mobile social media run on mobile devices, they differ from traditional social media by incorporating new factors such as the current location of the user (location-sensitivity) or the time delay between sending and receiving messages (time-sensitivity). According to Andreas Kaplan, mobile social media applications can be differentiated among four types:[22]

Space-timers (location and time sensitive): Exchange of messages with relevance mostly for one specific location at one specific point in time (e.g. Facebook Places What's app; Foursquare)
Space-locators (only location sensitive): Exchange of messages, with relevance for one specific location, which are tagged to a certain place and read later by others (e.g. Yelp; Qype, Tumblr, Fishbrain)
Quick-timers (only time sensitive): Transfer of traditional social media applications to mobile devices to increase immediacy (e.g. posting Twitter messages or Facebook status updates)
Slow-timers (neither location, nor time sensitive): Transfer of traditional social media applications to mobile devices (e.g. watching a YouTube video or reading/editing a Wikipedia article)

Business potential[edit]
Although social media accessed via desktop computers offer a variety of opportunities for companies in a wide range of business sectors, mobile social media, which users are accessing when they are "on the go" via tablet computer or smartphone can take advantage of the location- and time-sensitive awareness of users. Mobile social media tools can be used for marketing research, communication, sales promotions/discounts, and relationship development/loyalty programs.[22]

Marketing research: Mobile social media applications offer data about offline consumer movements at a level of detail heretofore limited to online companies. Any firm can know the exact time at which a customer entered one of its outlets, as well as know the social media comments made during the visit.[22]
Communication: Mobile social media communication takes two forms: company-to-consumer (in which a company may establish a connection to a consumer based on its location and provide reviews about locations nearby) and user-generated content. For example, McDonald's offered $5 and $10 gift-cards to 100 users randomly selected among those checking in at one of its restaurants. This promotion increased check-ins by 33% (from 2,146 to 2,865), resulted in over 50 articles and blog posts, and prompted several hundred thousand news feeds and Twitter messages.[22]
Sales promotions and discounts: Although customers have had to use printed coupons in the past, mobile social media allows companies to tailor promotions to specific users at specific times. For example, when launching its California-Cancun service, Virgin America offered users who checked in through Loopt at one of three designated Border trucks in San Francisco and Los Angeles between 11 a.m. and 3 p.m. on August 31, 2010, two tacos for $1 and two flights to Mexico for the price of one.[22] This special promotion was only available to people who were at a certain location and at a certain time.
Relationship development and loyalty programs: In order to increase long-term relationships with customers, companies can develop loyalty programs that allow customers who check-in via social media regularly at a location to earn discounts or perks. For example, American Eagle Outfitters remunerates such customers with a tiered 10%, 15%, or 20% discount on their total purchase.[22]
e-Commerce: Social media sites are increasingly implementing marketing-friendly strategies, creating platforms that are mutually beneficial for users, businesses, and the networks themselves in the popularity and accessibility of e-commerce, or online purchases. The user who posts her or his comments about a company's product or service benefits because they are able to share their views with their online friends and acquaintances. The company benefits because it obtains insight (positive or negative) about how their product or service is viewed by consumers. Mobile social media applications such as Amazon.com and Pinterest have started to influence an upward trend in the popularity and accessibility of e-commerce, or online purchases.[23][need quotation to verify]

E-commerce businesses may refer to social media as consumer-generated media (CGM). A common thread running through all definitions of social media is a blending of technology and social interaction for the co-creation of value for the business or organization that is using it. People obtain valuable information, education, news, and other data from electronic and print media. Social media are distinct from industrial or traditional media such as newspapers, magazines, television, and film as they are comparatively inexpensive and accessible (at least once a person has already acquired Internet access and a computer). They enable anyone (even private individuals) to publish or access information. Industrial media generally require significant resources to publish information as in most cases the articles go through many revisions before being published. This process adds to the cost and the resulting market price. Originally social media was only used by individuals but now it is used by businesses, charities and also in government and politics.
One characteristic shared by both social and industrial media is the capability to reach small or large audiences; for example, either a blog post or a television show may reach no people or millions of people.[24] Some of the properties that help describe the differences between social and industrial media are:

Quality: In industrial (traditional) publishing—mediated by a publisher—the typical range of quality is substantially narrower (skewing to the high quality side) than in niche, unmediated markets like user-generated social media posts. The main challenge posed by content in social media sites is the fact that the distribution of quality has high variance: from very high-quality items to low-quality, sometimes even abusive or inappropriate content.[5]
Reach: Both industrial and social media technologies provide scale and are capable of reaching a global audience. Industrial media, however, typically use a centralized framework for organization, production, and dissemination, whereas social media are by their very nature more decentralized, less hierarchical, and distinguished by multiple points of production and utility.
Frequency: The number of times users access a type of media per day. Heavy social media users, such as young people, check their social media account numerous times throughout the day.
Accessibility: The means of production for industrial media are typically government or corporate (privately owned); social media tools are generally available to the public at little or no cost, or they are supported by advertising revenue. While social media tools are available to anyone with access to Internet and a computer or mobile device, due to the digital divide, the poorest segment of the population lacks access to the Internet and computer. Low-income people may have more access to traditional media (TV, radio, etc.), as an inexpensive TV and aerial or radio costs much less than an inexpensive computer or mobile device. Moreover, in many regions, TV or radio owners can tune into free over the air programming; computer or mobile device owners need Internet access to go on social media sites.
Usability: Industrial media production typically requires specialized skills and training. For example, in the 1970s, to record a pop song, an aspiring singer would have to rent time in an expensive professional recording studio and hire an audio engineer. Conversely, most social media activities, such as posting a video of oneself singing a song require only modest reinterpretation of existing skills (assuming a person understands Web 2.0 technologies); in theory, anyone with access to the Internet can operate the means of social media production, and post digital pictures, videos or text online.
Immediacy: The time lag between communications produced by industrial media can be long (days, weeks, or even months, by the time the content has been reviewed by various editors and fact checkers) compared to social media (which can be capable of virtually instantaneous responses). The immediacy of social media can be seen as a strength, in that it enables regular people to instantly communicate their opinions and information. At the same time, the immediacy of social media can also be seen as a weakness, as the lack of fact checking and editorial "gatekeepers" facilitates the circulation of hoaxes and fake news.
Permanence: Industrial media, once created, cannot be altered (e.g., once a magazine article or paper book is printed and distributed, changes cannot be made to that same article in that print run) whereas social media posts can be altered almost instantaneously, when the user decides to edit their post or due to comments from other readers.

Community media constitute a hybrid of industrial and social media. Though community-owned, some community radio, TV, and newspapers are run by professionals and some by amateurs. They use both social and industrial media frameworks. Social media have also been recognized for the way they have changed how public relations professionals conduct their jobs.[25] They have provided an open arena where people are free to exchange ideas on companies, brands,[26] and products. Doc Searls and David Wagner state that the "...best of the people in PR are not PR types at all. They understand that there aren't censors, they're the company's best conversationalists."[27] Social media provides an environment where users and PR professionals can converse, and where PR professionals can promote their brand and improve their company's image by listening and responding to what the public is saying about their product.
Business performance[edit]
Social media have a strong influence on business activities and business performance.[citation needed] There are four channels by which social media resources can transform into business performance capabilities:[28]

Social capital represents the extent to which social media affects firms' and organizations' relationships with society and the degree to which the organizations' use of social media increases corporate social-performance capabilities.
Revealed preferences represents the extent to which social media exposes customers' likings (e.g., "likes" and followers) and increases a firm's financial capabilities (e.g., stock price, revenue, profit), or for non-profits, increases their donations, volunteerism rate, etc.
Social marketing represents the extent to which social-marketing resources (e.g., online conversations, sharing links, online presence, sending text-messages) are used to increase a firm's financial capabilities (e.g., sales, acquisition of new customers) or a non-profit's voluntary sector goals.
Social corporate networking involves the informal ties and linkages of corporate/organizational staff with other people from their field or industry, clients, customers, and other members of the public, which form through social networks. Social corporate networking can increase operational performance capabilities in many ways, as it can enable sales staff to find new clients; help marketing staff to learn about client/customer needs and demand; and teach management about the public perceptions of their strategy or approach.
Influence on consumer decisions With the ever-increasing technological development of social media, this has affected consumers' decision to buy the product or service provided by companies.On the other hand, social media has become an important factor in increasing the sales of brands, whether large or small, since the beginning of the Internet revolution. There is much research to prove this, based on the actions taken by the consumer through 2017. There will be many reports at the beginning 2018 confirming the degree to which social media has become effective in marketing companies and the importance of focusing on them.[29]

There are four tools or approaches that engage experts, customers, suppliers, and employees in the development of products and services using social media. Companies and other organizations can use these tools and approaches to improve their business capacity and performance.[30]

Customer relationship management (CRM) is an approach to managing a company's interaction with current and potential future customers that tries to analyze data about customers' history with a company and to improve business relationships with customers, specifically focusing on customer retention and ultimately driving sales growth. One important aspect of the CRM approach is the systems of CRM that compile data from a range of different communication channels, including a company's website, telephone, email, live chat, marketing materials, and social media. Through the CRM approach and the systems used to facilitate CRM, businesses learn more about their target audiences and how to best cater to their needs. However, adopting the CRM approach may also occasionally lead to favoritism within an audience of consumers, resulting in dissatisfaction among customers and defeating the purpose of CRM.
Innovation can be defined[by whom?] simply as a "new idea, device, or method" or as the application of better solutions that meet new requirements, unarticulated needs, or existing market needs. This is accomplished through more-effective products, processes, services, technologies, or business models that are readily available[citation needed] to markets, governments and society. The term "innovation" can be defined as something original and more effective and, as a consequence, new, that "breaks into" the market or society.[3] It is related to, but not the same as, invention. Innovation is often manifested[by whom?] via the engineering process. Innovation is generally considered[by whom?] to be the result of a process that brings together various novel ideas in a way that affects society. In industrial economics, innovations are created and found empirically from services to meet growing consumer demand.[citation needed]
Training in social-media techniques, tactics and unwritten rules may not be needed for "digital natives", such as workers who are already comfortable and experienced with using social media. However, for workers who are not familiar with social media, formal or informal training may be needed. Brand management and engagement is done differently on social media platforms than over traditional advertising formats such as TV and radio ads. To give just one example, with traditional ads, customers cannot respond to the ad. However, if an organization makes a major gaffe or politically incorrect statement on social media, customers and other regular citizens can immediately post comments about the ad.
Knowledge management could take place in traditional small businesses (such as coffeehouses and ice cream parlours) just by using the owner-proprietor's own memory of his key customers, their preferences, and their client-service expectations. However, with the shift to national or even multinational e-commerce businesses which operate online, companies are generating far more data on transactions for a single person or even a team to grasp just in their memory. As such, 2010-era global e-commerce firms typically use a range of digital tools to track, monitor and analyze the huge streams of data their businesses are generating, a process called "data mining".

Monitoring, tracking and analysis[edit]
Companies are increasingly using social media monitoring tools to monitor, track, and analyze online conversations on the Web about their brand or products or about related topics of interest. This can be useful in public relations management and advertising campaign tracking, allowing the companies to measure return on investment for their social media ad spending, competitor-auditing, and for public engagement. Tools range from free, basic applications to subscription-based, more in-depth tools.
Social media tracking also enables companies to respond quickly to online posts that criticize their product or service. By responding quickly to critical online posts, and helping the user to resolve the concerns, this helps the company to lessen the negative effects that online complaints can have about company product or service sales. In the US, for example, if a customer criticizes a major hotel chain's cleanliness or service standards on a social media website, a company representative will usually quickly be alerted to this critical post, so that the company representative can go online and express concern for the sub-par service and offer the complaining person a coupon or discount on their next purchase, plus a promise to forward their concerns to the hotel manager so that the problem will not be repeated. This rapid response helps to show that the company cares about its customers.
The "honeycomb framework" defines how social media services focus on some or all of seven functional building blocks.[4] These building blocks help explain the engagement needs of the social media audience. For instance, LinkedIn users are thought to care mostly about identity, reputation, and relationships, whereas YouTube's primary features are sharing, conversations, groups, and reputation. Many companies build their own social "containers" that attempt to link the seven functional building blocks around their brands. These are private communities that engage people around a more narrow theme, as in around a particular brand, vocation or hobby, rather than social media containers such as Google+, Facebook, and Twitter. PR departments face significant challenges in dealing with viral negative sentiment directed at organizations or individuals on social media platforms (dubbed "sentimentitis"), which may be a reaction to an announcement or event.[31] In a 2011 article,[4] Jan H. Kietzmann, Kristopher Hermkens, Ian P. McCarthy and Bruno S. Silvestre describe the honeycomb relationship as "present[ing] a framework that defines social media by using seven functional building blocks: identity, conversations, sharing, presence, relationships, reputation, and groups".
The elements of the honeycomb framework include:

Identity: This block represents the extent to which users reveal their identities in a social media setting. This can include disclosing information such as name, age, gender, profession, location, and also information that portrays users in certain ways.[4]
Conversations: This block represents the extent to which users communicate with other users in a social media setting. Many social media sites are designed primarily to facilitate conversations among individuals and groups. These conversations happen for all sorts of reasons. People tweet, blog, make online comments and send messages to other users to meet new like-minded people, to find a romantic partner, to build their self-esteem, or to be on the cutting edge of new ideas or trending topics. Yet others see social media as a way of making their message heard and positively impacting humanitarian causes, environmental problems, economic issues, or political debates.[4]
Sharing: This block represents the extent to which users exchange, distribute, and receive content, ranging from a short text post to a link or a digital photo. The term 'social' implies that exchanges between people are crucial. In many cases, however, sociality is about the objects that mediate these ties between people—the reasons why they meet online and associate with each other.[4]
Presence: This block represents the extent to which users can know if other users are accessible. It includes knowing where others are, in the virtual world or in the real world, and whether they are available.[4] Some social media sites have icons that indicate when other users are online, such as Facebook.
Relationships: This block represents the extent to which users can be related or linked up to other users. Two or more users have some form of association that leads them to converse, share objects of sociality, send texts or messages, meet up, or simply just list each other as a friend or fan.[4]
Reputation: This block represents the extent to which users can identify the standing of others, including themselves, in a social media setting. Reputation can have different meanings on social media platforms. In most cases, reputation is a matter of trust, but because information technologies are not yet good at determining such highly qualitative criteria, social media sites rely on 'mechanical Turks': tools that automatically aggregate user-generated information to determine trustworthiness.[4] Reputation management is another aspect and use of social media.
Groups: This block represents the extent to which users can form communities and sub-communities of people with similar backgrounds, demographics or interests. The more 'social' a network becomes, the wider the group of friends, followers, and contacts can be developed.[4] Some Facebook users develop a list of friends that includes people from all over the world.

Social media automation[edit]
Bots and social media marketing[edit]
There are direct benefits of social media in the form of greater market share and increased audiences.[32] To increase these benefits technologies that better facilitate social media marketing has been developed; an example of this technology is the development of bots.
Bots (short for robots) are automated programs that run over the internet.[33] There are many forms of bots with varying behaviors.[34] The bots most relevant to social media marketing are chatbots and social bots.[35] Chatbots and social bots are programmed to mimic natural human interactions such as liking, commenting, following, and unfollowing on social media platforms.[36] The ability of these bots to automate social media marketing needs has created a large demand and the establishment of a new industry of bot providers.[37]
The use of social bots and chatbots has created an analytical crisis in the marketing industry.[38] Companies use social and chat bots to automate their social marketing that appears to consumers and other companies to be real interaction. The ability for bots to mimic human interaction makes it difficult for marketers and data analysts to differentiate between human interactions and automated bot interactions;[38] having implications for quality of data.[38] Companies continue to use bots to automate their social media interactions although the same bots are negatively affecting their marketing data causing a "digital cannibalism" in social media marketing. Additionally, bots violate the terms of use on many social mediums such as Instagram. This can result in profiles being taken down and banned.[39]
Cyborgs[edit]
In addition to humans and bots, the third type of users are "cyborgs", described as a combination of a human and a bot, in an analogy to "real" cyborgs.[40][41] They are used, for instance, to spread fake news or create a buzz.[42] Cyborgs, in the social media context, are either bot-assisted humans or human-assisted bots.[43] A concrete example of a cyborg in the social media context is a human being who registers an account for which he sets automated programs to post, for instance tweets, during his absence.[43] From time to time, the human participates to tweet and interact with friends. Cyborgs are different from bots, as bots use automation, whereas cyborgs intertwine characteristics of both manual and automated behavior. Cyborgs offer unique opportunities for fake news spreaders, as it blends automated activity with human input.[43] When the automated accounts are publicly identified, the human part of the cyborg is able to take over and could protest that the account has been used manually all along. Such accounts try to pose as real people; in particular, number of their friends or followers should be resembling that of a real person. Often, such accounts use "friend farms" to collect large number of friends in a short period of time.[44]
Building "social authority" and vanity[edit]
Social media becomes effective through a process called "building social authority". One of the foundation concepts in social media has become that you cannot completely control your message through social media but rather you can simply begin to participate in the "conversation" expecting that you can achieve a significant influence in that conversation.[45] However, this conversation participation must be cleverly executed because although people are resistant to marketing in general, they are even more resistant to direct or overt marketing through social media platforms. This may seem counterintuitive but it is the main reason building social authority with credibility is so important. A marketer can generally not expect people to be receptive to a marketing message in and of itself. In the Edelman Trust Barometer report[46] in 2008, the majority (58%) of the respondents reported they most trusted company or product information coming from "people like me" inferred to be information from someone they trusted. In the 2010 Trust Report,[47] the majority switched to 64% preferring their information from industry experts and academics. According to Inc. Technology's Brent Leary, "This loss of trust, and the accompanying turn towards experts and authorities, seems to be coinciding with the rise of social media and networks."[48][49]
However, there is also speculation that social media is becoming perceived as a trustworthy source of information by a large number of people. The continuous interpersonal connectivity on social media has led to people regarding peer recommendations as a reliable source of information. However, this trust can be exploited by marketers, who can utilise consumer-created content about brands and products to influence public perceptions.[50]
Data mining[edit]
Main article: Social media mining
Social media "mining" is a type of data mining, a technique of analyzing data to detect patterns. Social media mining is a process of representing, analyzing, and extracting actionable patterns from data collected from people's activities on social media. Social media mining introduces basic concepts and principal algorithms suitable for investigating massive social media data; it discusses theories and methodologies from different disciplines such as computer science, data mining, machine learning, social network analysis, network science, sociology, ethnography, statistics, optimization, and mathematics. It encompasses the tools to formally represent, measure, model, and mine meaningful patterns from large-scale social media data.[51] Detecting patterns in social media use by data mining is of particular interest to advertisers, major corporations and brands, governments and political parties, among others.
Global usage[edit]




Social media websites are popular on mobile devices such as smartphones.


According to the article "The Emerging Role of Social Media in Political and Regime Change" by Rita Safranek, the Middle East and North Africa region has one of the most youthful populations in the world, with people under 25 making up between 35–45% of the population in each country. They make up the majority of social media users, including about 17 million Facebook users, 25,000 Twitter accounts and 40,000 active blogs, according to the Arab Advisors Group.[52]
Most popular services[edit]
This is a list of the leading social networks based on number of active user accounts as of August 2017.[53]

Facebook: 2,047,000,000 users
YouTube: 1,500,000,000 users
WhatsApp: 1,200,000,000 users
Facebook Messenger: 1,200,000,000 users
WeChat: 938,000,000 users
QQ: 861,000,000 users
Instagram: 700,000,000 users
QZone: 638,000,000 users
Tumblr: 357,000,000 users
Twitter: 328,000,000 users
Sina Weibo: 313,000,000 users
Baidu Tieba: 300,000,000 users
Skype: 300,000,000 users
Viber: 260,000,000 users
Snapchat: 255,000,000 users
Line: 214,000,000 users
Pinterest 175,000,000 users

Effects of usage for news purposes[edit]
Just as television turned a nation of people who listened to media content into watchers of media content in the 1950s to the 1980s, the emergence of social media has created a nation of media content creators. According to 2011 Pew Research data, nearly 80% of American adults are online and nearly 60% of them use social networking sites.[54] More Americans get their news via the Internet than from newspapers or radio, as well as three-fourths who say they get news from e-mail or social media sites updates, according to a report published by CNN. The survey suggests that Facebook and Twitter make news a more participatory experience than before as people share news articles and comment on other people's posts. According to CNN, in 2010 75% of people got their news forwarded through e-mail or social media posts, whereas 37% of people shared a news item via Facebook or Twitter.[55]
In the United States, 81% of people say they look online for news of the weather, first and foremost. National news at 73%, 52% for sports news, and 41% for entertainment or celebrity news. Based on this study, done for the Pew Center, two-thirds of the sample's online news users were younger than 50, and 30% were younger than 30. The survey involved tracking daily the habits of 2,259 adults 18 or older.[56] Thirty-three percent of young adults get news from social networks. Thirty-four percent watched TV news and 13% read print or digital content. Nineteen percent of Americans got news from Facebook, Google+, or LinkedIn. Thirty-six percent of those who get news from social network got it yesterday from survey. More than 36% of Twitter users use accounts to follow news organizations or journalists. Nineteen percent of users say they got information from news organizations of journalists. TV remains most popular source of news, but audience is aging (only 34% of young people).
Of those younger than 25, 29% said they got no news yesterday either digitally or traditional news platforms. Only 5% under 30 said they follow news about political figures and events in DC. Only 14% of respondents could answer all four questions about which party controls the House, current unemployment rate, what nation Angela Merkel leads, and which presidential candidate favors taxing higher-income Americans. Facebook and Twitter now pathways to news, but are not replacements for traditional ones. Seventy percent get social media news from friends and family on Facebook.[57]
Social media fosters communication. An Internet research company, Pew Research Center, claims that "more than half of internet users (52%) use two or more of the social media sites measured (Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest) to communicate with their family or friends".[58] For children, using social media sites can help promote creativity, interaction, and learning. It can also help them with homework and class work.[59] Moreover, social media enable them to stay connected with their peers, and help them to interact with each other. Some can get involved with developing fundraising campaigns and political events. However, it can impact social skills due to the absence of face-to-face contact.[60] Social media can affect mental health of teens.[61] Teens who use Facebook frequently and especially who are susceptible may become more narcissistic, antisocial, and aggressive. Teens become strongly influenced by advertising, and it influences buying habits. Since the creation of Facebook in 2004, it has become a distraction and a way to waste time for many users.[62] A head teacher in the United Kingdom commented in 2015 that social media caused more stress to teenage children than examinations, with constant interaction and monitoring by peers ending the past practice where what pupils did in the evening or at weekends was separate from the arguments and peer pressure at school.[63]
In a 2014 study, high school students ages 18 and younger were examined in an effort to find their preference for receiving news. Based on interviews with 61 teenagers, conducted from December 2007 to February 2011, most of the teen participants reported reading print newspapers only "sometimes," with fewer than 10% reading them daily. The teenagers instead reported learning about current events from social media sites such as Facebook, MySpace, YouTube, and blogs.[64] Another study showed that social media users read a set of news that is different from what newspaper editors feature in the print press.[65] Using nanotechnology as an example, a study was conducted that[66] studied tweets from Twitter and found that some 41% of the discourse about nanotechnology focused on its negative impacts, suggesting that a portion of the public may be concerned with how various forms of nanotechnology are used in the future. Although optimistic-sounding and neutral-sounding tweets were equally likely to express certainty or uncertainty, the pessimistic tweets were nearly twice as likely to appear certain of an outcome than uncertain. These results imply the possibility of a preconceived negative perception of many news articles associated with nanotechnology. Alternatively, these results could also imply that posts of a more pessimistic nature that are also written with an air of certainty are more likely to be shared or otherwise permeate groups on Twitter. Similar biases need to be considered when the utility of new media is addressed, as the potential for human opinion to over-emphasize any particular news story is greater despite the general improvement in addressed potential uncertainty and bias in news articles than in traditional media.[67]
On October 2, 2013, the most common hashtag throughout the United States was "#governmentshutdown", as well as ones focusing on political parties, Obama, and healthcare. Most news sources have Twitter, and Facebook, pages, like CNN and the New York Times, providing links to their online articles, getting an increased readership. Additionally, several college news organizations and administrators have Twitter pages as a way to share news and connect to students.[68] According to "Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2013",[69] in the US, among those who use social media to find news, 47% of these people are under 45 years old, and 23% are above 45 years old. However social media as a main news gateway does not follow the same pattern across countries. For example, in this report, in Brazil, 60% of the respondents said social media was one of the five most important ways to find news online, 45% in Spain, 17% in the UK, 38% in Italy, 14% in France, 22% in Denmark, 30% in the U.S., and 12% in Japan.[69] Moreover, there are differences among countries about commenting on news in social networks, 38% of the respondents in Brazil said they commented on news in social network in a week. These percentages are 21% in the U.S. and 10% in the UK. The authors argued that differences among countries may be due to culture difference rather than different levels of access to technical tools.[69]
History and memory effects[edit]
News media and television journalism have been a key feature in the shaping of American collective memory for much of the twentieth century.[70][71] Indeed, since the United States' colonial era, news media has influenced collective memory and discourse about national development and trauma. In many ways, mainstream journalists have maintained an authoritative voice as the storytellers of the American past. Their documentary style narratives, detailed exposes, and their positions in the present make them prime sources for public memory. Specifically, news media journalists have shaped collective memory on nearly every major national event – from the deaths of social and political figures to the progression of political hopefuls. Journalists provide elaborate descriptions of commemorative events in U.S. history and contemporary popular cultural sensations. Many Americans learn the significance of historical events and political issues through news media, as they are presented on popular news stations.[72] However, journalistic influence is growing less important, whereas social networking sites such as Facebook, YouTube and Twitter, provide a constant supply of alternative news sources for users.
As social networking becomes more popular among older and younger generations, sites such as Facebook and YouTube, gradually undermine the traditionally authoritative voices of news media. For example, American citizens contest media coverage of various social and political events as they see fit, inserting their voices into the narratives about America's past and present and shaping their own collective memories.[73][74] An example of this is the public explosion of the Trayvon Martin shooting in Sanford, Florida. News media coverage of the incident was minimal until social media users made the story recognizable through their constant discussion of the case. Approximately one month after the fatal shooting of Trayvon Martin, its online coverage by everyday Americans garnered national attention from mainstream media journalists, in turn exemplifying media activism. In some ways, the spread of this tragic event through alternative news sources parallels that of the Emmitt Till – whose murder became a national story after it circulated African American and Communists newspapers. Social media was also influential in the widespread attention given to the revolutionary outbreaks in the Middle East and North Africa during 2011.[75][76][77] However, there is some debate about the extent to which social media facilitated this kind of change.[78] Another example of this shift is in the ongoing Kony 2012 campaign, which surfaced first on YouTube and later garnered a great amount of attention from mainstream news media journalists. These journalists now monitor social media sites to inform their reports on the movement. Lastly, in the past couple of presidential elections, the use of social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter were used to predict election results. U.S. President Barack Obama was more liked on Facebook than his opponent Mitt Romney and it was found by a study done by Oxford Institute Internet Experiment that more people liked to tweet about comments of President Obama rather than Romney.[79]
Criticisms[edit]
We worry that social media is kind of the virtual bathhouse— Dr. Lynn Fitzgibbons, an infectious disease physician Santa Barbara County Public Health Department[80]

Criticisms of social media range from criticisms of the ease of use of specific platforms and their capabilities, disparity of information available, issues with trustworthiness and reliability of information presented,[81] the impact of social media use on an individual's concentration,[82] ownership of media content, and the meaning of interactions created by social media. Although some social media platforms offer users the opportunity to cross-post simultaneously, some social network platforms have been criticized for poor interoperability between platforms, which leads to the creation of information silos, viz. isolated pockets of data contained in one social media platform.[83] However, it is also argued that social media have positive effects such as allowing the democratization of the Internet[84] while also allowing individuals to advertise themselves and form friendships.[85] Others[86] have noted that the term "social" cannot account for technological features of a platform alone, hence the level of sociability should be determined by the actual performances of its users. There has been a dramatic decrease in face-to-face interactions as more and more social media platforms have been introduced with the threat of cyber-bullying and online sexual predators being more prevalent.[87] Social media may expose children to images of alcohol, tobacco, and sexual behaviors[relevant? – discuss].[88] In regards to cyber-bullying, it has been proven that individuals who have no experience with cyber-bullying often have a better well-being than individuals who have been bullied online.[89]
Twitter is increasingly a target of heavy activity of marketers. Their actions, focused on gaining massive numbers of followers, include use of advanced scripts and manipulation techniques that distort the prime idea of social media by abusing human trustfulness.[90] Twitter also promotes social connections among students. It can be used to enhance communication building and critical thinking. Domizi (2013) utilised Twitter in a graduate seminar requiring students to post weekly tweets to extend classroom discussions. Students reportedly used Twitter to connect with content and other students. Additionally, students found it "to be useful professionally and personally".[91] British-American entrepreneur and author Andrew Keen criticizes social media in his book The Cult of the Amateur, writing, "Out of this anarchy, it suddenly became clear that what was governing the infinite monkeys now inputting away on the Internet was the law of digital Darwinism, the survival of the loudest and most opinionated. Under these rules, the only way to intellectually prevail is by infinite filibustering."[92] This is also relative to the issue "justice" in the social network. For example, the phenomenon "Human flesh search engine" in Asia raised the discussion of "private-law" brought by social network platform. Comparative media professor José van Dijck contends in her book "The Culture of Connectivity" (2013) that to understand the full weight of social media, their technological dimensions should be connected to the social and the cultural. She critically describes six social media platforms. One of her findings is the way Facebook had been successful in framing the term 'sharing' in such a way that third party use of user data is neglected in favour of intra-user connectedness.
Disparity[edit]




People who live in poverty, such as homeless people, have low levels of access to computers and Internet or a lack of familiarity with these technologies. This means that these marginalized people are not able to use social media tools to find information, jobs, housing, and other necessities.


The digital divide is a measure of disparity in the level of access to technology between households, socioeconomic levels or other demographic categories.[93][94] People who are homeless, living in poverty, elderly people and those living in rural or remote communities may have little or no access to computers and the Internet; in contrast, middle class and upper-class people in urban areas have very high rates of computer and Internet access. Other models argue that within a modern information society, some individuals produce Internet content while others only consume it,[95][96] which could be a result of disparities in the education system where only some teachers integrate technology into the classroom and teach critical thinking.[97] While social media has differences among age groups, a 2010 study in the United States found no racial divide.[98] Some zero-rating programs offer subsidized data access to certain websites on low-cost plans. Critics say that this is an anti-competitive program that undermines net neutrality and creates a "walled garden"[99] for platforms like Facebook Zero. A 2015 study found that 65% of Nigerians, 61% of Indonesians, and 58% of Indians agree with the statement that "Facebook is the Internet" compared with only 5% in the US.[100]
Eric Ehrmann contends that social media in the form of public diplomacy create a patina of inclusiveness that covers[101] traditional economic interests that are structured to ensure that wealth is pumped up to the top of the economic pyramid, perpetuating the digital divide and post Marxian class conflict. He also voices concern over the trend that finds social utilities operating in a quasi-libertarian global environment of oligopoly that requires users in economically challenged nations to spend high percentages of annual income to pay for devices and services to participate in the social media lifestyle. Neil Postman also contends that social media will increase an information disparity between "winners" – who are able to use the social media actively – and "losers" – who are not familiar with modern technologies or who do not have access to them. People with high social media skills may have better access to information about job opportunities, potential new friends, and social activities in their area, which may enable them to improve their standard of living and their quality of life.
Trustworthiness[edit]
Because large-scale collaborative co-creation is one of the main ways of forming information in the social network, the user generated content is sometimes viewed with skepticism; readers do not trust it as a reliable source of information. Aniket Kittur, Bongowon Suh, and Ed H. Chi took wikis under examination and indicated that, "One possibility is that distrust of wiki content is not due to the inherently mutable nature of the system but instead to the lack of available information for judging trustworthiness."[102] To be more specific, the authors mention that reasons for distrusting collaborative systems with user-generated content, such as Wikipedia, include a lack of information regarding accuracy of contents, motives and expertise of editors, stability of content, coverage of topics and the absence of sources.[103]
Social media is also an important source of news. According to 'Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2013', social media are one of the most important ways for people find news online (the others being traditional brands, search engines and news aggregators).[69] The report suggested that in the United Kingdom, trust in news which comes from social media sources is low, compared to news from other sources (e.g. online news from traditional broadcaster or online news from national newspapers). People who aged at 24–35 trust social media most, whereas trust declined with the increase of age.
Rainie and Wellman have argued that media making now has become a participation work,[104] which changes communication systems. The center of power is shifted from only the media (as the gatekeeper) to the peripheral area, which may include government, organizations, and out to the edge, the individual.[105] These changes in communication systems raise empirical questions about trust to media effect. Prior empirical studies have shown that trust in information sources plays a major role in people's decision making.[106] People's attitudes more easily change when they hear messages from trustworthy sources. In the Reuters report, 27% of respondents agree that they worry about the accuracy of a story on a blog.[69] However, 40% of them believe the stories on blogs are more balanced than traditional papers because they are provided with a range of opinions. Recent research has shown that in the new social media communication environment, the civil or uncivil nature of comments will bias people's information processing even if the message is from a trustworthy source,[107] which bring the practical and ethical question about the responsibility of communicator in the social media environment.
Passive participation[edit]
For Malcolm Gladwell, the role of social media, such as Twitter and Facebook, in revolutions and protests is overstated.[108] On one hand, social media make it easier for individuals, and in this case activists, to express themselves. On the other hand, it is harder for that expression to have an impact.[108] Gladwell distinguishes between social media activism and high risk activism, which brings real changes. Activism and especially high-risk activism involves strong-tie relationships, hierarchies, coordination, motivation, exposing oneself to high risks, making sacrifices.[108] Gladwell discusses that social media are built around weak ties and he argues that "social networks are effective at increasing participation — by lessening the level of motivation that participation requires".[108] According to him "Facebook activism succeeds not by motivating people to make a real sacrifice, but by motivating them to do the things that people do when they are not motivated enough to make a real sacrifice".[108]
Furthermore, social media's role in democratizing media participation, which proponents herald as ushering in a new era of participatory democracy, with all users able to contribute news and comments, may fall short of the ideals. Social media has been championed as allowing anyone with an Internet connection to become a content creator[85] and empowering the "active audience".[109] But international survey data suggest online media audience members are largely passive consumers, while content creation is dominated by a small number of users who post comments and write new content.[69]:78 Others[110] argue that the effect of social media will vary from one country to another, with domestic political structures playing a greater role than social media in determining how citizens express opinions about "current affairs stories involving the state". According to the "Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2013", the percent of online news users who blog about news issues ranges from 1–5%. Greater percentages use social media to comment on news, with participation ranging from 8% in Germany to 38% in Brazil. But online news users are most likely to just talk about online news with friends offline or use social media to share stories without creating content.[69]:78
Reliability[edit]
Evgeny Morozov, 2009–2010 Yahoo fellow at Georgetown University, contends that the information uploaded to Twitter may have little relevance to the rest of the people who do not use Twitter. In the article "Iran: Downside to the "Twitter Revolution"" in the magazine Dissent ,[111] he says:

"Twitter only adds to the noise: it's simply impossible to pack much context into its 140 characters. All other biases are present as well: in a country like Iran it's mostly pro-Western, technology-friendly and iPod-carrying young people who are the natural and most frequent users of Twitter. They are a tiny and, most important, extremely untypical segment of the Iranian population (the number of Twitter users in Iran — a country of more than seventy million people.)"

Even in the United States, the birth-country of Twitter, currently in 2015 the social network has 306 million accounts.[112] Because there are likely to be many multi-account users, and the United States in 2012 had a population of 314.7 million,[113] the adoption of Twitter is somewhat limited. Professor Matthew Auer of Bates College casts doubt on the conventional wisdom that social media are open and participatory. He also speculates on the emergence of "anti-social media" used as "instruments of pure control."[114]
Ownership of social media content[edit]
Social media content is generated through social media interactions done by the users through the site. There has always been a huge debate on the ownership of the content on social media platforms because it is generated by the users and hosted by the company. Added to this is the danger to security of information, which can be leaked to third parties with economic interests in the platform, or parasites who comb the data for their own databases.[115] The author of Social Media Is Bullshit, Brandon Mendelson, claims that the "true" owners of content created on social media sites only benefits the large corporations who own those sites and rarely the users that created them.[116]
Privacy[edit]
Privacy rights advocates warn users on social media about the collection of their personal data. Some information is captured without the user's knowledge or consent through electronic tracking and third party applications. Data may also be collected for law enforcement and governmental purposes,[114] by social media intelligence using data mining techniques.[115] Data and information may also be collected for third party use. When information is shared on social media, that information is no longer private. There have been many cases in which young persons especially, share personal information, which can attract predators. It is very important to monitor what you share, and to be aware of who you could potentially be sharing that information with. Teens especially share significantly more information on the internet now than they have in the past. Teen are much more likely to share their personal information, such as email address, phone number, and school names.[117] Studies suggest that teens are not aware of what they are posting and how much of that information can be accessed by third parties.
Other privacy concerns with employers and social media are when employers use social media as a tool to screen a prospective employee. This issue raises many ethical questions that some consider an employer's right and others consider discrimination. Except in the states of California, Maryland, and Illinois, there are no laws that prohibit employers from using social media profiles as a basis of whether or not someone should be hired.[118] Title VII also prohibits discrimination during any aspect of employment including hiring or firing, recruitment, or testing.[119] Social media has been integrating into the workplace and this has led to conflicts within employees and employers.[107] Particularly, Facebook has been seen as a popular platform for employers to investigate in order to learn more about potential employees. This conflict first started in Maryland when an employer requested and received an employee's Facebook username and password. State lawmakers first introduced legislation in 2012 to prohibit employers from requesting passwords to personal social accounts in order to get a job or to keep a job. This led to Canada, Germany, the U.S. Congress and 11 U.S. states to pass or propose legislation that prevents employers' access to private social accounts of employees.[108]
It is not only an issue in the workplace, but an issue in schools as well. There have been situations where students have been forced to give up their social media passwords to school administrators.[118] There are inadequate laws to protect a student's social media privacy, and organizations such as the ACLU are pushing for more privacy protection, as it is an invasion. They urge students who are pressured to give up their account information to tell the administrators to contact a parent or lawyer before they take the matter any further. Although they are students, they still have the right to keep their password-protected information private.[119]
Many Western European countries have already implemented laws that restrict the regulation of social media in the workplace. States including Arkansas, California, Colorado, Illinois, Maryland, Michigan, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, Utah, Washington, and Wisconsin have passed legislation that protects potential employees and current employees from employers that demand them to give forth their username or password for a social media account.[120] Laws that forbid employers from disciplining an employee based on activity off the job on social media sites have also been put into act in states including California, Colorado, Connecticut, North Dakota, and New York. Several states have similar laws that protect students in colleges and universities from having to grant access to their social media accounts. Eight states have passed the law that prohibits post secondary institutions from demanding social media login information from any prospective or current students and privacy legislation has been introduced or is pending in at least 36 states as of July 2013.[121] As of May 2014, legislation has been introduced and is in the process of pending in at least 28 states and has been enacted in Maine and Wisconsin.[122] In addition, the National Labor Relations Board has been devoting a lot of their attention to attacking employer policies regarding social media that can discipline employees who seek to speak and post freely on social media sites.
There are arguments that "privacy is dead" and that with social media growing more and more, some heavy social media users appear to have become quite unconcerned with privacy. Others argue, however, that people are still very concerned about their privacy, but are being ignored by the companies running these social networks, who can sometimes make a profit off of sharing someone's personal information. There is also a disconnect between social media user's words and their actions. Studies suggest that surveys show that people want to keep their lives private, but their actions on social media suggest otherwise. Another factor is ignorance of how accessible social media posts are. Some social media users who have been criticized for inappropriate comments stated that they did not realize that anyone outside their circle of friends would read their post; in fact, on some social media sites, unless a user selects higher privacy settings, their content is shared with a wide audience.
Effects on interpersonal relationships[edit]






This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (August 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Modern day teenagers interacting


Data suggest that participants use social media to fulfill perceived social needs, but are typically disappointed.[123]  Lonely individuals are drawn to the Internet for emotional support. This could interfere with "real life socializing" by reducing face-to-face relationships.[124] Some of these views are summed up in an Atlantic article by Stephen Marche entitled Is Facebook Making Us Lonely?, in which the author argues that social media provides more breadth, but not the depth of relationships that humans require and that users begin to find it difficult to distinguish between the meaningful relationships which we foster in the real world, and the numerous casual relationships that are formed through social media.[120] Sherry Turkle explores similar issues in her book Alone Together as she discusses how people confuse social media usage with authentic communication. She posits that people tend to act differently online and are less afraid to hurt each other's feelings. According to Chouinard, "You always see a bunch of friend groups hanging out together when each of them is caught up in their digital devices; they constantly want to check what everyone's tweeting, what they are doing, instead of talking to the friends they're sitting with, or holding conversation and engaging with each other"[125] Some online behaviors can cause stress and anxiety, due to the permanence of online posts, the fear of being hacked, or of colleges and employers exploring social media pages. Turkle also speculates that people are beginning to prefer texting to face-to-face communication, which can contribute to feelings of loneliness.[121] Some researchers have also found that only exchanges that involved direct communication and reciprocation of messages to each other increased feelings of connectedness. However, passively using social media without sending or receiving messages to individuals does not make people feel less lonely unless they were lonely to begin with.[122]
A study published in the Public Library of Science in 2013 revealed that the perception of Facebook being an important resource for social connection was diminished by the number of people found to have developed low self-esteem, and the more they used the network the lower their level of self-esteem.[126] A current controversial topic is whether or not social media addiction should be explicitly categorized as a psychological ailment.[127] Extended use of social media has led to increased Internet addiction, cyberbullying, sexting, sleep deprivation, and the decline of face-to-face interaction.[128] Several clinics in the UK classify social media addiction is a certifiable medical condition with one psychiatric consultant claiming that he treats as many as one hundred cases a year.[129] Lori Ann Wagner, a psychotherapist, argues that humans communicate best face to face with their five senses involved.[130] In addition, a study on social media done by PhD's Hsuan-Ting Kim and Yonghwan Kim, suggests that social networking sites have begun to raise concern because of the expectations people seek to fulfill from these sites and the amount of time users are willing to invest.[131]
More studies were done by Nancy K. Baym, Yan Bing Zhang. and Mei-Chen Lin who are professors at the University of Kansas. They found that 49 percent of all social contact with kin was conducted online, while 62 percent of interactions with friends employed the internet.[132] They also discovered that not only do more people communicated through the internet, but it had a negative affect on relations. These doctors stated they found that the internet was rated worse for maintaining relationships, and better for getting schoolwork done and exchanging information[132]
Commercialization[edit]




Social media websites can also use "traditional" marketing approaches, as seen in these LinkedIn-branded chocolates.


As social media usage has become increasingly widespread, social media has to a large extent come to be subjected to commercialization by marketing companies and advertising agencies.[133] Christofer Laurell, a digital marketing researcher, suggested that the social media landscape currently consists of three types of places because of this development: consumer-dominated places, professionally dominated places and places undergoing commercialization.[134] As social media becomes commercialized, this process have been shown to create novel forms of value networks stretching between consumer and producer[135] in which a combination of personal, private and commercial contents are created.[136] The commercial development of social media has been criticized as the actions of consumers in these settings has become increasingly value-creating, for example when consumers contribute to the marketing and branding of specific products by posting positive reviews. As such, value-creating activities also increase the value of a specific product, which could, according to the marketing professors Bernad Cova and Daniele Dalli, lead to what they refer to as "double exploitation".[137] Companies are getting consumers to create content for the companies' websites for which the consumers are not paid.
Launching new campaign through social media[edit]
In term of trading, social media is a significant factor that helps companies build a strong brand and make a lasting impression on target customers. Similarity, establishing branding online can also help to remain an active online presence for any businesses. For instance, Magnum has launched its new campaign ‘Release the Beast’ and ‘Dare to go double’, the campaigns encourage Magnum fans to challenge themselves by releasing their wild side (Mortimer, N., 2016).[138] The company has taken advantages of social media such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and YouTube to reach more prospective users (Levine et al.,2000).[139] The campaign achieved its marketing objective by 80 per cent of users interested in the new campaign in 2016 (Mintel academic).[140] Therefore, the use of social media helps to gain the traffic and subscribers to the websites (Blackshaw and Nazzaro 2004).[141]  Social media sites have also been criticized for failing to do more to prevent terrorist organisations using it as a way to radicalize vulnerable people.[142]
Selective exposure[edit]
While selective exposure has been seen in many aspects of human life, social media has arguably created a greater avenue for people to actively participate in selective exposure. Selective exposure generally refers to people's tendencies to favor information that reinforces their ideas and reject information that opposes their ideas. As technology has become increasingly more personalized, the prevalence of selective exposure has increased. With technology such as televisions, people became able to choose from which organization they received news. A survey done by The Pew Research Center found Democrats 1.5 times more likely to watch CNN than Republicans and Republicans 1.5 times more likely to watch FOX News than Democrats. These results were magnified when examining more opinion based talk shows such as The O'Reilly Factor.[143] Subsequently, the political opinions of Republicans or Democrats who exclusively tuned into media outlets affirming their own views were significantly more polarized.[144] As social media makes selective exposure even easier through its features such as a news feed filled with media from sources which consumers actively follow, critics argue that the currently visible effects, both political and not, of selective exposure will only be magnified.[145][146] A recent study by Hayat and Samuel-Azran (2017) looked at online media exposure during the 2016 U.S. election primaries. The authors found evidences for ideological homophily among the followers of the twitter handles of different cable news shows. The followers of The O'Reilly Factor, were predominantly republicans, while the followers of The Rachel Maddow Show, where predominantly democrats. Hayat and Samuel-Azran further found that there was very little cross-camp interactions between democrats and republicans, and that users who were more active in posting content while watching news shows, were the least likely to be involved in cross camp interaction.
Harmful effects[edit]
There are several negative effects to social media which receive criticism, for example regarding privacy issues,[147] information overload[148] and Internet fraud. Social media can also have negative social effects on users. Angry or emotional conversations can lead to real-world interactions outside of the Internet, which can get users into dangerous situations. Some users have experienced threats of violence online and have feared these threats manifesting themselves offline. Studies also show that social media have negative effects on peoples' self-esteem and self-worth. The authors of "Who Compares and Despairs? The Effect of Social Comparison Orientation on Social Media Use and its Outcomes"[149] found that people with a higher social comparison orientation appear to use social media more heavily than people with low social comparison orientation. This finding was consistent with other studies that found people with high social comparison orientation make more social comparisons once on social media. People compare their own lives to the lives of their friends through their friends' posts. People are motivated to portray themselves in a way that is appropriate to the situation and serves their best interest. Often the things posted online are the positive aspects of people's lives, making other people question why their own lives are not as exciting or fulfilling. This can lead to depression and other self-esteem issues aswell as decrease their satisfaction of life as they feel if their life is not exciting enough to put online it is not as good as their friends or family.[150] Studies have shown that self comparison on social media can have dire effects on physical and mental health because they give us the ability to seek approval and compare ourselves.[151] Social media has both a practical usage- to connect us with others, but also can lead to fulfillment of gratification.[152] In fact, one study suggests that because a critical aspect of social networking sites involve spending hours, if not months customizing a personal profile, and encourage a sort of social currency based on likes, followers and comments- they provide a forum for persistent "appearance conversations".[153] These appearance centered conversations that forums like Facebook, Instagram among others provide can lead to feelings of disappointment in looks and personality when not enough likes or comments are achieved. In addition, social media use can lead to detrimental physical health effects. A large body of literature associates body image and disordered eating with social networking platforms. Specifically, literature suggests that social media can breed a negative feedback loop of viewing and uploading photos, self comparison, feelings of disappointment when perceived social success is not achieved, and disordered body perception.[154] In fact, one study shows that the microblogging platform, Pintrest is directly associated with disordered dieting behavior, indicating that for those who frequently look at exercise or dieting "pins" there is a greater chance that they will engage in extreme weight-loss and dieting behavior.[155]
Three researchers at Blanquerna University, Spain, examined how adolescents interact with social media and specifically Facebook. They suggest that interactions on the website encourage representing oneself in the traditional gender constructs, which helps maintain gender stereotypes.[156] The authors noted that girls generally show more emotion in their posts and more frequently change their profile pictures, which according to some psychologists can lead to self-objectification.[157] On the other hand, the researchers found that boys prefer to portray themselves as strong, independent, and powerful.[158] For example, men often post pictures of objects and not themselves, and rarely change their profile pictures; using the pages more for entertainment and pragmatic reasons. In contrast girls generally post more images that include themselves, friends and things they have emotional ties to, which the researchers attributed that to the higher emotional intelligence of girls at a younger age. The authors sampled over 632 girls and boys from the ages of 12–16 from Spain in an effort to confirm their beliefs. The researchers concluded that masculinity is more commonly associated with a positive psychological well-being, while femininity displays less psychological well-being.[159] Furthermore, the researchers discovered that people tend not to completely conform to either stereotype, and encompass desirable parts of both. Users of Facebook generally use their profile to reflect that they are a "normal" person. Social media was found to uphold gender stereotypes both feminine and masculine. The researchers also noted that the traditional stereotypes are often upheld by boys more so than girls. The authors described how neither stereotype was entirely positive, but most people viewed masculine values as more positive.
Terri H. Chan, the author of "Facebook and its Effects on Users' Empathic Social Skills and Life Satisfaction: A Double Edged Sword Effect",[160] claims that the more time people spend on Facebook, the less satisfied they feel about their life. Self-presentational theory explains that people will consciously manage their self-image or identity related information in social contexts. According to Gina Chen, the author of Losing Face on Social Media: Threats to Positive Face Lead to an Indirect Effect on Retaliatory Aggression Through Negative Affect,[161] when people are not accepted or are criticized online they feel emotional pain. This may lead to some form of online retaliation such as online bullying.[162] Trudy Hui Hui Chua and Leanne Chang's article, "Follow Me and Like My Beautiful Selfies: Singapore Teenage Girls' Engagement in Self-Presentation and Peer Comparison on Social Media"[163] states that teenage girls manipulate their self-presentation on social media to achieve a sense of beauty that is projected by their peers. These authors also discovered that teenage girls compare themselves to their peers on social media and present themselves in certain ways in effort to earn regard and acceptance, which can actually lead to problems with self-confidence and self-satisfaction.[163]
According to research from UCLA, teenage brains' reward circuits were more active when teenager's photos were liked by more peers. This has both positive and negative features. Teenagers and young adults befriend people online whom they don't know well. This opens the possibility of a child being influenced by people who engage in risk-taking behavior. When children have several hundred friends online there is no way for parents to know who they are.[164]
According to writer Christine Rosen in "Virtual Friendship, and the New Narcissism," many social media sites encourage status-seeking.[165] According to Rosen, the practice and definition of "friendship" changes in virtuality. Friendship "in these virtual spaces is thoroughly different from real-world friendship. In its traditional sense, friendship is a relationship which, broadly speaking, involves the sharing of mutual interests, reciprocity, trust, and the revelation of intimate details over time and within specific social (and cultural) contexts. Because friendship depends on mutual revelations that are concealed from the rest of the world, it can only flourish within the boundaries of privacy; the idea of public friendship is an oxymoron." Rosen also cites Brigham Young University researchers who "recently surveyed 184 users of social networking sites and found that heavy users 'feel less socially involved with the community around them.'" Critic Nicholas G. Carr in "Is Google Making Us Stupid?" questions how technology affects cognition and memory.[166] "The kind of deep reading that a sequence of printed pages promotes is valuable not just for the knowledge we acquire from the author's words but for the intellectual vibrations those words set off within our own minds. In the quiet spaces opened up by the sustained, undistracted reading of a book, or by any other act of contemplation, for that matter, we make our own associations, draw our own inferences and analogies, foster our own ideas... If we lose those quiet spaces, or fill them up with "content," we will sacrifice something important not only in our selves but in our culture."
Bo Han, a social media researcher at Texas A&M University-Commerce, finds that users are likely to experience the "social media burnout" issue.[167] Ambivalence, emotional exhaustion, and depersonalization are usually the main symptoms if a user experiences social media burnout. Ambivalence refers to a user's confusion about the benefits she can get from using a social media site. Emotional exhaustion refers to the stress a user has when using a social media site. Depersonalization refers to the emotional detachment from a social media site a user experiences. The three burnout factors can all negatively influence the user's social media continuance. This study provides an instrument to measure the burnout a user can experience, when her social media "friends" are generating an overwhelming amount of useless information (e.g., "what I had for dinner", "where I am now").
Impact on health[edit]
According to a recent article by Malak Rafla, Nicholas J. Carson and Sandra M. DeJong, it has been brought to the medical professional's attention that excessive use of technology by teenagers has caused disruptions in their physical and mental health, in sleeping patterns, their weight and levels of exercise and notably in their school work. The authors continue to say that in previous studies long hours spent on mobile devices have shown a positive relationship with an increase in teenagers BMI and a lack of physical activity. Moreover, heavy Internet users seemingly receiver lower grades than users who don't spend an excessive amount of time online, even with a control over age, gender, race, parent education and personal contentment factors that may affect the study.[168] Many teenagers suffer from sleep deprivation as they spend long hours at night on their phones, and this in turn will affect grades as they will be tired and unfocused in school. Social media has generated a phenomenon known as " Facebook depression", which is a type of depression that effects adolescents who spend too much of their free time engaging with social media sites. "Facebook depression" leads to problems such as reclusiveness which can negatively damage ones health by creating feelings of loneliness and low self-esteem among young people.[169] At the same time, a recent study entitled "Problematic Social Media Use: Results from a large-scale Nationally Representative Adolescent Sample" (Bányai et al., 2017) has shown that there is a link between social media addiction and negative mental health effects. In this study which took place in Hungary, 5,961 adolescent students were examined using the Bergen Social Media Addiction Scale. 4.5% of these students were found to be "at risk" of social media addiction. Furthermore, this same 4.5%, when examined using the "Rosenberg's Self-Esteem Scale" and the "Centre of Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale" reported low self-esteem and high levels of depressive symptoms. This study concludes that these scales referred to above should be used in the future in the prevention and intervention of social media addiction in schools.[170]
Beneficial effects[edit]
In the book Networked – The New Social Operating System by Lee Rainie and Barry Wellman, the two authors reflect on mainly positive effects of social media and other Internet-based social networks. According to the authors, social media are used to document memories, learn about and explore things, advertise oneself and form friendships as well as the growth of ideas from the creation of blogs, podcasts, videos and gaming sites.[171] For instance, they claim that the communication through Internet based services can be done more privately than in real life. Furthermore, Rainie and Wellman discuss that everybody has the possibility to become a content creator. Content creation provides networked individuals opportunities to reach wider audiences. Moreover, it can positively affect their social standing and gain political support. This can lead to influence on issues that are important for someone. As a concrete example of the positive effects of social media, the authors use the Tunisian revolution in 2011, where people used Facebook to gather meetings, protest actions, etc.[85] Rainie and Wellman (Ibid) also discuss that content creation is a voluntary and participatory act. What is important is that networked individuals create, edit, and manage content in collaboration with other networked individuals. This way they contribute in expanding knowledge. Wikis are examples of collaborative content creation.
A survey conducted (in 2011), by Pew Internet Research, discussed in Lee Rainie and Barry Wellman's Networked – The New Social Operating System, illustrates that 'networked individuals' are engaged to a further extent regarding numbers of content creation activities and that the 'networked individuals' are increasing over a larger age span. These are some of the content creation activities that networked individuals take part in:

writing material, such as text or online comments, on a social networking site such as Facebook: 65% of Internet users do this
sharing digital photos: 55%
contributing rankings and reviews of products or services: 37%
creating "tags" of content, such as tagging songs by genre: 33%
posting comments on third-party websites or blogs: 26%
taking online material and remixing it into a new creation: 15% of Internet users do this with photos, video, audio, or text
creating or working on a blog: 14%

Another survey conducted (in 2015) by Pew Internet Research shows that the Internet users among American adults who uses at least one social networking site has increased from 10% to 76% since 2005. Pew Internet Research illustrates furthermore that it nowadays is no real gender difference among Americans when it comes to social media usage. Women were even more active on social media a couple of years ago, however today's numbers point at women: 68%, and men: 62%.[172] Social media have been used to assist in searches for missing persons. When 21-year-old University of Cincinnati student Brogan Dulle disappeared in May 2014 from near his apartment in the Clifton neighborhood of Cincinnati, Ohio, his friends and family used social media to organize and fund a search effort.[173][174][175] The disappearance made international news[176][177][178][179][180][181][182][183] when their efforts went viral[173][184] on Facebook, Twitter, GoFundMe, and The Huffington Post during the week-long search. Dulle's body was eventually found in a building next door to his apartment.[185][186][187][188][undue weight? – discuss] Social media was brought up as a strategy to try and help bring together the community and police force. It is a way for the police force to show their progress to the community on issues they are dealing with.[189]
Impact on job seeking[edit]




If a young person posts photos on social media of themselves using drugs, this could adversely affect their chance of getting some types of jobs.


Use of social media by young people has caused significant problems for some applicants who are active on social media when they try to enter the job market. A survey of 17,000 young people in six countries in 2013 found that 1 in 10 people aged 16 to 34 have been rejected for a job because of online comments they made on social media websites.[190] A 2014 survey of recruiters found that 93% of them check candidates' social media postings.[191] Moreover, professor Stijn Baert of Ghent University conducted a field experiment in which fictitious job candidates applied for real job vacancies in Belgium. They were identical except in one respect: their Facebook profile photos. It was found that candidates with the most wholesome photos were a lot more likely to receive invitations for job interviews than those with the more controversial photos. In addition, Facebook profile photos had a greater impact on hiring decisions when candidates were highly educated.[192] These cases have created some privacy implications as to whether or not companies should have the right to look at employee's Facebook profiles. In March 2012, Facebook decided they might take legal action against employers for gaining access to employee's profiles through their passwords.[193] According to Facebook Chief Privacy Officer for policy, Erin Egan, the company has worked hard to give its users the tools to control who sees their information. He also said users shouldn't be forced to share private information and communications just to get a job. According to the network's Statement of Rights and Responsibilities, sharing or soliciting a password is a violation of Facebook policy. Employees may still give their password information out to get a job, but according to Erin Egan, Facebook will continue to do their part to protect the privacy and security of their users.[194]
College admission[edit]




If a college applicant has posted photos of engaging in activities that are contrary to college rules or values, it could adversely affect their chances of getting in.


Before social media,[195] admissions officials in the United States used SAT and other standardized test scores, extra-curricular activities, letters of recommendation, and high school report cards to determine whether to accept or deny an applicant. In the 2010s, while colleges and universities still use these traditional methods to evaluate applicants, these institutions are increasingly accessing applicants' social media profiles to learn about their character and activities. According to Kaplan, Inc, a corporation that provides higher education preparation, in 2012 27% of admissions officers used Google to learn more about an applicant, with 26% checking Facebook.[196] Students whose social media pages include offensive jokes or photos, racist or homophobic comments, photos depicting the applicant engaging in illegal drug use or drunkenness, and so on, may be screened out from admission processes.
Political effects[edit]
See also: Social impact of YouTube and Use of social media in the Wisconsin protests






This article reads like a press release or a news article or is entirely based on routine coverage. Please expand this article with properly sourced content to meet Wikipedia's quality standards, event notability guideline, or encyclopedic content policy. (June 2016)



People[who?] are increasingly getting political news and information from social media platforms. A 2014 study showed that 62% of web users turn to Facebook to find political news.[197] This social phenomenon allows for political information, true or not, to spread quickly and easily among peer networks. Furthermore, social media sites are now encouraging political involvement by uniting like-minded people, reminding users to vote in elections, and analyzing users' political affiliation data to find cultural similarities and differences.[198] Social media can help taint the reputation of political figures fairly quickly with information that may or may not be true. Information spreads like wildfire and before a politician can even get an opportunity to address the information, either to confirm, deny, or explain, the public has already formed an opinion about the politician based on that information. However, when conducted on purpose, the spread of information on social media for political means can help campaigns immensely. The Barack Obama presidential campaign, 2008, is considered to be one of the most successful in terms of social media. On the other hand, negative word-of-mouth in social media concerning a political figure can be very unfortunate for a politician and can cost the politician his/her career if the information is very damaging.[199] For example, Anthony Weiner's use of the social media platform Twitter to send inappropriate messages eventually led to his resignation from U.S. Congress.[200]
Open forums online have led to some negative[according to whom?] effects in the political sphere. Some politicians[who?] have made the mistake of using open forums to try to reach a broader audience and thus more potential voters. What they forgot to account for was that the forums would be open to everyone, including those in opposition. Having no control over the comments being posted, negative included, has been damaging for some with unfortunate oversight. Additionally, a constraint of social media as a tool for public political discourse is that if oppressive governments recognize the ability social media has to cause change, they shut it down.[201] During the peak of the Egyptian Revolution of 2011, the Internet and social media played a huge role in facilitating information. At that time, Hosni Mubarak was the president of Egypt and head the regime for almost 30 years. Mubarak was so threatened by the immense power that the Internet and social media gave the people that the government successfully shut down the Internet, using the Ramses Exchange, for a period of time in February 2011.[202]
Social media as an open forum gives a voice to those who have previously not had the ability to be heard. In 2015, some countries were still becoming equipped with Internet accessibility and other technologies. Social media is giving everyone a voice to speak out against government regimes. In 2014, the rural areas in Paraguay were only just receiving access to social media, such as Facebook. In congruence with the users worldwide, teens and young adults in Paraguay are drawn to Facebook and others types of social media as a means to self-express. Social media is becoming a main conduit for social mobilization and government critiques because, "the government can't control what we say on the Internet."[203]
Younger generations are becoming more involved in politics due to the increase of political news posted on various types of social media. Due to the heavier use of social media among younger generations, they are exposed to politics more frequently, and in a way that is integrated into their online social lives. While informing younger generations of political news is important, there are many biases within the realms of social media. It can be difficult for outsiders to truly understand the conditions of dissent when they are removed from direct involvement.[204] Social media can create a false sense of understanding among people who are not directly involved in the issue. An example of social media creating misconceptions can be seen during the Arab Spring protests. Today's generation rely heavily on social media to understand what is happening in the world, and consequently people are exposed to both true and false information. For example, Americans have several misconceptions surrounding the events of the Arab Springs movement.[205] Social media can be used to create political change, both major and minor. For example, in 2011 Egyptians used Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube as a means to communicate and organize demonstrations and rallies to overthrow President Hosni Mubarak. Statistics show that during this time the rate of Tweets from Egypt increased from 2,300 to 230,000 per day and the top 23 protest videos had approximately 5.5 million views.[206]
Beneficial versus harmful effects of Twitter[edit]
People around the world are taking advantage of social media as one of their key components of communication. According to King, 67 percent of US citizens ages 12 and up use social media of some type.[207] With the expansion of social media networks there are many positive and negative alternatives. As the use of Twitter increases, its influence impacts users as well. The potential role of Twitter as a means of both service feedback and a space in which mental health can be openly discussed and considered from a variety of perspectives.[208] The study conducted shows a positive outlook for using Twitter to discuss health issues with a patient and a professional, in this case alcohol. On the other hand, there can be negatives that arise from the use of social media. If a clinician prescribes abstinence from alcohol but then posts pictures on social media of one's own drunken exploits, the clinician's credibility is potentially lost in the eyes of the patient.[209] In these two studies, both negative and positive outcomes were examined. Although social media can be beneficial, it is important to understand the negative consequences as well.
Use by militant groups[edit]
As the world is becoming increasingly connected via the power of the Internet, political movements, including militant groups, have begun to see social media as a major organizing and recruiting tool.[210] Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, also known as ISIS, has used social media to promote their cause. ISIS produces an online magazine named the Islamic State Report to recruit more fighters.[211][212] ISIS produces online materials in a number of languages and uses recruiters to contact potential recruitees over the Internet.
In Canada, two girls from Montreal left their country to join ISIS in Syria after exploring ISIS on social media and eventually being recruited. On Twitter, there is an app called the Dawn of Glad Tidings that users can download and keep up to date on news about ISIS.[citation needed] Hundreds of users around the world have signed up for the app which once downloaded will post tweets and hash-tags to your[who?] account that are in support of ISIS. As ISIS marched on the northern region of Iraq, tweets in support of their efforts reached a high of 40,000 a day.[212] ISIS support online is a factor in the radicalization of youth. Mass media has yet to adopt the view that social media plays a vital link in the radicalization of people. When tweets supportive of ISIS make their way onto Twitter, they result in 72 re-tweets to the original, which further spreads the message of ISIS.[212] These tweets have made their way to the account known as active hashtags, which further helps broadcast ISIS's message as the account sends out to its followers the most popular hashtags of the day. Other militant groups such as al-Qaeda and the Taliban are increasingly using social media to raise funds, recruit and radicalize persons, and it has become increasingly effective.
Patents[edit]
Main article: Software patent




Number of US social network patent applications published and patents issued per year since 2003. The chart shows that the number of software applications published (the green bars) increased steadily from 2003 to 2007, and then shot up from 2008 to 2010.[213]


There has been rapid growth in the number of US patent applications that cover new technologies related to social media, and the number of them that are published has been growing rapidly over the past five years. There are now over 2000 published patent applications.[214] As many as 7000 applications may be currently on file including those that haven't been published yet. Only slightly over 100 of these applications have issued as patents, however, largely due to the multi-year backlog in examination of business method patents, patents which outline and claim new methods of doing business.[215]
In the classroom[edit]
Having social media in the classroom has been a controversial topic in the 2010s. Many parents and educators have been fearful of the repercussions of having social media in the classroom.[216] There are concerns that social media tools can be misused for cyberbullying or sharing inappropriate content. As result, cell phones have been banned from some classrooms, and some schools have blocked many popular social media websites. However, despite apprehensions, students in industrialized countries are (or will be) active social media users. As a result, many schools have realized that they need to loosen restrictions, teach digital citizenship skills, and even incorporate these tools into classrooms. The Peel District School Board (PDSB) in Ontario is one of many school boards that has begun to accept the use of social media in the classroom. In 2013, the PDSB introduced a "Bring Your Own Device" (BYOD) policy and have unblocked many social media sites.[217] Fewkes and McCabe (2012) have researched about the benefits of using Facebook in the classroom.[218] Some schools permit students to use smartphones or tablet computers in class, as long as the students are using these devices for academic purposes, such as doing research.
Wikipedia[edit]




Wikipedia is an online user-edited encyclopedia. Its users can register as "editors", which allows them to create a user profile.


In early 2013, Steve Joordens, a professor at the University of Toronto, encouraged the 1,900 students enrolled in his introductory psychology course to add content to Wikipedia pages featuring content that related to the course. Like other educators,[219] Joordens argued that the assignment would not only strengthen the site's psychology-related content, but also provide an opportunity for students to engage in critical reflection about the negotiations involved in collaborative knowledge production. However, Wikipedia's all-volunteer editorial staff complained that the students' contributions resulted in an overwhelming number of additions to the site, and that some of the contributions were inaccurate.[220]
Facebook and the classroom[edit]
Using Facebook in class allows for both an asynchronous and synchronous, open speech via a familiar and regularly accessed medium, and supports the integration of multimodal content such as student-created photographs and video and URLs to other texts, in a platform that many students are already familiar with. Further, it allows students to ask more minor questions that they might not otherwise feel motivated to visit a professor in person during office hours to ask.[221] It also allows students to manage their own privacy settings, and often work with the privacy settings they have already established as registered users. Facebook is one alternative means for shyer students to be able to voice their thoughts in and outside of the classroom. It allows students to collect their thoughts and articulate them in writing before committing to their expression.[221] Further, the level of informality typical to Facebook can also aid students in self-expression and encourage more frequent student-and-instructor and student-and-student communication. At the same time, Towner and Munoz note that this informality may actually drive many educators and students away from using Facebook for educational purposes.
From a course management perspective, Facebook may be less efficient as a replacement for more conventional course management systems, both because of its limitations with regards to uploading assignments and due to some students' (and educators') resistance to its use in education. Specifically, there are features of student-to-student collaboration that may be conducted more efficiently on dedicated course management systems, such as the organization of posts in a nested and linked format. That said, a number of studies suggest that students post to discussion forums more frequently and are generally more active discussants on Facebook posts versus conventional course management systems like WebCT or Blackboard (Chu and Meulemans, 2008; Salaway, et al., 2008; Schroeder and Greenbowe, 2009).[222][223][224]
Further, familiarity and comfortability with Facebook is often divided by socio-economic class, with students whose parents obtained a college degree, or at least having attended college for some span of time, being more likely to already be active users.[225] Instructors ought to seriously consider and respect these hesitancies, and refrain from "forcing" Facebook on their students for academic purposes.[226][227] Instructors also ought to consider that rendering Facebook optional, but continuing to provide content through it to students who elect to use it, places an unfair burden on hesitant students, who then are forced to choose between using a technology they are uncomfortable with and participating fully in the course. A related limitation, particularly at the level of K-12 schooling, is the distrust (and in some cases, outright prohibition) of the use of Facebook in formal classroom settings in many educational jurisdictions. However, this hesitancy towards Facebook use is continually diminishing in the United States, as the Pew Internet & American Life Project's annual report for 2012 shows that the likelihood of a person to be a registered Facebook user only fluctuates by 13 percent between different levels of educational attainment, 9 percent between urban, suburban, and rural users, only 5 percent between different household income brackets. The largest gap occurs between age brackets, with 86 percent of 18- to 29-year-olds reported as registered users as opposed to only 35 percent of 65-and-up-year-old users.[228]
Twitter[edit]




A chart showing the content of "Tweets"–messages posted online on Twitter. By far, the largest categories of "Tweeting" were "pointless babble" and "controversial" topics.


Twitter can be used to enhance communication building and critical thinking. Domizi (2013) utilized Twitter in a graduate seminar requiring students to post weekly tweets to extend classroom discussions. Students reportedly used Twitter to connect with content and other students. Additionally, students found it "to be useful professionally and personally".[91] Junco, Heibergert, and Loken (2011) completed a study of 132 students to examine the link between social media and student engagement and social media and grades. They divided the students into two groups, one used Twitter and the other did not. Twitter was used to discuss material, organize study groups, post class announcements, and connect with classmates. Junco and his colleagues (2011) found that the students in the Twitter group had higher GPAs and greater engagement scores than the control group.[229]
Gao, Luo, and Zhang (2012) reviewed literature about Twitter published between 2008 and 2011. They concluded that Twitter allowed students to participate with each other in class (by creating an informal "back channel"), and extend discussion outside of class time. They also reported that students used Twitter to get up-to-date news and connect with professionals in their field. Students reported that microblogging encouraged students to "participate at a higher level".[230] Because the posts cannot exceed 140 characters, students were required to express ideas, reflect, and focus on important concepts in a concise manner. Some students found this very beneficial. Other students did not like the character limit. Also, some students found microblogging to be overwhelming (information overload). The research indicated that many students did not actually participate in the discussions, "they just lurked" online and watched the other participants.[230]
Impact of retweeting on Twitter[edit]
A popular component and feature of Twitter is retweeting. Twitter allows other people to keep up with important events, stay connected with their peers, and can contribute in various ways throughout social media.[231] When certain posts become popular, they start to get tweeted over and over again, becoming viral. Ellen DeGeneres is a prime example of this. She was a host during the 86th Academy Awards,[232] when she took the opportunity to take a selfie with about twelve other celebrities that joined in on the highlight of the night,[233] including Jennifer Lawrence, Brad Pitt and Julia Roberts.[234] This picture went viral within forty minutes and was retweeted 1.8 million times within the first hour.[232] This was an astonishing record for Twitter and the use of selfies, which other celebrities have tried to recreate. In May 2017, Carter Wilkerson's tweet at Wendy's asking what it would take to get free chicken nuggets for a year surpassed Ellen DeGeneres' famous tweet with over 3 million retweets.[235] Retweeting is beneficial strategy, which notifies individuals on Twitter about popular trends, posts, and events.[236] The use of hashtags can also be used in retweets, and can be used to take count of how many people have used that hashtag. For example in the first five months of 2013, five new hashtags relating to climate change were created. [237]
YouTube[edit]
See also: Social impact of YouTube
YouTube is a frequently used social media tool in the classroom (also the second most visited website in the world).[238][not in citation given] Students can watch videos, answer questions, and discuss content. Additionally, students can create videos to share with others. Sherer and Shea (2011) claimed that YouTube increased participation, personalization (customization), and productivity. YouTube also improved students' digital skills and provided opportunity for peer learning and problem solving[239] Eick et al. (2012) found that videos kept students' attention, generated interest in the subject, and clarified course content.[240] Additionally, the students reported that the videos helped them recall information and visualize real world applications of course concepts.
LinkedIn[edit]
LinkedIn is a professional social network that enables employers and job-seeking workers to connect. It was created by Reid Hoffman in 2002 and was launched in May 2003. LinkedIn is now the world's largest professional social network with over 300 million members in over 200 countries. The mission of LinkedIn is to "connect the world's professionals to make them more productive and successful."[241] A lot of people describe LinkedIn as a "professional Facebook", but it is important to remember that LinkedIn is not Facebook. Users tend to avoid informal nicknames and any inappropriate pictures of their private lives in their profile. Instead, they use a standard headshot as a profile picture and keep the content and information as professional and career-focused as possible. Most LinkedIn users put their CV online. Some also provide a list of the courses they have taken in college or university. Users can also post articles that they have written or published, which enables prospective employers to see their written work.
There are over 39 million students and recent college graduates on LinkedIn, becoming the fastest-growing demographic on the site.[242] There are many ways that LinkedIn can be used in the classroom. First and foremost, using LinkedIn in the classroom encourages students to have a professional online social presence and can help them become comfortable in searching for a job or internship. "The key to making LinkedIn a great social learning tool is to encourage learners to build credibility through their profiles, so that experts and professionals won't think twice about connecting with them and share knowledge."[243] Dedicating class time solely for the purpose of setting up LinkedIn accounts and showing students how to navigate it and build their profile will set them up for success in the future. Next, professors can create assignments that involve using LinkedIn as a research tool. The search tool in LinkedIn gives students the opportunity to seek out organizations they are interested in and allow them to learn more.
Giving students the class time to work on their LinkedIn profile allows them to network with each other, and stresses the importance of networking. Finally, professors can design activities that revolve around resume building and interviews. A person's LinkedIn and resume are what employers look at first, and they need to know how to make a strong first impression. It's important to learn how to construct a strong resume as soon as possible, as well as learn strong interviewing skills. Not only is the information and skills learned in the classroom important, but it is also important to know how to apply the information and skills to their LinkedIn profile so they can get a job in their field of study. These skills can be gained while incorporating LinkedIn into the classroom.[243]
Advertising[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (May 2014)



Use of social media personalities in advertising[edit]
In recent years, social media personalities (also known as digital influencers) have been employed by marketers to promote products online. Research shows that digital influencer endorsements seem to be successfully targeting social media users,[244] especially younger consumers who have grown up in the digital age.[245] Celebrities with large social media followings, such as Kylie Jenner, regularly endorse products to their followers on their social media pages.[246] This practice has become controversial in recent years, as some feel that the endorsements are too implicit, and consumers may not realise that a celebrity's post has been paid for or sponsored by a corporate entity. This has led to some broadcasting authorities imposing regulations on product endorsement by digital celebrities in order to make the endorsements more explicit.[247][248]
Tweets containing advertising[edit]
In 2013, the United Kingdom Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) began to advise celebrities and sports stars to make it clear if they had been paid to tweet about a product or service by using the hashtag #spon or #ad within tweets containing endorsements. In July 2013, Wayne Rooney was accused of misleading followers by not including either of these tags in a tweet promoting Nike. The tweet read:"The pitches change. The killer instinct doesn't. Own the turf, anywhere. @NikeFootball #myground."[249] The tweet was investigated by the ASA but no charges were pressed. The ASA stated that "We considered the reference to Nike Football was prominent and clearly linked the tweet with the Nike brand."[249] When asked about whether the number of complaints regarding misleading social advertising had increased, the ASA stated that the number of complaints had risen marginally since 2011 but that complaints were "very low" in the "grand scheme."[250]
Censorship incidents[edit]
Main article: Internet censorship




Banner in Bangkok, observed on the 30th of June 2014, informing the Thai public that 'like' or 'share' activity on social media may land them in jail


Social media often features in political struggles to control public perception and online activity. In some countries, Internet police or secret police monitor or control citizens' use of social media. For example, in 2013 some social media was banned in Turkey after the Taksim Gezi Park protests. Both Twitter and YouTube were temporarily suspended in the country by a court's decision. A new law, passed by Turkish Parliament, has granted immunity to Telecommunications Directorate (TİB) personnel. The TİB was also given the authority to block access to specific websites without the need for a court order.[251] Yet TİB's 2014 blocking of Twitter was ruled by the constitutional court to violate free speech.[252] More recently, in the 2014 Thai coup d'état, the public was explicitly instructed not to 'share' or 'like' dissenting views on social media or face prison. In July that same year, in response to Wikileaks' release of a secret suppression order made by the Victorian Supreme Court, media lawyers were quoted in the Australian media to the effect that "anyone who tweets a link to the Wikileaks report, posts it on Facebook, or shares it in any way online could also face charges".[253]
Effects on youth communication[edit]
Social media has affected the way youth communicate, by introducing new forms of language.[254] Abbreviations have been introduced to cut down on the time it takes to respond online. The commonly known "LOL" has become globally recognized as the abbreviation for "laugh out loud" thanks to social media.[254] Online linguistics has changed the way youth communicate and will continue to do so in the future, as each year new catchphrases and neologisms such as "YOLO", which stands for "you only live once", and "BAE", which stands for "before anyone else" arise and start "trending" around the world.[255]
Other trends that influence the way youth communicate is through hashtags. With the introduction of social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook and Instagram, the hashtag was created to easily organize and search for information. As hashtags such as #tbt ("throwback Thursday") become a part of online communication, it influenced the way in which youth share and communicate in their daily lives.[254] Because of these changes in linguistics and communication etiquette, researchers of media semiotics have found that this has altered youth's communications habits and more.[254]
Social media also alters the way we understand each other. Social media has allowed for mass cultural exchange and intercultural communication. For example, people from different regions or even different countries can discuss current issues on Facebook. As different cultures have different value systems, cultural themes, grammar, and worldviews, they also communicate differently.[256] The emergence of social media platforms collided different cultures and their communication methods together, forcing them to realign in order to communicate with ease with other cultures.[256] As different cultures continue to connect through social media platforms, thinking patterns, expression styles and cultural content that influence cultural values are chipped away.[256] Social media has offered a new platform for peer pressure with both positive and negative communication. From Facebook comments to likes on Instagram, how the youth communicate and what is socially acceptable is now heavily based on social media.[257]
See also[edit]


Arab Spring, where social media played a defining role
Augmented reality
Citizen media
Coke Zero Facial Profiler
Connectivism (learning theory)
Connectivity of social media
Culture jamming
Human impact of Internet use
Internet and political revolutions
List of photo sharing websites
List of video sharing websites
List of social networking websites
Media psychology
Metcalfe's law
MMORPG
Networked learning
New media
Online presence management
Online research community
Participatory media
Social media marketing
Social media mining
Social media optimization
Social media surgery


References[edit]


^ a b c d e f g h i j k Obar, Jonathan A.; Wildman, Steve (2015). "Social media definition and the governance challenge: An introduction to the special issue". Telecommunications policy. 39 (9): 745–750. doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2015.07.014. SSRN 2647377 . 
^ a b c d Kaplan Andreas M., Haenlein Michael (2010). "Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of social media" (PDF). Business Horizons. 53 (1): 61. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ a b c d e boyd, danah m.; Ellison, Nicole B. (2007). "Social Network Sites: Definition, History, and Scholarship". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 13 (1): 210–30. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00393.x. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j Kietzmann, Jan H.; Kristopher Hermkens (2011). "Social media? Get serious! Understanding the functional building blocks of social media". Business Horizons. 54 (3): 241–251. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2011.01.005. 
^ a b Agichtein, Eugene; Carlos Castillo. Debora Donato; Aristides Gionis; Gilad Mishne (2008). "Finding high-quality content in social media". WISDOM – Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining: 183–193. 
^ Pavlik & MacIntoch, John and Shawn (2015). Converging Media 4th Edition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. p. 189. ISBN 978-0-19-934230-3. 
^ O'Keefe, Gwenn Schuirgin (2011). "The Impact of Social Media on Children, Adolescents and Families" (PDF). Pediatrics. 127 (4): 801–805. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-0054 . PMID 21444588. 
^ Hajirnis, Aditi (2015-12-01). "Social media networking: Parent guidance required". The Brown University Child and Adolescent Behavior Letter. 31 (12): 1–7. doi:10.1002/cbl.30086. 
^ "State of the media: The social media report 2012". Featured Insights, Global, Media + Entertainment. Nielsen. Retrieved 9 December 2012. 
^ Tang, Qian; Gu, Bin; Whinston, Andrew B. (2012). "Content Contribution for Revenue Sharing and Reputation in Social Media: A Dynamic Structural Model". Journal of Management Information Systems. 29 (2): 41–75. doi:10.2753/mis0742-1222290203. 
^ "Cyberbullying Statistics". NObullying.com. Retrieved November 21, 2016. 
^ Chapin, John (2016). "Adolescents and Cyber Bullying: The Precaution Adoption Process Model". Education and Information Technologies. 21 (4): 719–728. doi:10.1007/s10639-014-9349-1. 
^ Peebles, E (2014). "Cyberbullying: Hiding behind the screen". Pediatrics Child Health. 
^ Schejter, A.M.; Tirosh, N. (2015). ""Seek the meek, seek the just": Social media and social justice". Telecommunications Policy. 39 (9): 796–803. doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2015.08.002. 
^ "Dictionary and Thesaurus | Merriam-Webster". www.merriam-webster.com. Retrieved 2016-08-10. 
^ a b Aichner, T. and Jacob, F. (March 2015). "Measuring the Degree of Corporate Social Media Use". International Journal of Market Research. 57 (2): 257–275. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Christensson, Per. "Social Media Definition." TechTerms. (August 7, 2013). Accessed Oct 16, 2016. http://techterms.com/definition/social_media.
^ "Snapchat". www.snapchat.com. Retrieved 2016-11-01. 
^ Kirkpatrick, David (2011). The Facebook effect: the real inside story of Mark Zuckerberg and the world's fastest-growing company. London: Virgin. 
^ Nielsen Company. "Social Networks Blogs Now Account for One in Every Four and a Half Minutes Onlin". Nielsen. Retrieved 30 April 2015. 
^ Metzger, Justin. "Cell phones". 
^ a b c d e f g Kaplan, Andreas M. (March–April 2012). "If you love something, let it go mobile: Mobile marketing and mobile social media 4x4". Business Horizons. 55 (2): 129–139. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2011.10.009. 
^ Dunay, Paul (2012-04-18). "gyroVoice: 10 E-Commerce Predictions For 2013". Forbes. Retrieved 2013-06-16. 
^ R., Miller, Carolyn; Dawn, Shepherd,. "Blogging as Social Action: A Genre Analysis of the Weblog". conservancy.umn.edu. Retrieved 2016-04-22. 
^ Wrigh, Donald (Spring 2008). "How blogs and social media are changing public relations and the way it is practiced" (PDF). Public Relations Journal. 2 (2). CiteSeerX 10.1.1.590.7572 . Retrieved 22 April 2016. 
^ The Most Popular Brands on Social Media, Conversion Perk, retrieved 2016-04-24 
^ R. Levine; C. Locke; D. Searls & D. Weinberger, Markets are conversations, New York: Perseus, retrieved 2012-10-22 
^ Paniagua, Jordi; Sapena, Juan (2014). "Business performance and social media: Love or hate?". Business Horizons. 57 (6): 719–728. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2014.07.005. 
^ "Influence on consumer decisions". 
^ "The Impact Of Social Media On Business Performance". 
^ Dhami, Nav. "Outbreaks of sentimentitis – riding the social media tiger". Global Connections. Retrieved 12 December 2012. 
^ Castronovo, Cristina (2012). "Social Media in Alternative Marketing Communication Model". Journal of Marketing Development & Competitivness. 6: 117–136. 
^ "the definition of bots". Dictionary.com. Retrieved 11 May 2017. 
^ Dewangan, Madhuri (2016). "SocialBot: Behavioral Analysis and Detection". International Symposium on Security in Computing and Communication (SSCC): 450–460. doi:10.1007/978-981-10-2738-3_39. 
^ [1], Winterstein, Daniel Ben & Joe Halliwell, "System for organising social media content to support analysis, workflow and automation" 
^ Rodrigo, S. and Abraham, J. (2012). Development and Implementation of a Chat Bot in a Social Network. 2012 Ninth International Conference on Information Technology - New Generations.
^ "Global chatbot market 2015-2024 | Statistic". Statista. Retrieved 2017-05-11. 
^ a b c Baym, Nancy K. (7 October 2013). "Data Not Seen: The uses and shortcomings of social media metrics". 
^ "Terms of Use | Instagram Help Center". help.instagram.com. Retrieved 2017-06-26. 
^ Stone-Gross, B., Holz, T., Stringhini, G., & Vigna, G. (2011). The Underground Economy of Spam: A Botmaster's Perspective of Coordinating Large-Scale Spam Campaigns. LEET, 11, 4-4.
^ House, A. (2014). The Real Cyborgs. Retrieved from: http://s.telegraph.co.uk/graphics/projects/the-future-is-android/
^ Schreckinger, B.,. "Inside Trump's 'cyborg' Twitter army", Politico, September 30, 2016 (retrieved May 10, 2017)
^ a b c Chu, Z., Gianvecchio, S., Wang, H., & Jajodia, S. (2012). Detecting automation of twitter accounts: Are you a human, bot, or cyborg?. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 9(6), 811-824.
^ Romanov, Aleksei; Alexander Semenov; Jari Veijalainen (2017). "Revealing Fake Profiles in Social Networks by Longitudinal Data Analysis". Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Information Systems and Technologies. 
^ "Research Survey". Mprcenter.org. Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ "2015 Edelman TrustBarometer". Edelman. 
^ EOI Escuela de Organización Industrial. "Edelman Trust Barometer 2010". slideshare.net. 
^ "Inc. Technology Brent Leary Article". Technology.inc.com. 22 March 2010. Archived from the original on 3 April 2011. Retrieved 2014-02-09. 
^ "Edelman 2010 Trust Barometer Study". Edelman.com. Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ Dickey, Irene J. and Lewis, William F. "The Evolution (Revolution) of Social Media and Social Networking as a Necessary Topic in the Marketing Curriculum: A Case for Integrating Social Media into Marketing Classes". ecommons.udayton.edu. Department of Management and Marketing, eCommons. Retrieved 14 November 2017. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Zafarani, Reza; Abbasi, Mohammad Ali; Liu, Huan (2014). "Social Media Mining: An Introduction". Retrieved 15 November 2014. 
^ Safranak, R. "The Emerging Role of Social Media in Regime Change" (PDF). Proquest Discovery Guides. Retrieved 19 March 2013. 
^ "Global social media ranking 2017 - Statistic". Statista. 
^ "Overview – » Print Chapter". stateofthemedia.org. 14 March 2011. 
^ "Survey: More Americans get news from Internet than newspapers or radio". cnn.com. 
^ "One-third of adults under 30 get news on social networks now". poynter.org. 
^ "Pew: Half of Americans get news digitally, topping newspapers, radio". poynter.org. 
^ "Frequency of Social Media Use". Pew Research Center's Internet & American Life Project. 
^ "How Social Media Can Help Students Study". McGraw Hill Education. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ "Development of social skills in children hampered by digital media says study". Los Angeles News.Net. 23 August 2014. Retrieved 23 August 2014. 
^ Lenhart, Amanda; Purcell, Kristen; Smith, Aaron; Zickuhr, Kathryn (2010-02-03). Social Media & Mobile Internet Use among Teens and Young Adults. Millennials. Pew Internet & American Life Project. 
^ "The Effects of Social Media on Children". ewu.edu. 
^ Davis, Anna (18 May 2015). "Social media 'more stressful than exams'". London Evening Standard. p. 13. 
^ Marchi, R. (2012). "With Facebook, Blogs, and Fake News, Teens Reject Journalistic 'Objectivity'". Journal of Communication Inquiry. 36 (3): 246–62. doi:10.1177/0196859912458700. 
^ Bastos, Marco Toledo (2014). "Shares, Pins, and Tweets". Journalism Studies. 16 (3): 305–25. doi:10.1080/1461670X.2014.891857. 
^ Runge, Kristin K.; Yeo, Sara K.; Cacciatore, Michael; Scheufele, Dietram A.; Brossard, Dominique; Xenos, Michael; Anderson, Ashley; Choi, Doo-hun; Kim, Jiyoun; Li, Nan; Liang, Xuan; Stubbings, Maria; Su, Leona Yi-Fan (2013). "Tweeting nano: How public discourses about nanotechnology develop in social media environments". Journal of Nanoparticle Research. 15: 1381. Bibcode:2013JNR....15.1381R. doi:10.1007/s11051-012-1381-8. 
^ Gerhards, Jürgen; Schäfer, Mike (2010). "Is the internet a better public sphere? Comparing old and new media in the USA and Germany". New Media & Society. 12 (1): 143–160. doi:10.1177/1461444809341444. 
^ "» What Facebook and Twitter Mean for News". stateofthemedia.org. 18 March 2012. 
^ a b c d e f g Newman, N.; Levy, D. (2013). "Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2013" (PDF). reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk. 
^ Kitch, Carolyn (2002). "Anniversary Journalism, Collective Memory, and the Cultural Authority to Tell the Story of the American Past". Journal of Popular Culture. 36: 44–67. doi:10.1111/1540-5931.00030. 
^ Edy, Jill (1999). "Journalistic Uses of Collective Memory". Journal of Communication. 49 (2): 71–85. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.1999.tb02794.x. 
^ Pajala, Mary (2012). "Television as an Archive of Memory?". Critical Studies in Television. 5 (2): 133–145. doi:10.7227/cst.5.2.16. 
^ Motti Neiger, Oren Meyers and Eyal Zandberg. On Media Memory: Collective Memory in a New Media Age. New York : Palgrave MacMillan, 2011
^ Barnhurst, Kevin; Wartella, Ellen (1998). "Young Citizens, American TV Newscasts and the Collective Memory". Critical Studies in Mass Media. 15 (3): 279–305. doi:10.1080/15295039809367049. 
^ Anderson, Nate; Technica, Ars (14 January 2011). "Tweeting Tyrants Out of Tunisia: Global Internet at Its Best". Wired. 
^ Kirkpatrick, David D. (9 February 2011). "Wired and Shrewd, Young Egyptians Guide Revolt". The New York Times. 
^ "The Arab Uprising's Cascading Effects". Miller-mccune.com. 23 February 2011. Archived from the original on 27 February 2011. Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ Gladwell, Malcolm (1 March 2011). "Malcolm Gladwell and Clay Shirky on Social Media and Revolution, Foreign Affairs March/April 2011". Foreignaffairs.com. Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ Fitzgerald, B. (12 November 2012). "Disappearing Romney". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 25 March 2013. 
^ Noozhawk. "'Staggering' Increase of STD Cases Worries Santa Barbara County Public Health Officials". 
^ Flanigin, Andrew J; Metzger, Miriam (2007). "The role of site features, user attributes, and information verification behaviors on the perceived credibility of web-based information" (PDF). New Media and Society. 9 (2): 319–342. doi:10.1177/1461444807075015. Retrieved 15 February 2014. 
^ Paul, Jomon Aliyas; Baker, Hope M.; Cochran, Justin Daniel (November 2012). "Effect of online social networking on student academic performance". Computers in Human Behavior. 28 (6): 2117–2127. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2012.06.016. 
^ Hinchiffe, Don. "Are social media silos holding back business". ZDNet.com. Retrieved 15 February 2014. 
^ Kaplan Andreas M., Haenlein Michael (2010). "Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of social media". Business Horizons. 53 (1): 67. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ a b c Wellman, Barry (2012). Networked: The New Social Operating System. MIT. ISBN 0262017199. 
^ Ariel, Yaron; Avidar, Ruth (2014). "Information, Interactivity, and Social Media". Atlantic Journal of Communication. 23 (1): 19–30. doi:10.1080/15456870.2015.972404. 
^ Ukpe, Kufre. "The Impact of Social Media on Technology" (PDF). Afe Babalola University. 
^ Ray, Munni. "Effect of Electronic Media on Children". Springer-Verlag. Retrieved 4 February 2013. 
^ Spears, B. A.; Taddeo, C. M.; Daly, A. L.; Stretton, A.; Karklins, L. T. (2015). "Cyberbullying, help-seeking and mental health in young Australians: Implications for public health". International Journal of Public Health. 60 (2): 219–226. doi:10.1007/s00038-014-0642-y. 
^ Trimarchi, Maria. "5 Myths About Twitter". Howstuffworks. Retrieved 22 October 2017. 
^ a b Domizi, Denise P. (10 January 2013). "Microblogging To Foster Connections And Community in a Weekly Graduate Seminar Course". TechTrends. 57 (1): 43–51. doi:10.1007/s11528-012-0630-0. 
^ Keen, Andrew. The Cult of the Amateur. Random House. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-385-52081-2. 
^ Zhou, Wei-Xing; Leidig, Mathias; Teeuw, Richard M. (2015). "Quantifying and Mapping Global Data Poverty". PLoS ONE. 10 (11): e0142076. Bibcode:2015PLoSO..1042076L. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0142076 . PMC 4641581 . PMID 26560884. 
^ U.S. Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (1995). "Falling through the net: A survey of the have nots in rural and urban America".
^ Graham, M. (July 2011). "Time machines and virtual portals: The spatialities of the digital divide". Progress in Development Studies. 11 (3): 211–227. doi:10.1177/146499341001100303. 
^ Reilley, Collen A. (January 2011). "Teaching Wikipedia as a Mirrored Technology". First Monday. 16 (1–3). doi:10.5210/fm.v16i1.2824 . 
^ Reinhart, J.; Thomas, E.; Toriskie, J. (2011). "K-12 Teachers: Technology Use and the Second Level Digital Divide". Journal of Instructional Psychology. 38 (3/4): 181. 
^ Kontos, Emily Z.; Emmons, Karen M.; Puleo, Elaine; Viswanath, K. (2010). "Communication Inequalities and Public Health Implications of Adult Social Networking Site Use in the United States". Journal of Health Communication. 15 (Suppl 3): 216–235. doi:10.1080/10810730.2010.522689. PMC 3073379 . PMID 21154095. 
^ Hilary Heuler. "Who really wins from Facebook's 'free internet' plan for Africa?". ZDNet. 
^ Leo Mirani (9 Feb 2015). "Millions of Facebook users have no idea they're using the internet". 
^ "Eric Ehrmann: Uruguay Prodded by G-20 to End Bank Secrecy". Huffingtonpost.com. 14 December 2011. Retrieved 2013-06-16. 
^ Kittur, Aniket; Suh, Bongowon; Chi, Ed H. (2008). "Can you ever trust a wiki?: Impacting perceived trustworthiness in wikipedia" (PDF). In Begole, Bo; McDonald, David M. Proceedings of the ACM 2008 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work: November 8-12, 2008, San Diego, California. New York, N.Y.: ACM Press. doi:10.1145/1460563.1460639. ISBN 978-1-60558-007-4. 
^ Dennings, P.; Horning, J.; Parnas, D.; Weinstein, L. (2005). "Wikipedia risks". Communications of the ACM. 48 (12): 152. doi:10.1145/1101779.1101804. 
^ Rainie, Lee & Wellman, Barry (2012-04-27). Networked: The New Social Operating System. ISBN 9780262300407. 
^ Rosen, Jay (30 June 2006). "The People Formerly Known as the Audience". Huffington Post. 
^ Renn, Ortwin; Levine, Debra (1990). "Credibility and trust in risk communication". In Roger E. Kasperson; Pieter Jan M. Stallen. Communicating Risks to the Public International Perspectives. Technology, Risk, and Society. 4. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. pp. 175–217. doi:10.1007/978-94-009-1952-5_10. ISBN 978-94-009-1952-5. 
^ Brossard, D. (Aug 2013). "New media landscapes and the science information consumer". PNAS. 110 (Suppl 3): 14096–101. Bibcode:2013PNAS..11014096B. doi:10.1073/pnas.1212744110. PMC 3752175 . PMID 23940316. 
^ a b c d e Malcolm Gladwell (4 October 2010). "Small Changes – Why the revolution will not be tweeted". Retrieved 15 November 2012. 
^ Rosen, Jay. "The People Formally Known as the Audience". PressThink. Retrieved 27 January 2015. 
^ Filer, Tanya; Fredheim, Rolf (2016). "Sparking debate? Political deaths and Twitter discourses in Argentina and Russia". Information, Communication & Society. 19 (11): 1539–1555. doi:10.1080/1369118X.2016.1140805. 
^ Morozov, Evgeny (2009). "Iran: Downside to the "Twitter Revolution"". Dissent. 56 (4): 10–14. doi:10.1353/dss.0.0092. 
^ (Media Bistro, 2012)
^ (U.S. POPClock Projection". U.S. Census Bureau., 2012)
^ a b Auer, Matthew R. (2011). "The Policy Sciences of Social Media". Policy Studies Journal. 39 (4): 709–736. doi:10.1111/j.1541-0072.2011.00428.x. SSRN 1974080 . 
^ a b "Jones, Soltren, Facebook: Threats to Privacy, MIT 2005" (PDF). Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ "Chapter 5: There Is Nothing New Under The Sun (Excerpt From Social Media Is Bullshit)". 
^ Madden, Mary; et al. (2013-05-21). "Teens, Social Media, and Privacy". Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech. Retrieved 2016-11-29. 
^ a b "ACLU-MN Files Lawsuit Against Minnewaska Area Schools". www.aclu-mn.org. Retrieved 2016-11-30. 
^ a b "Employers, Schools, and Social Networking Privacy". American Civil Liberties Union. Retrieved 2016-11-30. 
^ a b Marche, S. (2012). "Is Facebook Making Us Lonely?". The Atlantic. Retrieved July 12, 2013. 
^ a b Turkle, S. (2012). Alone together: Why we expect more from technology and less from each other. New York, NY: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-03146-7. 
^ a b Burke, Moira; Kraut, Robert; Marlow, Cameron (2011). "Social capital on Facebook: Differentiating uses and users" (PDF). Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 7–9: 571–580. doi:10.1145/1978942.1979023. ISBN 978-1-4503-0228-9. 
^ Wang, Z.; Tchernev, J. M.; Solloway, T. (2012). "A dynamic longitudinal examination of social media use, needs, and gratifications among college students". Computers in Human Behavior. 28 (5): 1829–1839. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2012.05.001. 
^ Morahan-Martin, J.; Schumacher, P. (2003). "Loneliness and social uses of the internet". Computers in Human Behavior. 19 (6): 659–671. doi:10.1016/S0747-5632(03)00040-2. 
^ Chouinard, Jean-Sébastien (20 February 2013). ""When Hyperconnectivity Leads to Social Alienation."". 
^ "Use of Social Media as a Bullying Tool Subjects Many Sri Lankan Teens to Crippling Fear, Shame". Sri Lanka Source. 21 August 2014. Retrieved 23 August 2014. 
^ Christakis, D. A.; Moreno, M. A. (2009). "Trapped in the Net: Will Internet Addiction Become a 21st-Century Epidemic?". Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 163 (10): 959–960. doi:10.1001/archpediatrics.2009.162. 
^ O'Keefe, Gwenn Schurgin; Clarke-Pearson, Kathleen (April 2011). "The Impact of Social Media on Children, Adolescents, and Families". Pediatrics. American Academy of Pediatrics. 127 (4): 800–804. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-0054 . PMID 21444588. 
^ "Social media addiction recognised as official condition". Raidió Teilifís Éireann News. February 12, 2013. 
^ Wagner, Lori Ann (2015). "When Your Smartphone Is Too Smart for Your Own Good: How Social Media Alters Human Relationships". The Journal of Individual Psychology. 71 (2): 114–121. doi:10.1353/jip.2015.0009. 
^ Chen, Hsuan-Ting; Kim, Yonghwan (2013). "Problematic Use of Social Network Sites: The Interactive Relationship Between Gratifications Sought and Privacy Concerns". Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking. 16 (11): 806–812. doi:10.1089/cyber.2011.0608. 
^ a b Baym, Nancy K.; Bing Zhang, Yan; Lin, Mei-Chen (2004). "Social interactions across media: Interpersonal communication on the internet, telephone and face-to-face". New Media & Society. 6 (3): 299–318. doi:10.1177/1461444804041438. 
^ Pihl, Christofer (2011). Marketing fads and fashions – exploring digital marketing practices and emerging organisational fields (PDF). Gothenburg: Gothenburg University. 
^ Laurell, Christofer (2014). Commercialising social media: a study of fashion (blogo)spheres (PDF). Stockholm University. 
^ Pihl, Christofer (2013). "When customers create the ad and sell it –a value network approach". Journal of Global Scholars of Marketing Science. 23 (2): 127–143. doi:10.1080/21639159.2013.763487. 
^ Pihl, Christofer; Sandström, Christian (2013). "Value creation and appropriation in social media –the case of fashion bloggers in Sweden". International Journal of Technology Management. 61 (3/4): 309. doi:10.1504/IJTM.2013.052673. 
^ Cova, Bernard; Dalli, Daniele (2009). "Working consumers: the next step in marketing theory?". Marketing Theory. 9 (3): 315–339. doi:10.1177/1470593109338144. 
^ Mortimer, N. (2016) 'Magnum invests £13m in campaign to promote new Magnum Double' Available at:  http://www.thedrum.com/news/2016/04/11/magnum-invests-13m-campaign-promote-new-magnum-double. Retrieved 2017-05-11.
^ Levine et al. (2000) 'Marketing communications using digital media channels', in Chaffey, D. and Chadwick, F. E. (2016) Digital Marketing: Strategy, Implementation, and Practice. Edinburgh Gate: Pearson Education Limited, pp. 528-535.
^ Available at: http://academic.mintel.com/display/742016/?highlight#hit1. Retrieved 2017-05-11.
^ Mangold, W. Glynn; Faulds, David J. (2009). "Social media: The new hybrid element of the promotion mix". Business Horizons. 52 (4): 357–65. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2009.03.002. 
^ http://scholarcommons.usf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1146&context=jss
^ Hart, William et al. "Feeling Validated Versus Being Correct: A Meta-Analysis of Selective Exposure to Information." Psychological bulletin 135.4 (2009): 555–588. PMC. Web. 4 Dec. 2017. PMC 4797953
^ Perloff, R. M. (2013). Political persuasion. In James Price Dillard and Lijiang Shen (Eds.), The SAGE Handbook of Persuasion: Developments in Theory and Practice. Retrieved from the Gale Virtual Reference Library database.
^ Hayat, Tsahi; Samuel-Azran, Tal (2017-04-03). ""You too, Second Screeners?" Second Screeners' Echo Chambers During the 2016 U.S. Elections Primaries". Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media. 61 (2): 291–308. doi:10.1080/08838151.2017.1309417. ISSN 0883-8151. 
^ Hayat, Tsahi; Samuel-Azran, Tal; Galily, Yair (2016-09-22). "Al-Jazeera Sport's US Twitter followers: sport-politics nexus?". Online Information Review. 40 (6): 785–797. doi:10.1108/oir-01-2016-0033. ISSN 1468-4527. 
^ Lundblad, Niklas. "Privacy in a Noisy Society". CiteSeerX 10.1.1.67.965 . 
^ Postman, Neil. "Informing ourselves to death". 
^ Vogel, Erin A.; Rose, Jason P.; Okdie, Bradley M.; Eckles, Katheryn; Franz, Brittany (2015). "Who compares and despairs? The effect of social comparison orientation on social media use and its outcomes". Personality and Individual Differences. 86: 249–56. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2015.06.026. 
^ Hawi, N.S. & Samaha, M. 2017, "The Relations Among Social Media Addiction, Self-Esteem, and Life Satisfaction in University Students", Social Science Computer Review, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 576-586
^ Stefanone, M.A., Lackaff, D., & Rosen, D. (2011). "Contingencies of Self-Worth and Social-Networking-Site Behavior" (PDF). CYBERPSYCHOLOGY, BEHAVIOR, AND SOCIAL NETWORKING. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Quan-Haase, Anabel; Young, Alyson L. (2010-09-14). "Uses and Gratifications of Social Media: A Comparison of Facebook and Instant Messaging". Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society. 30 (5): 350–361. doi:10.1177/0270467610380009. 
^ "Children, Teens, Media, and Body Image | Common Sense Media". Retrieved 2017-12-03. 
^ Holland, G., & Tiggerman, M. (2016). "A systematic review of the impact of the use of social networking sites on body image and disordered eating outcomes". Body Image: 101–109. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Lewallen, Jennifer; Behm-Morawitz, Elizabeth (2016-03-30). "Pinterest or Thinterest?: Social Comparison and Body Image on Social Media". Social Media + Society. 2 (1): 205630511664055. doi:10.1177/2056305116640559. 
^ Basow, susan A. (1992). Gender : stereotypes and roles (3rd ed.). Belmont CA. U.S: Thomson Brooks/ Cole publishing Co. p. 447. 
^ Oberst, Ursala; Chamarro, Andres; Renau, Vanessa (2016). "Gender Stereotypes 2.0: Self-Representations of Adolescents on Facebook". Media Education Research Journal. 24 (48): 81–89. doi:10.3916/c48-2016-08. 
^ De Vies, D; Peter, J (2013). "Women on Display: The Effect of Portraying the Self Online on Women's Self-objectification". Computers in Human Behavior. 29 (4): 1,483–1489. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.01.015. 
^ Manago, Adriana M.; Ward, L. Monique; Lemm, Kristi M.; Reed, Lauren; Seabrook, Rita (2014). "Facebook Involvement, Objectified Body Consciousness, Body Shame, and Sexual Assertiveness in College Women and Men". Sex Roles. 72: 1–14. doi:10.1007/s11199-014-0441-1. 
^ Chan, TH (2014). "Facebook and its Effects on Users' Empathic Social Skills and Life Satisfaction: A Double Edged Sword Effect". Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking. 17 (5): 276–280. doi:10.1089/cyber.2013.0466. PMID 24606026. 
^ Chen, Gina Masullo (2015). "Losing Face on Social Media". Communication Research. 42 (6): 819–38. doi:10.1177/0093650213510937. 
^ Kowalski, Robin M, Sue Limber, and Patricia W Agatston. Cyberbullying. 1st ed. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012. Print.
^ a b Chua, Trudy Hui Hui; Chang, Leanne (2016). "Follow me and like my beautiful selfies: Singapore teenage girls' engagement in self-presentation and peer comparison on social media". Computers in Human Behavior. 55: 190–7. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.09.011. 
^ Wolpert, Stuart. "Teenage Brain on Social Media". Retrieved May 31, 2016. 
^ Rosen, Christine. "Virtual Friendship and the New Narcissism". The New Atlantis. Retrieved February 29, 2016. 
^ "Nicholas Carr, "Is Google Making Us Stupid?-What the Internet is doing to our brains"". 2008. Retrieved 15 November 2012. 
^ Han, Bo (2016). "Social Media Burnout: Definition, Measurement Instrument, and Why We Care". Journal of Computer Information Systems: 1–9. doi:10.1080/08874417.2016.1208064. 
^ Rafla, M., Carson, N.J. & DeJong, S.M. Curr Psychiatry Rep (2014) 16: 472. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-014-0472-x
^ (O’Keefe Schurgen, Gwenn. Clarke-Pearson, Kathleen. (2011) The impact of Social Media on Children, Adolescents, and Families. American Academy of Pediatrics, Volume 127 (issue 4), 800-805)
^ Bányai, Fanni; Zsila, Ágnes; Király, Orsolya; Maraz, Aniko; Elekes, Zsuzsanna; Griffiths, Mark D.; Andreassen, Cecilie Schou; Demetrovics, Zsolt (2017-01-09). "Problematic Social Media Use: Results from a Large-Scale Nationally Representative Adolescent Sample". PLOS ONE. 12 (1): e0169839. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0169839. ISSN 1932-6203. 
^ O'Keeffe, Gwenn Schurgin; Clarke-Pearson, Kathleen; Media, Council on Communications and (2011-04-01). "The Impact of Social Media on Children, Adolescents, and Families". Pediatrics. 127 (4): 800–804. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-0054. ISSN 0031-4005. PMID 21444588. 
^ Perrin, Andrew (8 October 2015). "Social Media Usage: 2005–2015". 
^ a b Foxx, Kara. "Social media plays a major role in search for Brogan Dulle". Fox 19 News. Retrieved 25 May 2014. 
^ Cunningham, Libby. "In the search for two Tri-State missing persons, contrasting pictures of social media's role emerge". WCPO-TV. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ Butts, Rebecca. "#FindBroganDulle gathers volunteers from all over Cincinnati". The News Record. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ Warren, Lydia. "Where is Brogan?". Daily Mail. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ "Family 'worried sick' after Ohio college student Brogan Dulle goes missing as he looks for cell phone". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ "Missing Cincinnati College Student's Family Hopes Reward Will Help Search". Good Morning America. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ Hastings, Deborah. "More volunteers join police in search of missing University of Cincinnati student". New York Daily News. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ "College Student's Disappearance Baffles Cops". ABC News. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ Lohr, David. "Family of Missing Student Brogan Dulle: 'Someone Out There Knows Something.'". Huffington Post. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ "Brogan Dulle, Cincinnati College Student, Missing 5 Days Since Going To Look For Phone". ABC 7 Chicago Eyewitness News. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ Weldon, Casey. "Brogan Dulle missing update: Family of missing UC student makes emotional plea for his return". WCPO-TV. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ Alter, Maxim. "TIMELINE: Retracing the last known steps of missing UC student Brogan Dulle". WCPO-TV. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ "Body found believed to be missing Ohio student". The Washington Times. Retrieved 27 May 2014. 
^ Alter, Maxim (May 26, 2014). "Police 'pretty certain' Brogan Dulle found dead in vacant building near his apartment". WCPO-TV. Retrieved 27 May 2014. 
^ Lohr, David. "Missing Ohio College Student Found Dead". Huffington Post. Retrieved 27 May 2014. 
^ "Brogan Dulle's body found in building next door to his apartment". WLWT News. Retrieved 27 May 2014. 
^ http://fh6xn3yd3x.search.serialssolutions.com/?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&ctx_enc=info%3Aofi%2Fenc%3AUTF-8&rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fsummon.serialssolutions.com&rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&rft.genre=article&rft.atitle=Social+media+lawsuits+increase&rft.jtitle=The+Idaho+Business+Review&rft.date=2017-07-14&rft.pub=BridgeTower+Media+Holding+Company&rft.issn=8750-4022&rft.eissn=2474-6649&paramdict=en-US
^ Burke for Silicon Republic, Elaine (30 May 2013). "1 in 10 young people losing out on jobs because of pics and comments on social media". 
^ Susie Poppick for Money Magazine (September 5, 2014). "10 Social Media Blunders That Cost a Millennial a Job — or Worse". 
^ Baert, S. (2015). "Do They Find You on Facebook? Facebook Profile Picture and Hiring Chances" (PDF). IZA Discussion Paper No. 9584. 
^ Matt Brian (23 March 2012). "Facebook May Take Legal Action Over Employer Password Requests". The Next Web. 
^ "Protecting Your Passwords and Your Privacy". facebook.com. 
^ Leenheer, Jorna; van Heerde, Harald J.; Bijmolt, Tammo H. A.; Smidts, Ale (2007-03-01). "Do loyalty programs really enhance behavioral loyalty? An empirical analysis accounting for self-selecting members". International Journal of Research in Marketing. 24 (1): 31–47. doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2006.10.005. 
^ "Kaplan Test Prep Online Pressroom » Kaplan Test Prep Survey: More College Admissions Officers Checking Applicants' Digital Trails, But Most Students Unconcerned". kaptest.com. 
^ "Social Media, Political News and Ideology – Pew Research Center". Pew Research Center's Journalism Project. 21 October 2014. 
^ "Politics and Culture on Facebook in the 2014 Midterm Elections". facebook.com. 
^ Pfeffer, J.; Zorbach, T.; Carley, K. M. (2013). "Understanding online firestorms: Negative word-of-mouth dynamics in social media networks". Journal of Marketing Communications. 20: 117–128. doi:10.1080/13527266.2013.797778. 
^ "How early Twitter decisions led to Weiner's downfall". CNN.com. 2011. 
^ Shirky, Clay (2011). "The Political Power of Social Media: Technology, the Public Sphere, and Political Change". Foreign Affairs. 90 (1): 28–41. JSTOR 25800379. 
^ Brym, Robert; Godbout, Melissa; Hoffbauer, Andreas; Menard, Gabe; Zhang, Tony Huiquan (2014). "Social media in the 2011 Egyptian uprising". The British Journal of Sociology. 65 (2): 266–92. doi:10.1111/1468-4446.12080. PMID 24798232. 
^ Illich, BriAnn (2014). Awareness, Agency, and Alternatives: Opportunities and Challenges for CONAMURI and the Paraguayan Women's Food Sovereignty Movement in an Age of Social Media (Thesis). Colby College – via Digital Commons, Colby College. 
^ Bennett, W. L. (2012). "The Personalization of Politics: Political Identity, Social Media, and Changing Patterns of Participation". The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. 644 (1): 20–39. doi:10.1177/0002716212451428. 
^ Hardy, Roger (3 December 2011). "Arab Spring Myths: misconceptions about the uprisings". BBC News. 
^ "New study quantifies use of social media in Arab Spring". washington.edu. 
^ King, David Lee (January 2015). "Why Use Social Media?". Library Technology Reports. 51 (1): 6–9. 
^ Shepherd, Andrew; Sanders, Caroline; Doyle, Michael; Shaw, Jenny (2015). "Using social media for support and feedback by mental health service users: Thematic analysis of a twitter conversation". BMC Psychiatry. 15: 29. doi:10.1186/s12888-015-0408-y. PMC 4337200 . PMID 25881089. 
^ Fleck, Johnson-Migalski, Jesse, Leigh (Summer 2015). "The Impact of Social Media on Personal and Professional Lives: An Adlerian Perspective". Journal of Individual Psychology. 71 (2): 8, 135–142. doi:10.1353/jip.2015.0013. 
^ Shirky for Foreign Affairs. January/February 2011, Clay. "The Political Power of Social Media". 
^ Ajbaili, Mustapha (24 June 2014). "How ISIS conquered social media". Al Arabiya News. 
^ a b c "How ISIS Games Twitter". The Atlantic. 
^ "Mark Nowotarski, "Do not Steal My Avatar! Challenges of Social Network Patents, IP Watchdog, January 23, 2011". Ipwatchdog.com. 23 January 2011. Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ "USPTO search on published patent applications mentioning "social media"". Appft.uspto.gov. Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ "USPTO search on issued patents mentioning "social media"". Patft.uspto.gov. Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ Kist, W. (2012). "Class get ready to tweet: Social media in the classroom. Our children" (PDF). files.eric.ed.gov. 
^ "BYOD". Peel District School Board. 2014. 
^ Fewkes, A.; McCabe, M. (2012). "Facebook: Learning Tool or Distraction? Journal of Digital Learning in Teacher Education, 28(3)". eric.ed.gov. 
^ Sarah Boesveld (30 May 2011). "Can Wikipedia improve students' work?". National Post. 
^ Michelle Mcquigge; The Canadian Press (7 April 2013). "Steve Joordens learns not all editors are welcome on Wikipedia". National Post. 
^ a b Moody, M (Spring 2010). "Teaching Twitter and Beyond: Tip for Incorporating Social Media in Traditional Courses" (PDF). Journal of Magazine & New Media Research. 11 (2): 1–9. 
^ Chu, Melanie; Meulemans, Yvonne Nalani (11 October 2008). "The Problems and Potential of MySpace and Facebook Usage in Academic Libraries". Internet Reference Services Quarterly. 13 (1): 69–85. doi:10.1300/J136v13n01_04. 
^ Salaway, G.; Caruso, J.; Mark, R. (2008). "The ECAR study of undergraduate students and information technology". EDUCAUSE Center for Applied Research. Boulder, Colo. Retrieved 15 November 2011. 
^ Schroeder, J.; Greenbowe, T. J. (2009). "The chemistry of Facebook: Using social networking to create an online community for the organic chemistry laboratory" (PDF). Innovate. 5 (4): 3. Retrieved 10 April 2017. 
^ Hargittai, Eszter (2007). "Whose Space? Differences Among Users and Non-Users of Social Network Sites". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication. 13 (1): 276–97. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00396.x. 
^ Towner, T.; Muñoz, C. "Facebook vs. Web courseware: A comparison". In C. Cheal; J. Coughlin; S. Moore. Transformation in teaching: Social media strategies in higher education. Informing Science Institute. ISBN 9781932886498. 
^ Madge, Clare; Meek, Julia; Wellens, Jane; Hooley, Tristram (2009). "Facebook, social integration and informal learning at university: 'It is more for socialising and talking to friends about work than for actually doing work'". Learning, Media and Technology. 34 (2): 141–55. doi:10.1080/17439880902923606. 
^ "The Demographics of Social Media Users — 2012". Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech. 14 February 2013. 
^ Junco, R.; Heiberger, G.; Loken, E. (2011). "The effect of Twitter on college student engagement and grades". Journal of Computer Assisted Learning. 27 (2): 119–132. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2729.2010.00387.x. 
^ a b Gao, F.; Luo, T.; Zhang, K. (2012). "Tweeting for learning: A critical analysis of research on microblogging in education published in 2008– 2011". British Journal of Educational Technology. 43 (5): 783–801. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2012.01357.x. 
^ Ghosh, Rumi (June 2011). "Entropy-based Classification of 'Retweeting' Activity on Twitter". arXiv:1106.0346  [cs.SI]. 
^ a b "Oscars 2014, the year of the selfie: Ellen tweet grabs retweet record". latimes.com. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ "Ellen DeGeneres' Selfie at Oscars Sets Retweet Record, Crashes Twitter". TheLedger.com. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ "#BBCtrending: Poor Leo, Oscar selfies, and a Cumberbomb – BBC News". BBC News. Retrieved 2015-11-25. 
^ "CNN- Nuggs for Carter". 
^ Yang, Zi (October 2010). "Understanding retweeting behaviors in social networks". Understanding retweeting behaviors in social networks. in Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management (PDF). ISBN 978-1-4503-0099-5. 
^ Williams, Hywel; McMurray, James; Kurz, Tim; Lambert, Hugo (15 November 2014). "Network analysis reveals open forums and echo chambers in social media discussions of climate change" (PDF). Elsevier: 127. Retrieved 11 April 2015. 
^ Moran, M., Seaman, J., Tinti-Kane, H. (2012). "How today's higher education faculty use social media" (PDF). pearsonlearningsolutions.com. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Sherer, Pamela; Shea, Timothy (4 April 2011). "Using Online Video to Support Student Learning and Engagement". College Teaching. 59 (2): 56–59. doi:10.1080/87567555.2010.511313. 
^ Eick, C.J.; King, D.T. (2012). "Non-science majors' perceptions on the use of YouTube video to support learning in an integrated science lecture". Journal of College Science Teaching. 42 (1): 26–30. 
^ "About Us – LinkedIn". www.linkedin.com. Retrieved 2015-11-19. 
^ "About Us – LinkedIn Newsroom". LinkedIn Newsroom. Retrieved 2015-11-19. 
^ a b "5 Steps To Use LinkedIn For Social Learning – eLearning Industry". eLearning Industry. Retrieved 2015-11-19. 
^ Newman, Daniel. "Love It Or Hate It: Influencer Marketing Works". www.forbes.com. Forbes. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ Dunkley, Lydia. "Reaching Generation Z: Harnessing the Power of Digital Influencers in Film Publicity". promotionalcommunications.org. Journal of Promotional Comunications. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ "Instagram". 
^ "Advertising Standards Authority for Ireland calls on bloggers and influencers to fully declare marketing communications". www.asai.ie. Advertising Standards Authority for Ireland. 
^ "Affiliate Marketing: New Advertising Guidance for social influencers". www.asa.org.uk. Advertising Standards Authority (United Kingdom). Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ a b Sherwin, Adam (4 September 2013). "Style over substance: Wayne Rooney cleared of Nike Twitter plug". The Independent. London. 
^ "Nike Rooney Twitter promo escapes censure". Marketing Week. 
^ Salih Sarıkaya (30 October 2014). "Social Media Ban In Turkey: What Does It Mean? by Salih Sarıkaya". Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. 
^ "Turkey's Twitter ban violates free speech: constitutional court". 2 April 2014 – via Reuters. 
^ Mex Cooper (30 July 2014). "Social media users could be charged for sharing Wikileaks story". Brisbane Times. 
^ a b c d Lebedko, Maria (2014). "Globalization, Networking and Intercultural Communication" (PDF). Intercultural Communication Studies. 23 (1): 28–41. 
^ Zarinsky, Natasha. "What the Hell is Up with 'Bae'?". Esquire. 
^ a b c Guo-Ming, Chen (2012). "The Impact of New Media on Intercultural Communication in Global Context". China Media Research. 8 (2): 1–10. 
^ O'Keeffe, Gwenn; Clarke-Pearson, Kathleen. "The Impact of Social Media on Children, Adolescents, and Families". AAP News & Journals Gateway. 


Further reading[edit]

Benkler, Yochai (2006). The Wealth of Networks. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-11056-1. OCLC 61881089. 
Fuchs, Christian (2014). Social Media: A Critical Introduction. London: Sage. ISBN 978-1-4462-5731-9. 
Gentle, Anne (2012). Conversation and Community: The Social Web for Documentation (2nd ed.). Laguna Hills, CA: XML Press. ISBN 978-1-937434-10-6. OCLC 794490599. 
Hayat, T.; Samuel-Azran, T. (2017). ""You too, Second Screeners?" Second Screeners' Echo Chambers During the 2016 U.S. Elections Primaries". Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media. 61 (2): 291–308. doi:10.1080/08838151.2017.1309417. ISSN 0883-8151.

Johnson, Steven Berlin (2005). Everything Bad Is Good for You. New York: Riverhead Books. ISBN 1-57322-307-7. OCLC 57514882. 
Jue, Arthur L., Jackie Alcalde Marr, Mary Ellen Kassotakis (2010). Social media at work : how networking tools propel organizational performance (1st ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. ISBN 978-0470405437. 
Lardi, Kamales; Fuchs, Rainer (2013). Social Media Strategy – A step-by-step guide to building your social business (1st ed.). Zurich: vdf. ISBN 978-3-7281-3557-5. 
Li, Charlene; Bernoff, Josh (2008). Groundswell: Winning in a World Transformed by Social Technologies. Boston: Harvard Business Press. ISBN 978-1-4221-2500-7. OCLC 423555651. 
McHale, Robert; Garulay, Eric (2012). Navigating Social Media Legal Risks: Safeguarding Your Business. Que. ISBN 978-0-789-74953-6. 
Piskorski, Mikołaj Jan (2014). A Social Strategy: How We Profit from Social Media. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-15339-1. 
Powell, Guy R.; Groves, Steven W.; Dimos, Jerry (2011). ROI of Social Media: How to improve the return on your social marketing investment. New York: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-82741-3. OCLC 0470827416. 
Rheingold, Howard (2002). Smart mobs: The next social revolution (1st printing ed.). Cambridge, MA: Perseus Pub. p. 288. ISBN 978-0-7382-0608-0. 
Scoble, Robert; Israel, Shel (2006). Naked Conversations: How Blogs are Changing the Way Businesses Talk with Customers. Hoboken, N.J: John Wiley. ISBN 0-471-74719-X. OCLC 61757953. 
Shirky, Clay (2008). Here Comes Everybody. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-59420-153-0. OCLC 458788924. 
Siegel, Alyssa (September 7, 2015). "How Social Media Affects Our Relationships". Psychology Tomorrow. 
Surowiecki, James (2004). The Wisdom of Crowds. New York: Anchor Books. ISBN 0-385-72170-6. OCLC 156770258. 
Tapscott, Don; Williams, Anthony D. (2006). Wikinomics. New York: Portfolio. ISBN 1-59184-138-0. OCLC 318389282. 
Watts, Duncan J. (2003). Six degrees: The science of a connected age. London: Vintage. p. 368. ISBN 978-0-09-944496-1. 
Tedesco, Laura Anne (October 2000). "Lascaux (ca. 15,000 B.C.)". Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 
Agozzino, Alisa (2012). "Building A Personal Relationship Through Social Media: A Study Of Millennial Students' Brand Engagement". Ohio Communication Journal. 50: 181–204. 
Schoen, Harald; Gayo-Avello, Daniel; Takis Metaxas, Panagiotis; Mustafaraj, Eni; Strohmaier, Markus; Gloor, Peter (2013). "The power of prediction with social media". Internet Research. 23 (5): 528–43. doi:10.1108/IntR-06-2013-0115. 
Mateus, Samuel (2012). "Social Networks Scopophilic dimension – social belonging through spectatorship". 
Schrape, Jan-Felix (2016). "Social Media, Mass Media and the ›Public Sphere‹. Differentiation, Complementarity and Co-existence" (PDF). Stuttgart: Research Contributions to Organizational Sociology and Innovation Studies 2016-01. 
Jordan, Kasteler (2017). "How to use SEO data in your social media strategy". 
O'Keeffe, G.S.; Clarke-Pearson, K. (2011). "The impact of social media on children, adolescents, and families". Pediatrics. 127 (4): 800–804. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-0054. PMID 21444588. 
Blankenship, M (2011). "How social media can and should impact higher education". The Education Digest. 76 (7): 39. 




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Social media.



Al-Rahmi, Mugahed, Waleed.Othman, Shahizan, Mohd. The Impact of Social Media use on Academic Performance among university students: A Pilot Study. JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH AND INNOVATION,( pages 1–10). Available at:URL ( 14 November 2017)
Beshears, M.L. Am J Crim Just (2017) 42: 489. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12103-016-9380-4







v
t
e


Media culture



Media



Mass media
Mainstream media
24-hour news cycle
Corporate media
News broadcasting
News media
Film
Internet
Radio
Television





Ideology



Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music





Deception




Forms



Advertising
Propaganda
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism





Techniques



Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism





Others



Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation








Philosophers



Theodor W. Adorno
Jean Baudrillard
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan





Counterculture



Boycott
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Strike action





In academia



Influence of mass media
Media studies
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd





Issues



Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy





Synonyms



Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_media&oldid=817934471"					Categories: Collaborative projectsSocial mediaMass mediaRevolutionary tacticsNew mediaWeb 2.0CommunicationSocial networksHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2017Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sectionsWikipedia articles needing style editing from August 2014All articles needing style editingArticles with minor POV problems from August 2015Articles with a promotional tone from June 2016All articles with a promotional toneAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from January 2014Articles to be expanded from May 2014All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxes