





It has been suggested that this article be merged into Programmer. (Discuss) Proposed since December 2017.



A software developer is a person concerned with facets of the software development process, including the research, design, programming, and testing of computer software. Other job titles which are often used with similar meanings are programmer, software analyst, and software engineer. According to developer Eric Sink, the differences between system design, software development, and programming are more apparent. Already in the current market place there can be found a segregation between programmers and developers, being that one who implements is not the same as the one who designs the class structure or hierarchy. Even more so that developers become software architects or systems architects, those who design the multi-leveled architecture or component interactions of a large software system.[1]
In a large company, there may be employees whose sole responsibility consists of only one of the phases above. In smaller development environments, a few people or even a single individual might handle the complete process.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Qualifications and Skills


2 References
3 Externally links



History[edit]
The word "software" was first used as early as 1953, but did not appear in print until the 1960s.[2] Before this time, computers were programmed either by customers, or the few commercial computer vendors of the time, such as UNIVAC and IBM. The first company founded to provide software products and services was Computer Usage Company in 1955.[3]
The software industry expanded in the early 1960s, almost immediately after computers were first sold in mass-produced quantities. Universities, government, and business customers created a demand for software. Many of these programs were written in-house by full-time staff programmers. Some were distributed freely between users of a particular machine for no charge. Others were done on a commercial basis, and other firms such as Computer Sciences Corporation (founded in 1959) started to grow. The computer/hardware makers started bundling operating systems, system software and programming environments with their machines.[citation needed]
The industry expanded greatly with the rise of the personal computer ("PC") in the mid-1970s, which brought computing to the desktop of the office worker. In the following years, it also created a growing market for games, applications, and utilities. DOS, Microsoft's first operating system product, was the dominant operating system at the time.[4]
In the early years of the 21st century, another successful business model has arisen for hosted software, called software-as-a-service, or SaaS; this was at least the third time[citation needed] this model had been attempted. From the point of view of producers of some proprietary software, SaaS reduces the concerns about unauthorized copying, since it can only be accessed through the Web, and by definition, no client software is loaded onto the end user's PC.[citation needed] By 2014 the role of cloud developer had been defined; in this context, one definition of a "developer" in general was published:[5]
Qualifications and Skills[edit]
A software developer must have a relevant BTEC or HND in any field such as computer science, information technology, engineering, programming, or any other IT related post graduate studies.[6] An ideal software developer is a self-motivated professional carrying a dynamic hands-on experience on key languages of programming such as C++, C#, JAVA, C, Javascript, VB, Oracle, UML, Linux, Python, UNIX, XML, HTTP, Smalltalk, Other software testing tools etc.
References[edit]



^ Eric Sink. "Small ISVs: You need Developers, not Programmers". Sourcegear. Retrieved 2008-06-06. A programmer is someone who does nothing but code new features and (if you're lucky) fix bugs. They don't write specs. They don't write automated test cases. They don't help keep the automated build system up to date. They don't help customers work out tough problems. They don't help write documentation. They don't help with testing. They don't even read code. All they do is write new code. 
^ Paul Niquette (1995). "Softword: Provenance for the Word 'Software'".  adapted from Sophisticated: The Magazine ISBN 1-58922-233-4
^ Elmer C. Kubie (Summer 1994). "Recollections of the first software company". Annals of the History of Computing. IEEE Computer Society. 16 (2): 65–71. doi:10.1109/85.279238. 
^ Rebello, Kathy; Schwartz, Evan I.; Verity, John W.; Lewyn, Mark; Levine, Jonathan (28 February 1993). "Is Microsoft Too Powerful?". Businessweek Archives. Bloomberg Businessweek. Retrieved 26 September 2014. 
^ Hardiman, Nick (24 July 2014). "A portrait of the modern cloud developer". TechRepublic. 
^ "Software Engineer Skills and Responsibilities". 



Externally links[edit]

Software Developer description from the US Department of Labor
Vincit: Software development 450 words per minute. Interview with a blind software developer






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Software_developer&oldid=818084117"					Categories: Computer programmersPeople in information technologyComputer occupationsHidden categories: Articles to be merged from December 2017All articles to be mergedUse dmy dates from August 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2014Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012