





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Software development


Core activities




Processes
Requirements
Design
Engineering
Construction
Testing
Debugging
Deployment
Maintenance




Paradigms and models




Agile
Cleanroom
Incremental
Prototyping
Spiral
Waterfall




Methodologies and frameworks




DevOps
DSDM
FDD
IID
Kanban
Lean SD
MDD
MSF
PSP
RAD
SAFe
Scrum
SEMAT
TSP
UP
V-Model
XP




Supporting disciplines




Configuration management
Documentation
Software quality assurance (SQA)
Project management
User experience




Practices




ATDD
BDD
CCO
CI
CD
DDD
PP
Stand-up
TDD




Tools




Compiler
Debugger
Profiler
GUI designer
Modeling
IDE
Build automation
Release automation
Infrastructure as Code
Testing




Standards and BOKs




CMMI
IEEE standards
ISO 9001
ISO/IEC standards
SWEBOK
PMBOK
BABOK







v
t
e





Software design is the process by which an agent creates a specification of a software artifact, intended to accomplish goals, using a set of primitive components and subject to constraints.[1] Software design may refer to either "all the activity involved in conceptualizing, framing, implementing, commissioning, and ultimately modifying complex systems" or "the activity following requirements specification and before programming, as ... [in] a stylized software engineering process."[2]
Software design usually involves problem solving and planning a software solution. This includes both a low-level component and algorithm design and a high-level, architecture design.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Design Concepts
3 Design considerations
4 Modeling language
5 Design patterns
6 Technique
7 Usage
8 See also
9 References



Overview[edit]
Software design is the process of implementing software solutions to one or more sets of problems. One of the main components of software design is the software requirements analysis (SRA). SRA is a part of the software development process that lists specifications used in software engineering. If the software is "semi-automated" or user centered, software design may involve user experience design yielding a storyboard to help determine those specifications. If the software is completely automated (meaning no user or user interface), a software design may be as simple as a flow chart or text describing a planned sequence of events. There are also semi-standard methods like Unified Modeling Language and Fundamental modeling concepts. In either case, some documentation of the plan is usually the product of the design. Furthermore, a software design may be platform-independent or platform-specific, depending upon the availability of the technology used for the design.
The main difference between software analysis and design is that the output of a software analysis consists of smaller problems to solve. Additionally, the analysis should not be designed very differently across different team members or groups. In contrast, the design focuses on capabilities, and thus multiple designs for the same problem can and will exist. Depending on the environment, the design often varies, whether it is created from reliable frameworks or implemented with suitable design patterns. Design examples include operation systems, webpages, mobile devices or even the new cloud computing paradigm.
Software design is both a process and a model. The design process is a sequence of steps that enables the designer to describe all aspects of the software for building. Creative skill, past experience, a sense of what makes "good" software, and an overall commitment to quality are examples of critical success factors for a competent design. It is important to note, however, that the design process is not always a straightforward procedure; the design model can be compared to an architect’s plans for a house. It begins by representing the totality of the thing that is to be built (e.g., a three-dimensional rendering of the house); slowly, the thing is refined to provide guidance for constructing each detail (e.g., the plumbing lay). Similarly, the design model that is created for software provides a variety of different views of the computer software. Basic design principles enable the software engineer to navigate the design process. Davis [DAV95][full citation needed] suggests a set of principles for software design, which have been adapted and extended in the following list:

The design process should not suffer from "tunnel vision." A good designer should consider alternative approaches, judging each based on the requirements of the problem, the resources available to do the job.
The design should be traceable to the analysis model. Because a single element of the design model can often be traced back to multiple requirements, it is necessary to have a means for tracking how requirements have been satisfied by the design model.
The design should not reinvent the wheel. Systems are constructed using a set of design patterns, many of which have likely been encountered before. These patterns should always be chosen as an alternative to reinvention. Time is short and resources are limited; design time should be invested in representing truly new ideas and integrating patterns that already exist when applicable.
The design should "minimize the intellectual distance" between the software and the problem as it exists in the real world. That is, the structure of the software design should, whenever possible, mimic the structure of the problem domain.
The design should exhibit uniformity and integration. A design is uniform if it appears fully coherent. In order to achieve this outcome, rules of style and format should be defined for a design team before design work begins. A design is integrated if care is taken in defining interfaces between design components.
The design should be structured to accommodate change. The design concepts discussed in the next section enable a design to achieve this principle.
The design should be structured to degrade gently, even when aberrant data, events, or operating conditions are encountered. Well- designed software should never "bomb"; it should be designed to accommodate unusual circumstances, and if it must terminate processing, it should do so in a graceful manner.
Design is not coding, coding is not design. Even when detailed procedural designs are created for program components, the level of abstraction of the design model is higher than the source code. The only design decisions made at the coding level should address the small implementation details that enable the procedural design to be coded.
The design should be assessed for quality as it is being created, not after the fact. A variety of design concepts and design measures are available to assist the designer in assessing quality throughout the development process.
The design should be reviewed to minimize conceptual (semantic) errors. There is sometimes a tendency to focus on minutiae when the design is reviewed, missing the forest for the trees. A design team should ensure that major conceptual elements of the design (omissions, ambiguity, inconsistency) have been addressed before worrying about the syntax of the design model.

Design Concepts[edit]
The design concepts provide the software designer with a foundation from which more sophisticated methods can be applied. A set of fundamental design concepts has evolved. They are as follows:

Abstraction - Abstraction is the process or result of generalization by reducing the information content of a concept or an observable phenomenon, typically in order to retain only information which is relevant for a particular purpose.It is an act of Representing essential features without including the background details or explanations.
Refinement - It is the process of elaboration. A hierarchy is developed by decomposing a macroscopic statement of function in a step-wise fashion until programming language statements are reached. In each step, one or several instructions of a given program are decomposed into more detailed instructions. Abstraction and Refinement are complementary concepts.
Modularity - Software architecture is divided into components called modules.
Software Architecture - It refers to the overall structure of the software and the ways in which that structure provides conceptual integrity for a system. Good software architecture will yield a good return on investment with respect to the desired outcome of the project, e.g. in terms of performance, quality, schedule and cost.
Control Hierarchy - A program structure that represents the organization of a program component and implies a hierarchy of control.
Structural Partitioning - The program structure can be divided both horizontally and vertically. Horizontal partitions define separate branches of modular hierarchy for each major program function. Vertical partitioning suggests that control and work should be distributed top down in the program structure.
Data Structure - It is a representation of the logical relationship among individual elements of data.
Software Procedure - It focuses on the processing of each module individually.
Information Hiding - Modules should be specified and designed so that information contained within a module is inaccessible to other modules that have no need for such information.

In his object model, Grady Booch mentions Abstraction, Encapsulation, Modularisation, and Hierarchy as fundamental software design principles.[3] The acronym PHAME (Principles of Hierarchy, Abstraction, Modularisation, and Encapsulation) is sometimes used to refer to these four fundamental principles.[4]
Design considerations[edit]
There are many aspects to consider in the design of a piece of software. The importance of each consideration should reflect the goals and expectations that the software is being created to meet. Some of these aspects are:

Compatibility - The software is able to operate with other products that are designed for interoperability with another product. For example, a piece of software may be backward-compatible with an older version of itself.
Extensibility - New capabilities can be added to the software without major changes to the underlying architecture.
Modularity - the resulting software comprises well defined, independent components which leads to better maintainability. The components could be then implemented and tested in isolation before being integrated to form a desired software system. This allows division of work in a software development project.
Fault-tolerance - The software is resistant to and able to recover from component failure.
Maintainability - A measure of how easily bug fixes or functional modifications can be accomplished. High maintainability can be the product of modularity and extensibility.
Reliability (Software durability) - The software is able to perform a required function under stated conditions for a specified period of time.
Reusability - The ability to use some or all of the aspects of the preexisting software in other projects with little to no modification.
Robustness - The software is able to operate under stress or tolerate unpredictable or invalid input. For example, it can be designed with resilience to low memory conditions.
Security - The software is able to withstand and resist hostile acts and influences.
Usability - The software user interface must be usable for its target user/audience. Default values for the parameters must be chosen so that they are a good choice for the majority of the users.[5]
Performance - The software performs its tasks within a time-frame that is acceptable for the user, and does not require too much memory.
Portability - The software should be usable across a number of different conditions and environments.
Scalability - The software adapts well to increasing data or number of users satisfaction.

Modeling language[edit]
A modeling language is any artificial language that can be used to express information, knowledge or systems in a structure that is defined by a consistent set of rules. These rules are used for interpretation of the components within the structure. A modeling language can be graphical or textual. Examples of graphical modeling languages for software design are:

Architecture description language (ADL) is a language used to describe and represent the software architecture of a software system.
Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) is an example of a Process Modeling language.
EXPRESS and EXPRESS-G (ISO 10303-11) is an international standard general-purpose data modeling language.
Extended Enterprise Modeling Language (EEML) is commonly used for business process modeling across a number of layers.
Flowchart is a schematic representation of an algorithm or step-wise process.
Fundamental Modeling Concepts (FMC) is modeling language for software-intensive systems.
IDEF is a family of modeling languages, the most notable of which include IDEF0 for functional modeling, IDEF1X for information modeling, and IDEF5 for modeling ontologies.
Jackson Structured Programming (JSP) is a method for structured programming based on correspondences between data stream structure and program structure.
LePUS3 is an object-oriented visual Design Description Language and a formal specification language that is suitable primarily for modeling large object-oriented (Java, C++, C#) programs and design patterns.
Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a general modeling language to describe software both structurally and behaviorally. It has a graphical notation and allows for extension with a Profile (UML).
Alloy (specification language) is a general purpose specification language for expressing complex structural constraints and behavior in a software system. It provides a concise language base on first-order relational logic.
Systems Modeling Language (SysML) is a new general-purpose modeling language for systems engineering.
Service-oriented modeling framework (SOMF)[6]

Design patterns[edit]
A software designer or architect may identify a design problem which has been visited and perhaps even solved by others in the past. A template or pattern describing a solution to a common problem is known as a design pattern. The reuse of such patterns can help speed up the software development process.[7]
Technique[edit]
The difficulty of using the term "design" in relation to software is that in some senses, the source code of a program is the design for the program that it produces. To the extent that this is true, "software design" refers to the design of the design. Edsger W. Dijkstra referred to this layering of semantic levels as the "radical novelty" of computer programming,[8] and Donald Knuth used his experience writing TeX to describe the futility of attempting to design a program prior to implementing it:

TEX would have been a complete failure if I had merely specified it and not participated fully in its initial implementation. The process of implementation constantly led me to unanticipated questions and to new insights about how the original specifications could be improved.[9]

Usage[edit]
Software design documentation may be reviewed or presented to allow constraints, specifications and even requirements to be adjusted prior to computer programming. Redesign may occur after review of a programmed simulation or prototype. It is possible to design software in the process of programming, without a plan or requirement analysis,[10] but for more complex projects this would not be considered feasible. A separate design prior to programming allows for multidisciplinary designers and Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) to collaborate with highly skilled programmers for software that is both useful and technically sound.
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Software design.



Aspect-oriented software development
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology
Design rationale
Interaction design
Icon design
Search-based software engineering
Software Design Description (IEEE 1016)
Software development
User experience
User interface design
Zero One Infinity

References[edit]



^ Ralph, P. and Wand, Y. (2009). A proposal for a formal definition of the design concept. In Lyytinen, K., Loucopoulos, P., Mylopoulos, J., and Robinson, W., editors, Design Requirements Workshop (LNBIP 14), pp. 103–136. Springer-Verlag, p. 109 doi:10.1007/978-3-540-92966-6_6.
^ Freeman, Peter; David Hart (2004). "A Science of design for software-intensive systems". Communications of the ACM. 47 (8): 19–21 [20]. doi:10.1145/1012037.1012054. 
^ Booch, Grady; et al. (2004). Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications (3rd ed.). MA, USA: Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-201-89551-X. Retrieved 30 January 2015. 
^ Suryanarayana, Girish (November 2014). Refactoring for Software Design Smells. Morgan Kaufmann. p. 258. ISBN 978-0128013977. Retrieved 31 January 2015. 
^ Carroll, John, ed. (1995). Scenario-Based Design: Envisioning Work and Technology in System Development. New York: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0471076597. 
^ Bell, Michael (2008). "Introduction to Service-Oriented Modeling". Service-Oriented Modeling: Service Analysis, Design, and Architecture. Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-14111-3. 
^ Judith Bishop. "C# 3.0 Design Patterns: Use the Power of C# 3.0 to Solve Real-World Problems". C# Books from O'Reilly Media. Retrieved 2012-05-15. If you want to speed up the development of your .NET applications, you're ready for C# design patterns -- elegant, accepted and proven ways to tackle common programming problems. 
^ Dijkstra, E. W. (1988). "On the cruelty of really teaching computing science". Retrieved 2014-01-10. 
^ Knuth, Donald E. (1989). "Notes on the Errors of TeX" (PDF). 
^ Ralph, P., and Wand, Y. A Proposal for a Formal Definition of the Design Concept. In, Lyytinen, K., Loucopoulos, P., Mylopoulos, J., and Robinson, W., (eds.), Design Requirements Engineering: A Ten-Year Perspective: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 103-136



^Roger S. Pressman. Software engineering: a practitioner’s approach. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-365578-3. 






v
t
e


Major fields of computer science




Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.



Hardware



Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very-large-scale integration
Energy consumption
Electronic design automation





Computer systems
organization



Computer architecture
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Dependability





Networks



Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service





Software organization



Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality





Software notations
and tools



Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository





Software development



Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software construction
Software deployment
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model





Theory of computation



Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics





Algorithms



Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry





Mathematics
of computing



Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis





Information
systems



Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval





Security



Cryptography
Formal methods
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security





Human–computer
interaction



Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility





Concurrency



Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing





Artificial
intelligence



Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence





Machine learning



Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Cross-validation





Graphics



Animation
Rendering
Image manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling





Applied
computing



E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video game
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management








 Book
 Category
 Portal
WikiProject
 Commons












v
t
e


Software engineering



Fields



Computer programming
Requirements engineering
Software deployment
Software design
Software maintenance
Software testing
Systems analysis
Formal methods





Concepts



Data modeling
Enterprise architecture
Functional specification
Modeling language
Orthogonality
Programming paradigm
Software
Software archaeology
Software architecture
Software configuration management
Software development methodology
Software development process
Software quality
Software quality assurance
Software verification and validation
Structured analysis





Orientations



Agile
Aspect-oriented
Object orientation
Ontology
Service orientation
SDLC





Models




Developmental



Agile
EUP
Executable UML
Incremental model
Iterative model
Prototype model
RAD
UP
Scrum
Spiral model
V-Model
Waterfall model
XP





Other



SPICE
CMMI
Data model
ER model
Function model
Information model
Metamodeling
Object model
Systems model
View model





Languages



IDEF
UML
USL
SysML









Software
engineers




Victor Basili
Kent Beck
Grady Booch
Fred Brooks
Barry Boehm
Peter Chen
Danese Cooper
Ward Cunningham
Tom DeMarco
Edsger W. Dijkstra
Delores M. Etter
Martin Fowler
Adele Goldstine
Margaret Hamilton
C. A. R. Hoare
Lois Haibt
Mary Jean Harrold
Grace Hopper
Watts Humphrey
Michael A. Jackson
Ivar Jacobson
Alan Kay
Nancy Leveson
Stephen J. Mellor
Bertrand Meyer
David Parnas
Trygve Reenskaug
Winston W. Royce
James Rumbaugh
Mary Shaw
Peri Tarr
Elaine Weyuker
Niklaus Wirth
Edward Yourdon





Related fields



Computer science
Computer engineering
Project management
Risk management
Systems engineering








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Design






Outline
Portal
Designer










Disciplines







Communication
design



Advertising
Book design
Corporate design
Exhibit design
Film title design
Graphic design

Motion
Postage stamp design
Print design


Illustration
Information design
Instructional design
News design
Photography
Retail design
Signage / Traffic sign design
Typography / Type design
Video design
Visual merchandising





Environmental
design



Architecture
Architectural lighting design
Building design

Passive solar


Ecological design
Environmental impact design
Garden design

Computer-aided


Healthy community design
Hotel design
Interior architecture
Interior design

EID


Keyline design
Landscape architecture

Sustainable


Landscape design
Spatial design
Urban design





Industrial
design



Automotive design
Automotive suspension design
CMF design
Corrugated box design
Electric guitar design
Furniture design

Sustainable


Hardware interface design
Motorcycle design
Packaging and labeling
Photographic lens design
Product design
Production design
Sensory design
Service design





Interaction
design



Experience design

EED


Game design

Level design
Video game design


Hardware interface design
Icon design
Immersive design
Information design
Sonic interaction design
User experience design
User interface design
Web design





Other
applied arts



Public art design
Ceramic / glass design
Fashion design

Costume design
Jewelry design


Floral design
Game art design
Property design
Scenic design
Sound design
Stage/set lighting design
Textile design





Other
design
& engineering



Algorithm design
Boiler design
Conceptual design
Database design
Drug design
Electrical system design
Experimental design
Filter design
Job design
Integrated circuit design

Circuit design
Physical design
Power network design


Mechanism design
Nuclear weapon design
Nucleic acid design
Organization design
Process design
Processor design
Protein design
Research design
Social design
Software design
Spacecraft design
Strategic design
Systems design
















Approaches






Activity-centered
Adaptive web
Affective
Brainstorming
By committee
By contract
C-K theory
Closure
Co-design
Concept-oriented
Configuration
Contextual
Continuous
Cradle-to-cradle
Creative problem-solving
Creativity techniques
Critical

Design fiction


Defensive
Design–bid–build
Design–build

architect-led


Domain-driven
Ecodesign
Energy neutral
Engineering design process

Probabilistic design


Error-tolerant
Fault-tolerant
Framework-oriented
For assembly
For behaviour change
For manufacturability
For Six Sigma
For testing
For X
Functional
Generative
Geodesign
High-level
Integrated
Integrated topside
Intelligence-based
Iterative
KISS principle
Low-level
Metadesign
Mind mapping
Modular
New Wave
Object-oriented
Open
Parametric
Participatory
Platform-based
Policy-based
Process-centered
Public interest
Rational
Regenerative
Reliability engineering
Research-based
Responsibility-driven
RWD
Safe-life
Sustainable
Systemic

SOD


Tableless web
Theory of constraints
Top-down and bottom-up
Transformation
Transgenerational
TRIZ
Universal

Design for All


Usage-centered
Use-centered
User-centered

Empathic


User innovation
Value-driven
Value sensitive

Privacy by




Design choice
computing
controls
flow
leadership
management
marker
methods
pattern
research
science
strategy
theory
thinking
















Tools
Intellectual property
Organizations
Awards










Tools



AAD
Architectural model
Blueprint
Comprehensive layout
CAD

CAID
Virtual home design software


CAutoD
Design quality indicator
Electronic design automation
Flowchart
Mockup
Product design specification
Prototype
Sketch
Storyboard
Technical drawing
Web design program
Website wireframe





Intellectual
property



Community design
Design around
Design patent
Fashion design copyright
Geschmacksmuster
Industrial design rights

European Union







Organizations



AIGA
Chartered Society of Designers
Design and Industries Association
Design Council
International Forum Design
The Design Society
Design Research Society





Awards



European Design Award
German Design Award
Good Design Award (Chicago)
Good Design Award (Japan)
Graphex
IF product design award
James Dyson Award
Prince Philip Designers Prize
















Related topics






Aesthetics
Agile
Concept art
Creative industries
Cultural icon
.design
Enterprise architecture
Futures studies
Innovation Management
Intelligent design
Lean Startup
New product development
OODA Loop
Philosophy of design
Process simulation
Slow design
STEAM fields
Unintelligent design
Visualization
Wicked problem


Design brief
change
classic
director
education
elements and principles
engineer
firm
history
knowledge
language
life
load
museum
paradigm
rationale
review
specification
studio
technology











Commons
Wikibooks
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Wiktionary











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Software_design&oldid=818154743"					Categories: Computer occupationsSoftware designHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing more detailed references