For other uses, see Software development (disambiguation).


Software development


Core activities




Processes
Requirements
Design
Engineering
Construction
Testing
Debugging
Deployment
Maintenance




Paradigms and models




Agile
Cleanroom
Incremental
Prototyping
Spiral
Waterfall




Methodologies and frameworks




DevOps
DSDM
FDD
IID
Kanban
Lean SD
MDD
MSF
PSP
RAD
SAFe
Scrum
SEMAT
TSP
UP
V-Model
XP




Supporting disciplines




Configuration management
Documentation
Software quality assurance (SQA)
Project management
User experience




Practices




ATDD
BDD
CCO
CI
CD
DDD
PP
Stand-up
TDD




Tools




Compiler
Debugger
Profiler
GUI designer
Modeling
IDE
Build automation
Release automation
Infrastructure as Code
Testing




Standards and BOKs




CMMI
IEEE standards
ISO 9001
ISO/IEC standards
SWEBOK
PMBOK
BABOK







v
t
e





Software development is the process of computer programming, documenting, testing, and bug fixing involved in creating and maintaining applications and frameworks resulting in a software product. Software development is a process of writing and maintaining the source code, but in a broader sense, it includes all that is involved between the conception of the desired software through to the final manifestation of the software, sometimes in a planned and structured process.[1] Therefore, software development may include research, new development, prototyping, modification, reuse, re-engineering, maintenance, or any other activities that result in software products.[2]
Software can be developed for a variety of purposes, the three most common being to meet specific needs of a specific client/business (the case with custom software), to meet a perceived need of some set of potential users (the case with commercial and open source software), or for personal use (e.g. a scientist may write software to automate a mundane task). Embedded software development, that is, the development of embedded software, such as used for controlling consumer products, requires the development process to be integrated with the development of the controlled physical product. System software underlies applications and the programming process itself, and is often developed separately.
The need for better quality control of the software development process has given rise to the discipline of software engineering, which aims to apply the systematic approach exemplified in the engineering paradigm to the process of software development.
There are many approaches to software project management, known as software development life cycle models, methodologies, processes, or models. The waterfall model is a traditional version, contrasted with the more recent innovation of agile software development.



Contents


1 Methodologies
2 Software development activities

2.1 Identification of need
2.2 Planning
2.3 Designing
2.4 Implementation, testing and documenting
2.5 Deployment and maintenance


3 Subtopics

3.1 View model
3.2 Business process and data modelling
3.3 Computer-aided software engineering
3.4 Integrated development environment
3.5 Modeling language
3.6 Programming paradigm
3.7 Reuse of solutions


4 See also

4.1 Roles and industry
4.2 Specific applications


5 References
6 Further reading



Methodologies[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A software development process (also known as a software development methodology, model, or life cycle) is a framework that is used to structure, plan, and control the process of developing information systems. A wide variety of such frameworks has evolved over the years, each with its own recognized strengths and weaknesses. There are several different approaches to software development: some take a more structured, engineering-based approach to developing business solutions, whereas others may take a more incremental approach, where software evolves as it is developed piece-by-piece. One system development methodology is not necessarily suitable for use by all projects. Each of the available methodologies is best suited to specific kinds of projects, based on various technical, organizational, project and team considerations.
Most methodologies share some combination of the following stages of software development:

Analyzing the problem
Market research
Gathering requirements for the proposed business solution
Devising a plan or design for the software-based solution
Implementation (coding) of the software
Testing the software
Deployment
Maintenance and bug fixing

These stages are often referred to collectively as the software development lifecycle, or SDLC. Different approaches to software development may carry out these stages in different orders, or devote more or less time to different stages. The level of detail of the documentation produced at each stage of software development may also vary. These stages may also be carried out in turn (a “waterfall” based approach), or they may be repeated over various cycles or iterations (a more "extreme" approach). The more extreme approach usually involves less time spent on planning and documentation, and more time spent on coding and development of automated tests. More “extreme” approaches also promote continuous testing throughout the development lifecycle, as well as having a working (or bug-free) product at all times. More structured or “waterfall” based approaches attempt to assess the majority of risks and develop a detailed plan for the software before implementation (coding) begins, and avoid significant design changes and re-coding in later stages of the software development lifecycle planning.
There are significant advantages and disadvantages to the various methodologies, and the best approach to solving a problem using software will often depend on the type of problem. If the problem is well understood and a solution can be effectively planned out ahead of time, the more "waterfall" based approach may work the best. If, on the other hand, the problem is unique (at least to the development team) and the structure of the software solution cannot be easily envisioned, then a more "extreme" incremental approach may work best.
Software development activities[edit]
Identification of need[edit]
The sources of ideas for software products are plenteous. These ideas can come from market research including the demographics of potential new customers, existing customers, sales prospects who rejected the product, other internal software development staff, or a creative third party. Ideas for software products are usually first evaluated by marketing personnel for economic feasibility, for fit with existing channels distribution, for possible effects on existing product lines, required features, and for fit with the company's marketing objectives. In a marketing evaluation phase, the cost and time assumptions become evaluated. A decision is reached early in the first phase as to whether, based on the more detailed information generated by the marketing and development staff, the project should be pursued further.[3]
In the book "Great Software Debates", Alan M. Davis states in the chapter "Requirements", subchapter "The Missing Piece of Software Development"

Students of engineering learn engineering and are rarely exposed to finance or marketing. Students of marketing learn marketing and are rarely exposed to finance or engineering. Most of us become specialists in just one area. To complicate matters, few of us meet interdisciplinary people in the workforce, so there are few roles to mimic. Yet, software product planning is critical to the development success and absolutely requires knowledge of multiple disciplines.[4]

Because software development may involve compromising or going beyond what is required by the client, a software development project may stray into less technical concerns such as human resources, risk management, intellectual property, budgeting, crisis management, etc. These processes may also cause the role of business development to overlap with software development.
Planning[edit]
Planning is an objective of each and every activity, where we want to discover things that belong to the project. An important task in creating a software program is extracting the requirements or requirements analysis.[5] Customers typically have an abstract idea of what they want as an end result but do not know what software should do. Skilled and experienced software engineers recognize incomplete, ambiguous, or even contradictory requirements at this point. Frequently demonstrating live code may help reduce the risk that the requirements are incorrect.
"Although much effort is put in the requirements phase to ensure that requirements are complete and consistent, rarely that is the case; leaving the software design phase as the most influential one when it comes to minimizing the effects of new or changing requirements. Requirements volatility is challenging because they impact future or already going development efforts."[6]
Once the general requirements are gathered from the client, an analysis of the scope of the development should be determined and clearly stated. This is often called a scope document.
Certain functionality may be out of scope of the project as a function of cost or as a result of unclear requirements at the start of development. If the development is done externally, this document can be considered a legal document so that if there are ever disputes, any ambiguity of what was promised to the client can be clarified.
Designing[edit]
Main articles: Software design and Systems design
Once the requirements are established, the design of the software can be established in a software design document. This involves a preliminary, or high-level design of the main modules with an overall picture (such as a block diagram) of how the parts fit together. The language, operating system, and hardware components should all be known at this time. Then a detailed or low-level design is created, perhaps with prototyping as proof-of-concept or to firm up requirements.
Implementation, testing and documenting[edit]
Implementation is the part of the process where software engineers actually program the code for the project.
Software testing is an integral and important phase of the software development process. This part of the process ensures that defects are recognized as soon as possible. In some processes, generally known as test-driven development, tests may be developed just before implementation and serve as a guide for the implementation's correctness.
Documenting the internal design of software for the purpose of future maintenance and enhancement is done throughout development. This may also include the writing of an API, be it external or internal. The software engineering process chosen by the developing team will determine how much internal documentation (if any) is necessary. Plan-driven models (e.g., Waterfall) generally produce more documentation than Agile models.
Deployment and maintenance[edit]
Deployment starts directly after the code is appropriately tested, approved for release, and sold or otherwise distributed into a production environment. This may involve installation, customization (such as by setting parameters to the customer's values), testing, and possibly an extended period of evaluation.[citation needed]
Software training and support is important, as software is only effective if it is used correctly.[7]
Maintaining and enhancing software to cope with newly discovered faults or requirements can take substantial time and effort, as missed requirements may force redesign of the software.[citation needed]
Subtopics[edit]
View model[edit]




The TEAF Matrix of Views and Perspectives.


A view model is a framework that provides the viewpoints on the system and its environment, to be used in the software development process. It is a graphical representation of the underlying semantics of a view.
The purpose of viewpoints and views is to enable human engineers to comprehend very complex systems and to organize the elements of the problem and the solution around domains of expertise. In the engineering of physically intensive systems, viewpoints often correspond to capabilities and responsibilities within the engineering organization.[8]
Most complex system specifications are so extensive that no one individual can fully comprehend all aspects of the specifications. Furthermore, we all have different interests in a given system and different reasons for examining the system's specifications. A business executive will ask different questions of a system make-up than would a system implementer. The concept of viewpoints framework, therefore, is to provide separate viewpoints into the specification of a given complex system. These viewpoints each satisfy an audience with interest in some set of aspects of the system. Associated with each viewpoint is a viewpoint language that optimizes the vocabulary and presentation for the audience of that viewpoint.
Business process and data modelling[edit]
Graphical representation of the current state of information provides a very effective means for presenting information to both users and system developers.




example of the interaction between business process and data models.[9]



A business model illustrates the functions associated with the business process being modeled and the organizations that perform these functions. By depicting activities and information flows, a foundation is created to visualize, define, understand, and validate the nature of a process.
A data model provides the details of information to be stored and is of primary use when the final product is the generation of computer software code for an application or the preparation of a functional specification to aid a computer software make-or-buy decision. See the figure on the right for an example of the interaction between business process and data models.[9]

Usually, a model is created after conducting an interview, referred to as business analysis. The interview consists of a facilitator asking a series of questions designed to extract required information that describes a process. The interviewer is called a facilitator to emphasize that it is the participants who provide the information. The facilitator should have some knowledge of the process of interest, but this is not as important as having a structured methodology by which the questions are asked of the process expert. The methodology is important because usually a team of facilitators is collecting information across the facility and the results of the information from all the interviewers must fit together once completed.[9]
The models are developed as defining either the current state of the process, in which case the final product is called the "as-is" snapshot model, or a collection of ideas of what the process should contain, resulting in a "what-can-be" model. Generation of process and data models can be used to determine if the existing processes and information systems are sound and only need minor modifications or enhancements, or if re-engineering is required as a corrective action. The creation of business models is more than a way to view or automate your information process. Analysis can be used to fundamentally reshape the way your business or organization conducts its operations.[9]
Computer-aided software engineering[edit]
Computer-aided software engineering (CASE), in the field software engineering, is the scientific application of a set of software tools and methods to the development of software which results in high-quality, defect-free, and maintainable software products.[10] It also refers to methods for the development of information systems together with automated tools that can be used in the software development process.[11] The term "computer-aided software engineering" (CASE) can refer to the software used for the automated development of systems software, i.e., computer code. The CASE functions include analysis, design, and programming. CASE tools automate methods for designing, documenting, and producing structured computer code in the desired programming language.[12]
Two key ideas of Computer-aided Software System Engineering (CASE) are:[13]

Foster computer assistance in software development and or software maintenance processes, and
An engineering approach to software development and or maintenance.

Typical CASE tools exist for configuration management, data modeling, model transformation, refactoring, source code generation.
Integrated development environment[edit]




Anjuta, a C and C++ IDE for the GNOME environment


An integrated development environment (IDE) also known as integrated design environment or integrated debugging environment is a software application that provides comprehensive facilities to computer programmers for software development. An IDE normally consists of a:

Source code editor,
Compiler or interpreter,
Build automation tools, and
Debugger (usually).

IDEs are designed to maximize programmer productivity by providing tight-knit components with similar user interfaces. Typically an IDE is dedicated to a specific programming language, so as to provide a feature set which most closely matches the programming paradigms of the language.
Modeling language[edit]
A modeling language is any artificial language that can be used to express information or knowledge or systems in a structure that is defined by a consistent set of rules. The rules are used for interpretation of the meaning of components in the structure. A modeling language can be graphical or textual.[14] Graphical modeling languages use a diagram techniques with named symbols that represent concepts and lines that connect the symbols and that represent relationships and various other graphical annotation to represent constraints. Textual modeling languages typically use standardised keywords accompanied by parameters to make computer-interpretable expressions.
Examples of graphical modelling languages in the field of software engineering are:

Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN, and the XML form BPML) is an example of a process modeling language.
EXPRESS and EXPRESS-G (ISO 10303-11) is an international standard general-purpose data modeling language.
Extended Enterprise Modeling Language (EEML) is commonly used for business process modeling across layers.
Flowchart is a schematic representation of an algorithm or a stepwise process,
Fundamental Modeling Concepts (FMC) modeling language for software-intensive systems.
IDEF is a family of modeling languages, the most notable of which include IDEF0 for functional modeling, IDEF1X for information modeling, and IDEF5 for modeling ontologies.
LePUS3 is an object-oriented visual Design Description Language and a formal specification language that is suitable primarily for modelling large object-oriented (Java, C++, C#) programs and design patterns.
Specification and Description Language(SDL) is a specification language targeted at the unambiguous specification and description of the behaviour of reactive and distributed systems.
Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a general-purpose modeling language that is an industry standard for specifying software-intensive systems. UML 2.0, the current version, supports thirteen different diagram techniques and has widespread tool support.

Not all modeling languages are executable, and for those that are, using them doesn't necessarily mean that programmers are no longer needed. On the contrary, executable modeling languages are intended to amplify the productivity of skilled programmers, so that they can address more difficult problems, such as parallel computing and distributed systems.
Programming paradigm[edit]
A programming paradigm is a fundamental style of computer programming, which is not generally dictated by the project management methodology (such as waterfall or agile). Paradigms differ in the concepts and abstractions used to represent the elements of a program (such as objects, functions, variables, constraints) and the steps that comprise a computation (such as assignations, evaluation, continuations, data flows). Sometimes the concepts asserted by the paradigm are utilized cooperatively in high-level system architecture design; in other cases, the programming paradigm's scope is limited to the internal structure of a particular program or module.
A programming language can support multiple paradigms. For example, programs written in C++ or Object Pascal can be purely procedural, or purely object-oriented, or contain elements of both paradigms. Software designers and programmers decide how to use those paradigm elements. In object-oriented programming, programmers can think of a program as a collection of interacting objects, while in functional programming a program can be thought of as a sequence of stateless function evaluations. When programming computers or systems with many processors, process-oriented programming allows programmers to think about applications as sets of concurrent processes acting upon logically shared data structures.
Just as different groups in software engineering advocate different methodologies, different programming languages advocate different programming paradigms. Some languages are designed to support one paradigm (Smalltalk supports object-oriented programming, Haskell supports functional programming), while other programming languages support multiple paradigms (such as Object Pascal, C++, C#, Visual Basic, Common Lisp, Scheme, Python, Ruby, and Oz).
Many programming paradigms are as well known for what methods they forbid as for what they enable. For instance, pure functional programming forbids using side-effects; structured programming forbids using goto statements. Partly for this reason, new paradigms are often regarded as doctrinaire or overly rigid by those accustomed to earlier styles.[citation needed] Avoiding certain methods can make it easier to prove theorems about a program's correctness, or simply to understand its behavior.
Examples of high-level paradigms include:

Aspect-oriented software development
Domain-specific modeling
Model-driven engineering
Object-oriented programming methodologies

Grady Booch's object-oriented design (OOD), also known as object-oriented analysis and design (OOAD). The Booch model includes six diagrams: class, object, state transition, interaction, module, and process.[15]


Search-based software engineering
Service-oriented modeling
Structured programming
Top-down and bottom-up design

Top-down programming: evolved in the 1970s by IBM researcher Harlan Mills (and Niklaus Wirth) in developed structured programming.



Reuse of solutions[edit]






This section may need to be rewritten entirely to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The discussion page may contain suggestions. (May 2016)




A software framework is a re-usable design or implementation for a software system or subsystem.
Existing components (Component-based software engineering) can be reused, assembled together to create a larger application.
API (Application programming interface, Web service) establish a set of "subroutine definitions, protocols, and tools for building application software" which can be utilized in future builds.
Open Source documentions, via libraries such as GitHub, provide free code for software developers to re-use and implement into new applications or designs.

See also[edit]

Continuous integration
Custom software
DevOps
Functional specification
Programming productivity
Software blueprint
Software design
Software development effort estimation
Software development process
Software project management
Specification and Description Language
User experience
Software industry

Roles and industry[edit]

Bachelor of Science in Information Technology
Computer programmer
Consulting software engineer
Offshore software development
Software developer
Software engineer
Software publisher

Specific applications[edit]

Video game development
Web application development
Web engineering
Mobile Application Development

References[edit]



^ "Application Development (AppDev) Defined and Explained". Bestpricecomputers.co.uk. 2007-08-13. Retrieved 2012-08-05. 
^ DRM Associates (2002). "New Product Development Glossary". Retrieved 2006-10-29. 
^ Joseph M. Morris (2001). Software Industry Accounting. p.1.10
^ Alan M. Davis. Great Software Debates (October 8, 2004), pp:125-128 Wiley-IEEE Computer Society Press
^ Ralph, P., and Wand, Y. A Proposal for a Formal Definition of the Design Concept. In, Lyytinen, K., Loucopoulos, P., Mylopoulos, J., and Robinson, W., (eds.), Design Requirements Engineering: A Ten-Year Perspective: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 103-136
^ Otero, Carlos. "Software Design Challenges". IT Performance Improvement. Taylor & Francis LLC. Retrieved 19 October 2017. 
^ "Software Development". hayathisolutions.com. Retrieved 2016-06-07. 
^ Edward J. Barkmeyer ea (2003). Concepts for Automating Systems Integration NIST 2003.
^ a b c d Paul R. Smith & Richard Sarfaty (1993). Creating a strategic plan for configuration management using Computer Aided Software Engineering (CASE) tools. Paper For 1993 National DOE/Contractors and Facilities CAD/CAE User's Group.
^ Kuhn, D.L (1989). "Selecting and effectively using a computer aided software engineering tool". Annual Westinghouse computer symposium; 6-7 Nov 1989; Pittsburgh, PA (USA); DOE Project.
^ P. Loucopoulos and V. Karakostas (1995). System Requirements Engineering. McGraw-Hill.
^ CASE Archived 2012-02-18 at the Wayback Machine. definition In: Telecom Glossary 2000 Archived 2005-11-22 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved 26 Oct 2008.
^ K. Robinson (1992). Putting the Software Engineering into CASE. New York : John Wiley and Sons Inc.
^ Xiao He (2007). "A metamodel for the notation of graphical modeling languages". In: Computer Software and Applications Conference, 2007. COMPSAC 2007 – Vol. 1. 31st Annual International, Volume 1, Issue , 24–27 July 2007, pp 219-224.
^ Georges Gauthier Merx & Ronald J. Norman (2006). Unified Software Engineering with Java. p.201.



Further reading[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Software development.



Kit, Edward (1992). Software Testing in The Real World. Addison-Wesley Professional. ISBN 0201877562. 
McCarthy, Jim (1995). Dynamics of Software Development. Microsoft Press. ISBN 1556158238. 
Conde, Dan (2002). Software Product Management: Managing Software Development from Idea to Product to Marketing to Sales. Aspatore Books. ISBN 1587622025. 
Davis, A. M. (2005). Just enough requirements management: Where software development meets marketing. Dorset House Publishing Company, Incorporated. ISBN 0932633641. 
Hasted, Edward (2005). Software That Sells: A Practical Guide to Developing and Marketing Your Software Project. Wiley Publishing. ISBN 0764597833. 
Hohmann, Luke (2003). Beyond Software Architecture: Creating and Sustaining Winning Solutions. Addison-Wesley Professional. ISBN 0201775948. 
John W. Horch (2005). "Two Orientations On How To Work With Objects." In: IEEE Software. vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 117–118, Mar., 1995.
Rittinghouse, John (2003). Managing Software Deliverables: A Software Development Management Methodology. Digital Press. ISBN 155558313X. 
Wiegers, Karl E. (2005). More About Software Requirements: Thorny Issues and Practical Advice. Microsoft Press. ISBN 0735622671. 
Wysocki, Robert K. (2006). Effective Software Project Management. Wiley. ISBN 0764596365. 







v
t
e


Software engineering



Fields



Computer programming
Requirements engineering
Software deployment
Software design
Software maintenance
Software testing
Systems analysis
Formal methods





Concepts



Data modeling
Enterprise architecture
Functional specification
Modeling language
Orthogonality
Programming paradigm
Software
Software archaeology
Software architecture
Software configuration management
Software development methodology
Software development process
Software quality
Software quality assurance
Software verification and validation
Structured analysis





Orientations



Agile
Aspect-oriented
Object orientation
Ontology
Service orientation
SDLC





Models




Developmental



Agile
EUP
Executable UML
Incremental model
Iterative model
Prototype model
RAD
UP
Scrum
Spiral model
V-Model
Waterfall model
XP





Other



SPICE
CMMI
Data model
ER model
Function model
Information model
Metamodeling
Object model
Systems model
View model





Languages



IDEF
UML
USL
SysML









Software
engineers




Victor Basili
Kent Beck
Grady Booch
Fred Brooks
Barry Boehm
Peter Chen
Danese Cooper
Ward Cunningham
Tom DeMarco
Edsger W. Dijkstra
Delores M. Etter
Martin Fowler
Adele Goldstine
Margaret Hamilton
C. A. R. Hoare
Lois Haibt
Mary Jean Harrold
Grace Hopper
Watts Humphrey
Michael A. Jackson
Ivar Jacobson
Alan Kay
Nancy Leveson
Stephen J. Mellor
Bertrand Meyer
David Parnas
Trygve Reenskaug
Winston W. Royce
James Rumbaugh
Mary Shaw
Peri Tarr
Elaine Weyuker
Niklaus Wirth
Edward Yourdon





Related fields



Computer science
Computer engineering
Project management
Risk management
Systems engineering








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Major fields of computer science




Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.



Hardware



Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very-large-scale integration
Energy consumption
Electronic design automation





Computer systems
organization



Computer architecture
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Dependability





Networks



Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service





Software organization



Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality





Software notations
and tools



Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository





Software development



Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software construction
Software deployment
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model





Theory of computation



Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics





Algorithms



Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry





Mathematics
of computing



Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis





Information
systems



Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval





Security



Cryptography
Formal methods
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security





Human–computer
interaction



Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility





Concurrency



Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing





Artificial
intelligence



Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence





Machine learning



Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Cross-validation





Graphics



Animation
Rendering
Image manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling





Applied
computing



E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video game
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management








 Book
 Category
 Portal
WikiProject
 Commons









Authority control



NDL: 00679589











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Software_development&oldid=817221782"					Categories: Software developmentSoftware project managementProject managementComputer occupationsProduct developmentHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing additional references from August 2010All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2011Articles with unsourced statements from January 2008Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from May 2016All articles needing rewrite