For other uses, see Soldier (disambiguation).
For a broader coverage related to this topic, see Military personnel.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Soldier


South African soldiers next to a helicopter



Occupation


Profession



Activity sectors

Military


Description


Competencies
Physical
Stamina
Mindset



Fields of
employment

Armies and fireteams



Related jobs

Commando
Mercenary








v
t
e


Army units and organization



Subordinated
element



Fireteam Ø 


Squad / Crew  ● 


Section / Patrol  ●●


Platoon / Flight ●●● 





Unit



Company / Battery / Troop | 


Battalion / Cohort / Squadron || 


Regiment  |||  





Formation



Brigade / Group / Wing x 


Division / Legion xx 


Corps xxx 





Command



Field army xxxx 


Army group / Front xxxxx 


Region / Theater XXXXXX 





Temporary



Detachment
Patrol
Task force
Brigade group
Flying column
Field force
Combat command
Battlegroup
Regimental combat team









Common military ranks in English



Navies
Armies
Air forces


Commissioned officers


Admiral of
the fleet
Field marshal or
General of the Army
Marshal of
the air force


Admiral
General
Air chief marshal


Vice admiral
Lieutenant general
Air marshal


Rear admiral
Major general
Air vice-marshal


Commodore
Brigadier or
Brigadier general
Air commodore


Captain
Colonel
Group captain


Commander
Lieutenant colonel
Wing commander


Lieutenant
commander
Major or
Commandant
Squadron leader


Lieutenant
Captain
Flight lieutenant


Sub-lieutenant
Lieutenant or
First lieutenant
Flying officer


Ensign
Second lieutenant
Pilot officer


Midshipman
Officer cadet
Officer cadet


Enlisted grades


Warrant officer or
Chief petty officer
Warrant officer or
Sergeant major
Warrant officer


Petty officer
Sergeant
Sergeant


Leading seaman
Corporal or
Bombardier
Corporal


Seaman
Private or
Gunner or
Trooper
Aircraftman


Talk·View


A soldier is one who fights as part of an army. A soldier can be a conscripted or volunteer enlisted person, a non-commissioned officer, or an officer.




Mexican soldiers saluting






US Soldier with an M16 equipped with a grenade launcher





Contents


1 Etymology
2 Occupational designations
3 Other terms
4 Career soldiers and conscripts

4.1 Women as soldiers


5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word soldier derives from the Middle English word soudeour, from Old French soudeer or soudeour, meaning mercenary, from soudee, meaning shilling's worth or wage, from sou or soud, shilling.[1] The word is also related to the Medieval Latin soldarius, meaning soldier (literally, "one having pay").[2] These words ultimately derive from the Late Latin word solidus, referring to an Ancient Roman coin used in the Byzantine Empire.[1][2]
Occupational designations[edit]
In most armed forces use of the word "soldier" has taken on a more general meaning due to the increasing specialization of military occupations that require different areas of knowledge and skill-sets. As a result, "soldiers" are referred to by names or ranks which reflect an individual's military occupation specialty arm, service, or branch of military employment, their type of unit, or operational employment or technical use such as: trooper, tanker (a member of tank crew), commando, dragoon, infantryman, artilleryman, marine, paratrooper, grenadier, ranger, sniper, engineer, sapper, craftsman, signaller, medic, or a gunner.
Other terms[edit]
In many countries soldiers serving in specific occupations are referred to by terms other than their occupational name. For example, military police personnel in the British Army are known as "red caps" because of the colour of their caps (and berets).
Infantry are sometimes called "grunts" (in the United States Army or United States Marine Corps) or "squaddies" (in the British Army), while U.S. Army artillery crews, or "gunners," are sometimes referred to as "redlegs", from the service branch color for artillery.[citation needed] U.S. soldiers are often called "G.I.s" (short for the term "General Issue"). Members of the Marine Corps are typically referred to as "marines" rather than "soldiers".[3]
In the United States, the term warfighter is often used to refer collectively to all whose job it is to do the actual fighting, although in 2011 the U.S. Army officially started calling its combat personnel soldiers instead of warfighters, in part to avoid confusion among "warfighters" assigned to peace-keeping or other types of duties beyond combat activities.[4] The army has not completely phased out this terminology and still uses "warfighter" in various contexts such as the Project Manager Warfighter Information Network-Tactical.
French Marine Infantry are called marsouins (French: porpoises) because of their amphibious role.[citation needed] Military units in most armies have nicknames of this type, arising either from items of distinctive uniform, some historical connotation or rivalry between branches or regiments.
Career soldiers and conscripts[edit]
Some soldiers, such as conscripts or draftees, serve a single limited term. Others choose to serve until retirement; then they receive a pension and other benefits. In the United States, military members can retire after 20 years.[5] In other countries, the term of service is 30 years, hence the term "30-year man".
Women as soldiers[edit]
According to the United Nations, 10-30% of all soldiers worldwide are women.[6]
See also[edit]

Airman
Marine
Military use of children
Seaman

References[edit]


^ a b Mish, Frederick C., ed. (2004). "soldier". Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (11th ed.). Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster. ISBN 0-87779-809-5. 
^ a b Harper, Douglas (2010). "Online Etymology Dictionary". Retrieved 17 August 2010. 
^ "Don't call a Marine a soldier or sailor". The News-Times. Danbury, CT. September 25, 2005. Retrieved January 28.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Patton, Mark (2011-08-14). "Wordsmiths take aim at simplifying acronyms for Army". Stars and Stripes. Retrieved 2015-07-23.  Citing the potential for ambiguity in meaning of term "warfighter" (which could, like the term "firefighter" be read to mean "one who fights to stop or prevent wars").
^ "20-Year Retirement". Armytimes.com. Retrieved 8 March 2012. 
^ admin. "Congolese young women participating in conflict must actively participate in post-conflict stabilisation -". 


External links[edit]



Look up soldier in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



 Media related to Soldier at Wikimedia Commons




Authority control



GND: 4055409-0
NDL: 00562631











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soldier&oldid=818085673"					Categories: SoldiersMilitary specialismsMilitary lifeCombat occupationsHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesArticles needing additional references from August 2011All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from October 2010All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2016Articles containing French-language textArticles with unsourced statements from October 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers