This article is about chemical solutions. For other uses, see Solution (disambiguation).
"Solute" redirects here. For the sole order of the class Homoiostelea, see Solute (echinoderm).




Making a saline water solution by dissolving table salt (NaCl) in water. The salt is the solute and the water the solvent.


In chemistry, a solution is a homogeneous mixture composed of two or more substances. In such a mixture, a solute is a substance dissolved in another substance, known as a solvent. The mixing process of a solution happens at a scale where the effects of chemical polarity are involved, resulting in interactions that are specific to solvation. The solution assumes the phase of the solvent when the solvent is the larger fraction of the mixture, as is commonly the case. The concentration of a solute in a solution is the mass of that solute expressed as a percentage of the mass of the whole solution.



Contents


1 Characteristics
2 Types

2.1 Gaseous solutions
2.2 Liquid solutions
2.3 Solid solutions


3 Solubility
4 Properties
5 Liquid

5.1 Preparation from constituent ingredients


6 See also
7 References



Characteristics[edit]

A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances.
The particles of solute in a solution cannot be seen by the naked eye.
A solution does not allow beams of light to scatter.
A solution is stable.
The solute from a solution cannot be separated by filtration (or mechanically).
It is composed of only one phase.

Types[edit]






This section is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this section to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (June 2014)



Homogeneous means that the components of the mixture form a single phase. Heterogeneous means that the components of the mixture are of different phase. The properties of the mixture (such as concentration, temperature, and density) can be uniformly distributed through the volume but only in absence of diffusion phenomena or after their completion. Usually, the substance present in the greatest amount is considered the solvent. Solvents can be gases, liquids or solids. One or more components present in the solution other than the solvent are called solutes. The solution has the same physical state as the solvent.
Gaseous solutions[edit]
If the solvent is a gas, only gases are dissolved under a given set of conditions. An example of a gaseous solution is air (oxygen and other gases dissolved in nitrogen). Since interactions between molecules play almost no role, dilute gases form rather trivial solutions. In part of the literature, they are not even classified as solutions, but addressed as mixtures.
Liquid solutions[edit]
If the solvent is a liquid, then almost all gases, liquids, and solids can be dissolved. Here are some examples:

Gas in liquid:

Oxygen in water
Carbon dioxide in water – a less simple example, because the solution is accompanied by a chemical reaction (formation of ions). Note also that the visible bubbles in carbonated water are not the dissolved gas, but only an effervescence of carbon dioxide that has come out of solution; the dissolved gas itself is not visible since it is dissolved on a molecular level.


Liquid in liquid:

The mixing of two or more substances of the same chemistry but different concentrations to form a constant. (Homogenization of solutions)
Alcoholic beverages are basically solutions of ethanol in water.


Solid in liquid:

Sucrose (table sugar) in water
Sodium chloride (NaCl) (table salt) or any other salt in water, which forms an electrolyte: When dissolving, salt dissociates into ions.


Solutions in water are especially common.

Counter examples are provided by liquid mixtures that are not homogeneous: colloids, suspensions, emulsions are not considered solutions.
Body fluids are examples for complex liquid solutions, containing many solutes. Many of these are electrolytes, since they contain solute ions, such as potassium. Furthermore, they contain solute molecules like sugar and urea. Oxygen and carbon dioxide are also essential components of blood chemistry, where significant changes in their concentrations may be a sign of severe illness or injury.
Solid solutions[edit]
If the solvent is a solid, then gases, liquids and solids can be dissolved.

Gas in solids:

Hydrogen dissolves rather well in metals, especially in palladium; this is studied as a means of hydrogen storage.


Liquid in solid:

Mercury in gold, forming an amalgam
Water in solid salt or sugar, forming moist solids
Hexane in paraffin wax


Solid in solid:

Steel, basically a solution of carbon atoms in a crystalline matrix of iron atoms
Alloys like bronze and many others
Polymers containing plasticizers



Solubility[edit]
Main articles: Solubility and Solvation
The ability of one compound to dissolve in another compound is called solubility. When a liquid can completely dissolve in another liquid the two liquids are miscible. Two substances that can never mix to form a solution are called immiscible.
All solutions have a positive entropy of mixing. The interactions between different molecules or ions may be energetically favored or not. If interactions are unfavorable, then the free energy decreases with increasing solute concentration. At some point the energy loss outweighs the entropy gain, and no more solute particles can be dissolved; the solution is said to be saturated. However, the point at which a solution can become saturated can change significantly with different environmental factors, such as temperature, pressure, and contamination. For some solute-solvent combinations a supersaturated solution can be prepared by raising the solubility (for example by increasing the temperature) to dissolve more solute, and then lowering it (for example by cooling).
Usually, the greater the temperature of the solvent, the more of a given solid solute it can dissolve. However, most gases and some compounds exhibit solubilities that decrease with increased temperature. Such behavior is a result of an exothermic enthalpy of solution. Some surfactants exhibit this behaviour. The solubility of liquids in liquids is generally less temperature-sensitive than that of solids or gases.
Properties[edit]
The physical properties of compounds such as melting point and boiling point change when other compounds are added. Together they are called colligative properties. There are several ways to quantify the amount of one compound dissolved in the other compounds collectively called concentration. Examples include molarity, volume fraction, and mole fraction.
The properties of ideal solutions can be calculated by the linear combination of the properties of its components. If both solute and solvent exist in equal quantities (such as in a 50% ethanol, 50% water solution), the concepts of "solute" and "solvent" become less relevant, but the substance that is more often used as a solvent is normally designated as the solvent (in this example, water).
Liquid[edit]
See also: Solvent § Solvent classifications
In principle, all types of liquids can behave as solvents: liquid noble gases, molten metals, molten salts, molten covalent networks, and molecular liquids. In the practice of chemistry and biochemistry, most solvents are molecular liquids. They can be classified into polar and non-polar, according to whether their molecules possess a permanent electric dipole moment. Another distinction is whether their molecules can form hydrogen bonds (protic and aprotic solvents). Water, the most commonly used solvent, is both polar and sustains hydrogen bonds.




Water is a good solvent because the molecules are polar and capable of forming hydrogen bonds (1).


Salts dissolve in polar solvents, forming positive and negative ions that are attracted to the negative and positive ends of the solvent molecule, respectively. If the solvent is water, hydration occurs when the charged solute ions become surrounded by water molecules. A standard example is aqueous saltwater. Such solutions are called electrolytes.
Polar solutes dissolve in polar solvents, forming polar bonds or hydrogen bonds. As an example, all alcoholic beverages are aqueous solutions of ethanol. On the other hand, non-polar solutes dissolve better in non-polar solvents. Examples are hydrocarbons such as oil and grease that easily mix with each other, while being incompatible with water.
An example for the immiscibility of oil and water is a leak of petroleum from a damaged tanker, that does not dissolve in the ocean water but rather floats on the surface.
Preparation from constituent ingredients[edit]
It is common practice in laboratories to make a solution directly from its constituent ingredients. There are three cases in practical calculation:

Case 1: amount of solvent volume is given.
Case 2: amount of solute mass is given.
Case 3: amount of final solution volume is given.

In the following equations, A is solvent, B is solute, and C is concentration. Solute volume contribution is considered through ideal solution model.

Case 1: amount (mL) of solvent volume VA is given. Solute mass mB = C VA dA /(100-C/dB)
Case 2: amount of solute mass mB is given. Solvent volume VA = mB (100/C-1/ dB )
Case 3: amount (mL) of final solution volume Vt is given. Solute mass mB = C Vt /100; Solvent volume VA=(100/C-1/ dB) mB
Case 2: solute mass is known, VA = mB 100/C
Case 3: total solution volume is known, same equation as case 1. VA=Vt; mB = C VA /100

Example: Make 2 g/100mL of NaCl solution with 1 L water Water (properties). The density of resulting solution is considered to be equal to that of water, statement holding especially for dilute solutions, so the density information is not required.
mB = C VA =( 2 / 100 ) x 1000 =20 g
See also[edit]


Underwater diving portal





Look up solution or solute in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Molar solution
Percentage solution (disambiguation)
Solubility equilibrium
Stock solution
Total dissolved solids is a common term in a range of disciplines, and can have different meanings depending on the analytical method used. In water quality, it refers to the amount of residue remaining after evaporation of water from a sample.
Upper critical solution temperature
Lower critical solution temperature
Coil-globule transition

References[edit]


IUPAC, Compendium of Chemical Terminology, 2nd ed. (the "Gold Book") (1997). Online corrected version:  (2006–) "solution".







v
t
e


Articles related to solutions



Solution



Ideal solution
Aqueous solution
Solid solution
Buffer solution
Flory–Huggins
Mixture
Suspension
Colloid
Phase diagram
Eutectic point
Alloy
Saturation
Supersaturation
Serial dilution
Dilution (equation)
Apparent molar property
Miscibility gap





Concentration
and related quantities



Molar concentration
Mass concentration
Number concentration
Volume concentration
Normality
Percentage solution
Molality
Mole fraction
Mass fraction
Isotopic abundance
Mixing ratio
Ternary plot





Solubility



Solubility equilibrium
Total dissolved solids
Solvation
Solvation shell
Enthalpy of solution
Lattice energy
Raoult's law
Henry's law
Solubility table (data)
Solubility chart





Solvent



(Category)
Acid dissociation constant
Protic solvent
Inorganic nonaqueous solvent
Solvation
List of boiling and freezing information of solvents
Partition coefficient
Polarity
Hydrophobe
Hydrophile
Lipophilic
Amphiphile
Lyonium ion
Lyate ion












v
t
e


Routes of administration, dosage forms



Oral




Digestive
tract (enteral)




Solids



Pill
Tablet
Capsule
Pastille
Time release technology
Osmotic delivery system (OROS)









Liquids



Decoction
Elixir
Electuary
Emulsion
Extended-release syrup
Effervescent powder or tablet
Herbal tea
Hydrogel
Molecular encapsulation
Powder
Softgel
Solution
Suspension
Syrup
Syrup Concentrate for dilution and/or addition of carbonated water
Tincture








Buccal (sublabial), sublingual




Solids



Orally disintegrating tablet (ODT)
Film
Lollipop
Sublingual drops
Lozenges
Effervescent buccal tablet
Chewing gum





Liquids



Mouthwash
Toothpaste
Ointment
Oral spray








Respiratory
tract




Solids



Smoking device
Dry-powder inhaler (DPI)





0
0



Liquids



Anaesthetic vaporizer
Vaporizer
Nebulizer
Metered-dose inhaler (MDI)





Gas



Oxygen mask and Nasal cannula
Oxygen concentrator
Anaesthetic machine
Relative analgesia machine











Ophthalmic,
otologic, nasal




Nasal spray
Ear drops
Eye drops
Ointment
Hydrogel
Nanosphere suspension
Insufflation
Mucoadhesive microdisc (microsphere tablet)





Urogenital



Ointment
Pessary (vaginal suppository)
Vaginal ring
Vaginal douche
Intrauterine device (IUD)
Extra-amniotic infusion
Intravesical infusion





Rectal (enteral)




Ointment
Suppository
Enema

Solution
Hydrogel


Murphy drip
Nutrient enema





Dermal




Ointment
Topical cream
Topical gel
Liniment
Paste
Film
DMSO drug solution
Electrophoretic dermal delivery system
Hydrogel
Liposomes
Transfersome vesicles
Cream
Lotion
Lip balm
Medicated shampoo
Dermal patch
Transdermal patch
Contact (rubbed into break in the skin)
Transdermal spray
Jet injector






Injection,
infusion
(into tissue/blood)





Skin



Intradermal
Subcutaneous
Transdermal implant








Organs



Intracavernous
Intravitreal
Intra-articular injection
Transscleral





Central nervous system



Intracerebral
Intrathecal
Epidural





Circulatory, musculoskeletal



Intravenous
Intracardiac
Intramuscular
Intraosseous
Intraperitoneal
Nanocell injection
Patient-Controlled Analgesia pump
PIC line











 Category
 WikiProject
 Pharmacy portal












v
t
e


Diving medicine, physiology, physics and environment



Diving
medicine




Injuries
and
disorders




Pressure




Oxygen



Freediving blackout
Hyperoxia
Hypoxia (medical)
Oxygen toxicity





Inert gases



Atrial septal defect
Avascular necrosis
Decompression sickness
Dysbaric osteonecrosis
High-pressure nervous syndrome
Hydrogen narcosis
Isobaric counterdiffusion
Nitrogen narcosis
Taravana
Uncontrolled decompression





Carbon dioxide



Hypercapnia
Hypocapnia







Aerosinusitis
Air embolism
Alternobaric vertigo
Barodontalgia
Barostriction
Barotrauma
Compression arthralgia
Decompression illness
Dental barotrauma
Dysbarism
Ear clearing
Frenzel maneuver
Valsalva maneuver





Immersion



Asphyxia
Drowning
Hypothermia
Immersion diuresis
Instinctive drowning response
Laryngospasm
Salt water aspiration syndrome
Swimming-induced pulmonary edema







List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders
Cramps
Diving disorders
Motion sickness
Surfer's ear





Treatments



Diving chamber
Diving medicine
Hyperbaric medicine
Hyperbaric treatment schedules
In-water recompression
Oxygen therapy







Fitness to dive








Diving
physiology



Artificial gills (human)
Blood–air barrier
Blood shift
Breathing
Circulatory system
CO₂ retention
Cold shock response
Dead space (physiology)
Decompression (diving)
Decompression theory
Diving reflex
Gas exchange
History of decompression research and development
Lipid
Maximum operating depth
Metabolism
Normocapnia
Oxygen window in diving decompression
Perfusion
Physiological response to water immersion
Physiology of decompression
Pulmonary circulation
Respiratory exchange ratio
Respiratory quotient
Respiratory system
Systemic circulation
Tissue (biology)





Diving
physics



Ambient pressure
Amontons' law
Anti-fog
Archimedes' principle
Atmospheric pressure
Boyle's law
Breathing performance of regulators
Buoyancy
Charles's law
Combined gas law
Dalton's law
Diffusion
Force
Gay-Lussac's law
Henry's law
Hydrophobe
Hydrostatic pressure
Ideal gas law
Molecular diffusion
Neutral buoyancy
Oxygen fraction
Partial pressure
Permeation
Pressure
Psychrometric constant
Snell's law
Solubility
Solution
Supersaturation
Surface tension
Surfactant
Torricellian chamber
Underwater vision
Weight





Diving
environment



Algal bloom
Breaking wave
Ocean current
Current (stream)
Ekman transport
Halocline
List of diving hazards and precautions
Longshore drift
Rip current
Stratification
Surf
Surge (wave action)
Thermocline
Tides
Turbidity
Undertow (water waves)
Upwelling





Researchers in
diving medicine
and physiology



Arthur J. Bachrach
Albert R. Behnke
Paul Bert
George F. Bond
Robert Boyle
Albert A. Bühlmann
John R Clarke
William Paul Fife
John Scott Haldane
Robert William Hamilton Jr.
Leonard Erskine Hill
Brian Andrew Hills
Felix Hoppe-Seyler
Christian J. Lambertsen
Simon Mitchell
Charles Momsen
John Rawlins R.N.
Charles Wesley Shilling
Edward D. Thalmann
Jules Triger





Diving medical
research
organisations



Aerospace Medical Association
Divers Alert Network (DAN)
Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC)
Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC}
European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC)
European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS)
National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology
Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory
Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine
Rubicon Foundation
South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS)
Southern African Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Association (SAUHMA}
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS)
United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU)








 Categories: Diving medicine
Underwater diving physiology
Underwater diving physics
Physical oceanography
 Glossary
 Portal









Authority control



GND: 4036159-7
NDL: 00574261











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solution&oldid=815223558"					Categories: SolutionsHomogeneous chemical mixturesAlchemical processesPhysical chemistryColloidal chemistryDrug delivery devicesDosage formsHidden categories: Articles needing cleanup from June 2014All pages needing cleanupArticles with sections that need to be turned into prose from June 2014Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers