




Earth's oceans




Arctic
Atlantic
Indian
Pacific
Southern






World Ocean






v
t
e









The Southern Ocean, as delineated by the draft 4th edition of the International Hydrographic Organization's Limits of Oceans and Seas (2002).






A general delineation of the Antarctic Convergence, sometimes used by scientists as the demarcation of the Southern Ocean.


The Southern Ocean, also known as the Antarctic Ocean[1] or the Austral Ocean,[2][note 4] comprises the southernmost waters of the World Ocean, generally taken to be south of 60° S latitude and encircling Antarctica.[6] As such, it is regarded as the fourth-largest of the five principal oceanic divisions: smaller than the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans but larger than the Arctic Ocean.[7] This ocean zone is where cold, northward flowing waters from the Antarctic mix with warmer subantarctic waters.
By way of his voyages in the 1770s, Captain James Cook proved that waters encompassed the southern latitudes of the globe. Since then, geographers have disagreed on the Southern Ocean's northern boundary or even existence, considering the waters as various parts of the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans, instead. However, according to Commodore John Leech of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), recent oceanographic research has discovered the importance of Southern Circulation, and the term Southern Ocean has been used to define the body of water which lies south of the northern limit of that circulation.[8] This remains the current official policy of the IHO, since a 2000 revision of its definitions including the Southern Ocean as the waters south of the 60th parallel has not yet been adopted. Others regard the seasonally-fluctuating Antarctic Convergence as the natural boundary.[9]



Contents


1 Definitions and use

1.1 Pre-20th-century definitions
1.2 1928 delineation
1.3 1937 delineation
1.4 1953 delineation
1.5 2002 (draft) delineation


2 History of exploration

2.1 Unknown southern land
2.2 South of the Antarctic Convergence
2.3 South of the Antarctic Circle
2.4 First sighting of land
2.5 Antarctic expeditions
2.6 Recent history


3 Geography

3.1 Sub-divisions of the Southern Ocean
3.2 Natural resources
3.3 Natural hazards


4 Physical oceanography

4.1 Antarctic Circumpolar Current and Antarctic Convergence
4.2 Upwelling
4.3 Ross and Weddell Gyres


5 Climate
6 Biodiversity

6.1 Animals
6.2 Birds
6.3 Fish

6.3.1 Icefish


6.4 Mammals
6.5 Invertebrates

6.5.1 Arthropods
6.5.2 Others




7 Environment

7.1 Current issues
7.2 International agreements


8 Economy
9 Ports and harbors
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Definitions and use[edit]





Pulsating pack-ice around Antarctica reflects the various definitions of the Southern Ocean



Borders and names for oceans and seas were internationally agreed when the International Hydrographic Bureau (IHB), the precursor to the IHO, convened the First International Conference on 24 July 1919. The IHO then published these in its Limits of Oceans and Seas, the first edition being 1928. Since the first edition, the limits of the Southern Ocean have moved progressively southwards; since 1953, it has been omitted from the official publication and left to local hydrographic offices to determine their own limits. The IHO included the ocean and its definition as the waters south of 60°S in its year 2000 revisions, but this has not been formally adopted, due to continuing impasses over other areas of the text, such as the naming dispute over the Sea of Japan. The 2000 IHO definition, however, was circulated in a draft edition in 2002 and is used by some within the IHO and by some other organizations such as the US Central Intelligence Agency[7] and Merriam-Webster.[note 5][10] Australian authorities regard the Southern Ocean as lying immediately south of Australia.[11][12] The National Geographic Society does not recognize the ocean,[2] depicting it (if at all) in a typeface different from the other world oceans; instead, it shows the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans extending to Antarctica on both its print and on line maps.[13][note 6] Map publishers using the term Southern Ocean on their maps include Hema Maps[15] and GeoNova.[16]








The International Hydrographic Organization's delineation of the "Southern Ocean" has moved steadily southwards since the original 1928 edition of its Limits of Oceans and Seas. Australia continues to view the ocean as beginning at its southern coast. The 1953 limits shown are those of Britain, as identified in third edition. Others continue to view the Antarctic Convergence as the natural boundary of the Southern Ocean, regardless of political agreements.[6]









Southern Ocean Antarctica Map.





Pre-20th-century definitions[edit]




"Southern Ocean" as an alternative name for the Aethiopian Ocean in a 1700 map of Africa


"Southern Ocean" is an obsolete name for the Pacific Ocean or South Pacific, coined by Vasco Núñez de Balboa, the first European to discover it, who approached it from the north.[17] The "South Seas" is a less archaic synonym. A 1745 British Act of Parliament established a prize for discovering a Northwest Passage to "the Western and Southern Ocean of America".[18]
Authors using "Southern Ocean" to name the waters encircling the unknown southern polar regions used varying limits. James Cook's account of his second voyage implies New Caledonia borders it.[19] Peacock's 1795 Geographical Dictionary said it lay "to the southward of America and Africa";[20] John Payne in 1796 used 40 degrees as the northern limit;[21] the 1827 Edinburgh Gazetteer used 50 degrees.[22] The Family Magazine in 1835 divided the "Great Southern Ocean" into the "Southern Ocean" and the "Antarctick [sic] Ocean" along the Antarctic Circle, with the northern limit of the Southern Ocean being lines joining Cape Horn, the Cape of Good Hope, Van Diemen's Land and the south of New Zealand.[23]
The United Kingdom's South Australia Act 1834 described the waters forming the southern limit of the new colony of South Australia as "the Southern Ocean". The Colony of Victoria's Legislative Council Act of 1881 delimited part of the division of Bairnsdale as "along the New South Wales boundary to the Southern ocean".[24]
1928 delineation[edit]




1928 First Edition of Limits of Oceans and Seas with original IHO delineation of Southern Ocean abutting land-masses.[25]


In the 1928 first edition of Limits of Oceans and Seas, the Southern Ocean was delineated by land-based limits: Antarctica to the south, and South America, Africa, Australia, and Broughton Island, New Zealand to the north.
The detailed land-limits used were from Cape Horn in South America eastwards to Cape Agulhas in Africa, then further eastwards to the southern coast of mainland Australia to Cape Leeuwin, Western Australia. From Cape Leeuwin, the limit then followed eastwards along the coast of mainland Australia to Cape Otway, Victoria, then southwards across Bass Strait to Cape Wickham, King Island, along the west coast of King Island, then the remainder of the way south across Bass Strait to Cape Grim, Tasmania. The limit then followed the west coast of Tasmania southwards to the South East Cape and then went eastwards to Broughton Island, New Zealand, before returning to Cape Horn.[25]




1937 Second Edition of Limits of Oceans and Seas showing IHO's pre-1953 delineation of Southern Ocean moved southwards.[26]


1937 delineation[edit]
The northern limits of the Southern Ocean were moved southwards in the IHO's 1937 second edition of the Limits of Oceans and Seas. From this edition, much of the ocean's northern limit ceased to abut land masses.
In the second edition, the Southern Ocean then extended from Antarctica northwards to latitude 40°S between Cape Agulhas in Africa (long. 20°E) and Cape Leeuwin in Western Australia (long. 115°E), and extended to latitude 55°S between Auckland Island of New Zealand (165 or 166°E east) and Cape Horn in South America (67°W).[26]
As is discussed in more detail below (see section on '2002 delineation'), prior to the 2002 (draft) edition the limits of oceans explicitly excluded the seas lying within each of them. The Great Australian Bight was unnamed in the 1928 edition, and delineated as shown in the figure above in the 1937 edition. It therefore encompassed former Southern Ocean waters (as designated in 1928) but was technically not inside any of the three adjacent oceans by 1937. In the 2002 draft edition, the IHO have designated 'seas' as being subdivisions within 'oceans', so the Bight would have still been within the Southern Ocean in 1937 if the 2002 convention were in place then. To perform direct comparisons of current and former limits of oceans (for example to compare surface areas) it is necessary to consider, or at least be aware of, how the 2002 change in IHO terminology for 'seas' can affect the comparison.
1953 delineation[edit]
The Southern Ocean did not appear in the 1953 third edition and a note in the publication read:

The Antarctic or Southern Ocean has been omitted from this publication as the majority of opinions received since the issue of the 2nd Edition in 1937 are to the effect that there exists no real justification for applying the term Ocean to this body of water, the northern limits of which are difficult to lay down owing to their seasonal change. The limits of the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans have therefore been extended South to the Antarctic Continent.
Hydrographic Offices who issue separate publications dealing with this area are therefore left to decide their own northern limits (Great Britain uses Latitude of 55 South.)

Instead, in the IHO 1953 publication, the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans were extended southward, the Indian and Pacific Oceans (which had not previously touched pre 1953, as per the first and second editions) now abutted at the meridian of South East Cape, and the southern limits of the Great Australian Bight and the Tasman Sea were moved northwards.[27]




The Pacific Ocean as example of terminology concerning seas: the area inside the black line includes the seas included in the Pacific Ocean prior to 2002 and the darker blue areas are its informal current borders, following the recreation of the Southern Ocean and the reinclusion of marginal seas.[28]


2002 (draft) delineation[edit]
The IHO readdressed the question of the Southern Ocean in a survey in 2000. Of its 68 member nations, 28 responded, and all responding members except Argentina agreed to redefine the ocean, reflecting the importance placed by oceanographers on ocean currents. The proposal for the name Southern Ocean won 18 votes, beating the alternative Antarctic Ocean. Half of the votes supported a definition of the ocean's northern limit at 60°S (with no land interruptions at this latitude), with the other 14 votes cast for other definitions, mostly 50°S, but a few for as far north as 35°S.
A draft fourth edition of Limits of Oceans and Seas was circulated to IHO member states in August 2002 (sometimes referred to as the "2000 edition" as it summarized the progress to 2000).[29] It has yet to be published due to 'areas of concern' by several countries relating to various naming issues around the world – primarily the Sea of Japan naming dispute – and there have been various changes, 60 seas were given new names, and even the name of the publication was changed.[30] A reservation had also been lodged by Australia regarding the Southern Ocean limits.[31] Effectively, the 3rd edition (which did not delineate the Southern Ocean leaving delineation to local hydrographic offices) has yet to be superseded.
Despite this, the 4th edition definition has partial de facto usage by many nations, scientists and organisations such as the U.S. (the Central Intelligence Agency World Factbook uses "Southern Ocean" but none of the other new sea names within the "Southern Ocean" such as "Cosmonauts Sea") and Merriam-Webster,[7][10][14] scientists and nations – and even by some within the IHO.[32] Some nations' hydrographic offices have defined their own boundaries; the United Kingdom used the 55°S parallel for example.[27] Other organisations favour more northerly limits for the Southern Ocean. For example, the Encyclopædia Britannica describes the Southern Ocean as extending as far north as South America, and confers great significance on the Antarctic Convergence, yet its description of the Indian Ocean contradicts this, describing the Indian Ocean as extending south to Antarctica.[12][33]
Other sources, such as the National Geographic Society, show the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans as extending to Antarctica on its maps, although articles on the National Geographic web site have begun to reference the Southern Ocean.[14]
In Australia, cartographical authorities define the Southern Ocean as including the entire body of water between Antarctica and the south coasts of Australia and New Zealand, and up to 60°s elsewhere.[34] Coastal maps of Tasmania and South Australia label the sea areas as Southern Ocean,[35] while Cape Leeuwin in Western Australia is described as the point where the Indian and Southern Oceans meet.[36]
A radical shift from past IHO practices (1928–1953) was also seen in the 2002 draft edition when the IHO delineated 'seas' as being subdivisions that lay within the boundaries of 'oceans'. While the IHO are often considered the authority for such conventions, the shift brought them into line with the practices of other publications (e.g. the CIA World Fact Book) which already adopted the principle that seas are contained within oceans. This difference in practice is markedly seen for the Pacific Ocean in the adjacent figure. Thus, for example, previously the Tasman Sea between Australia and New Zealand was not regarded by the IHO as being part of the Pacific, but as of the 2002 draft edition it is.
The new delineation of seas being subdivisions of oceans has avoided the need to interrupt the northern boundary of the Southern Ocean where intersected by Drake Passage which includes all of the waters from South America to the Antarctic coast, nor interrupt it for the Scotia Sea, which also extends below the 60th parallel south. The new delineation of seas has also meant that the long-time named seas around Antarctica, excluded from the 1953 edition (the 1953 map did not even extend that far south), are 'automatically' part of the Southern Ocean.
History of exploration[edit]
Main article: History of Antarctica
Unknown southern land[edit]
See also: Terra Australis




1564 Typus Orbis Terrarum, a map by Abraham Ortelius showed the imagined link between the proposed continent of Antarctica and South America.


Exploration of the Southern Ocean was inspired by a belief in the existence of a Terra Australis—a vast continent in the far south of the globe to "balance" the northern lands of Eurasia and North Africa—which had existed since the times of Ptolemy. The doubling of the Cape of Good Hope in 1487 by Bartolomeu Dias first brought explorers within touch of the Antarctic cold, and proved that there was an ocean separating Africa from any Antarctic land that might exist. Ferdinand Magellan, who passed through the Strait of Magellan in 1520, assumed that the islands of Tierra del Fuego to the south were an extension of this unknown southern land. In 1564, Abraham Ortelius published his first map, Typus Orbis Terrarum, an eight-leaved wall map of the world, on which he identified the Regio Patalis with Locach as a northward extension of the Terra Australis, reaching as far as New Guinea.[37][38]
European geographers continued to connect the coast of Tierra del Fuego with the coast of New Guinea on their globes, and allowing their imaginations to run riot in the vast unknown spaces of the south Atlantic, south Indian and Pacific oceans they sketched the outlines of the Terra Australis Incognita ("Unknown Southern Land"), a vast continent stretching in parts into the tropics. The search for this great south land was a leading motive of explorers in the 16th and the early part of the 17th centuries.
The Spaniard Gabriel de Castilla, who claimed having sighted "snow-covered mountains" beyond the 64° S in 1603, is recognized as the first explorer that discovered the continent of Antarctica, although he was ignored in his time.
In 1606, Pedro Fernández de Quirós took possession for the king of Spain all of the lands he had discovered in Australia del Espiritu Santo (the New Hebrides) and those he would discover "even to the Pole".
Francis Drake, like Spanish explorers before him, had speculated that there might be an open channel south of Tierra del Fuego. When Willem Schouten and Jacob Le Maire discovered the southern extremity of Tierra del Fuego and named it Cape Horn in 1615, they proved that the Tierra del Fuego archipelago was of small extent and not connected to the southern land, as previously thought. Subsequently, in 1642, Abel Tasman showed that even New Holland (Australia) was separated by sea from any continuous southern continent.




Portrait of Edmund Halley by Thomas Murray, c. 1687


South of the Antarctic Convergence[edit]
See also: Anthony de la Roché
The visit to South Georgia by Anthony de la Roché in 1675 was the first ever discovery of land south of the Antarctic Convergence i.e. in the Southern Ocean / Antarctic.[39][40] Soon after the voyage cartographers started to depict ‘Roché Island’, honouring the discoverer. James Cook was aware of la Roché's discovery when surveying and mapping the island in 1775.[41]
Edmond Halley's voyage in HMS Paramour for magnetic investigations in the South Atlantic met the pack ice in 52° S in January 1700, but that latitude (he reached 140 mi off the north coast of South Georgia) was his farthest south. A determined effort on the part of the French naval officer Jean-Baptiste Charles Bouvet de Lozier to discover the "South Land" – described by a half legendary "sieur de Gonneyville" – resulted in the discovery of Bouvet Island in 54°10′ S, and in the navigation of 48° of longitude of ice-cumbered sea nearly in 55° S in 1730 .
In 1771, Yves Joseph Kerguelen sailed from France with instructions to proceed south from Mauritius in search of "a very large continent." He lighted upon a land in 50° S which he called South France, and believed to be the central mass of the southern continent. He was sent out again to complete the exploration of the new land, and found it to be only an inhospitable island which he renamed the Isle of Desolation, but which was ultimately named after him.[42]
South of the Antarctic Circle[edit]
See also: James Cook




Famous official portrait of Captain James Cook who proved that waters encompassed the southern latitudes of the globe. "He holds his own chart of the Southern Ocean on the table and his right hand points to the east coast of Australia on it."[43]






Map from 1771, showing "Terres Australes" (sic) label without any charted landmass.






Painting of James Weddell's second expedition in 1823, depicting the brig Jane and the cutter Beaufroy.


The obsession of the undiscovered continent culminated in the brain of Alexander Dalrymple, the brilliant and erratic hydrographer who was nominated by the Royal Society to command the Transit of Venus expedition to Tahiti in 1769. The command of the expedition was given by the admiralty to Captain James Cook. Sailing in 1772 with Resolution, a vessel of 462 tons under his own command and Adventure of 336 tons under Captain Tobias Furneaux, Cook first searched in vain for Bouvet Island, then sailed for 20 degrees of longitude to the westward in latitude 58° S, and then 30° eastward for the most part south of 60° S, a lower southern latitude than had ever been voluntarily entered before by any vessel. On 17 January 1773 the Antarctic Circle was crossed for the first time in history and the two ships reached 67° 15' S by 39° 35' E, where their course was stopped by ice.
Cook then turned northward to look for French Southern and Antarctic Lands, of the discovery of which he had received news at Cape Town, but from the rough determination of his longitude by Kerguelen, Cook reached the assigned latitude 10° too far east and did not see it. He turned south again and was stopped by ice in 61° 52′ S by 95° E and continued eastward nearly on the parallel of 60° S to 147° E. On 16 March, the approaching winter drove him northward for rest to New Zealand and the tropical islands of the Pacific. In November 1773, Cook left New Zealand, having parted company with the Adventure, and reached 60° S by 177° W, whence he sailed eastward keeping as far south as the floating ice allowed. The Antarctic Circle was crossed on 20 December and Cook remained south of it for three days, being compelled after reaching 67° 31′ S to stand north again in 135° W.
A long detour to 47° 50′ S served to show that there was no land connection between New Zealand and Tierra del Fuego. Turning south again, Cook crossed the Antarctic Circle for the third time at 109° 30′ W before his progress was once again blocked by ice four days later at 71° 10′ S by 106° 54′ W. This point, reached on 30 January 1774, was the farthest south attained in the 18th century. With a great detour to the east, almost to the coast of South America, the expedition regained Tahiti for refreshment. In November 1774, Cook started from New Zealand and crossed the South Pacific without sighting land between 53° and 57° S to Tierra del Fuego; then, passing Cape Horn on 29 December, he rediscovered Roché Island renaming it Isle of Georgia, and discovered the South Sandwich Islands (named Sandwich Land by him), the only ice-clad land he had seen, before crossing the South Atlantic to the Cape of Good Hope between 55° and 60°. He thereby laid open the way for future Antarctic exploration by exploding the myth of a habitable southern continent. Cook's most southerly discovery of land lay on the temperate side of the 60th parallel, and he convinced himself that if land lay farther south it was practically inaccessible and without economic value.[42]
Voyagers rounding Cape Horn frequently met with contrary winds and were driven southward into snowy skies and ice-encumbered seas; but so far as can be ascertained none of them before 1770 reached the Antarctic Circle, or knew it, if they did.
In a voyage from 1822 to 1824, James Weddell commanded the 160-ton brig Jane, accompanied by his second ship Beaufoy captained by Matthew Brisbane. Together they sailed to the South Orkneys where sealing proved disappointing. They turned south in the hope of finding a better sealing ground. The season was unusually mild and tranquil, and on 20 February 1823 the two ships reached latitude 74°15' S and longitude 34°16'45″ W the southernmost position any ship had ever reached up to that time. A few icebergs were sighted but there was still no sight of land, leading Weddell to theorize that the sea continued as far as the South Pole. Another two days' sailing would have brought him to Coat's Land (to the east of the Weddell Sea) but Weddell decided to turn back.[44]
First sighting of land[edit]




Admiral von Bellingshausen


See also: William Smith (mariner) and Fabian von Bellingshausen
The first land south of the parallel 60° south latitude was discovered by the Englishman William Smith, who sighted Livingston Island on 19 February 1819. A few months later Smith returned to explore the other islands of the South Shetlands archipelago, landed on King George Island, and claimed the new territories for Britain.
In the meantime, the Spanish Navy ship San Telmo sank in September 1819 when trying to cross Cape Horn. Parts of her wreckage were found months later by sealers on the north coast of Livingston Island (South Shetlands). It is unknown if some survivor managed to be the first to set foot on these Antarctic islands.
The first confirmed sighting of mainland Antarctica cannot be accurately attributed to one single person. It can, however, be narrowed down to three individuals. According to various sources,[45][46][47] three men all sighted the ice shelf or the continent within days or months of each other: von Bellingshausen, a captain in the Russian Imperial Navy; Edward Bransfield, a captain in the British navy; and Nathaniel Palmer, an American sealer out of Stonington, Connecticut. It is certain that the expedition, led by von Bellingshausen and Lazarev on the ships Vostok and Mirny, reached a point within 32 km (20 mi) from Princess Martha Coast and recorded the sight of an ice shelf at 69°21′28″S 2°14′50″W﻿ / ﻿69.35778°S 2.24722°W﻿ / -69.35778; -2.24722[48] that became known as the Fimbul ice shelf. On 30 January 1820, Bransfield sighted Trinity Peninsula, the northernmost point of the Antarctic mainland, while Palmer sighted the mainland in the area south of Trinity Peninsula in November 1820. Von Bellingshausen's expedition also discovered Peter I Island and Alexander I Island, the first islands to be discovered south of the circle.



Historical maps showing a southern ocean between Antarctica and the continents of South America, Africa and Australia













1683 map by French cartographer Alain Manesson Mallet from his publication Description de L'Univers. Shows a sea below both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans at a time when Tierra del Fuego was believed joined to Antarctica. Sea is named Mer Magellanique after Ferdinand Magellan. 













Samuel Dunn's 1794 General Map of the World or Terraqeuous Globe shows a Southern Ocean (but meaning what is today named the South Atlantic) and a Southern Icy Ocean. 













A New Map of Asia, from the Latest Authorities, by John Cary, Engraver, 1806, shows the Southern Ocean lying to the south of both the Indian Ocean and Australia. 













Freycinet Map of 1811 – resulted from the 1800-1803 French Baudin expedition to Australia and was the first full map of Australia ever to be published. In French, the map named the ocean immediately below Australia as the Grand Océan Austral (‘Great Southern Ocean’). 













1863 map of Australia shows the Southern Ocean lying immediately to the south of Australia. 













1906 map by German publisher Justus Perthes showing Antarctica encompassed by an Antarktischer (Sudl. Eismeer) Ocean – the ‘Antarctic (South Arctic) Ocean’. 













Map of The World in 1922 by the National Geographic Society showing the Antarctic (Southern) Ocean. 






Antarctic expeditions[edit]
Main article: List of Antarctic expeditions




USS Vincennes at Disappointment Bay, Antarctica in early 1840.






1911 South Polar Regions exploration map


In December 1839, as part of the United States Exploring Expedition of 1838–42 conducted by the United States Navy (sometimes called "the Wilkes Expedition"), an expedition sailed from Sydney, Australia, on the sloops-of-war USS Vincennes and USS Peacock , the brig USS Porpoise , the full-rigged ship Relief, and two schooners Sea Gull and USS Flying Fish . They sailed into the Antarctic Ocean, as it was then known, and reported the discovery "of an Antarctic continent west of the Balleny Islands" on 25 January 1840. That part of Antarctica was later named "Wilkes Land", a name it maintains to this day.
Explorer James Clark Ross passed through what is now known as the Ross Sea and discovered Ross Island (both of which were named for him) in 1841. He sailed along a huge wall of ice that was later named the Ross Ice Shelf. Mount Erebus and Mount Terror are named after two ships from his expedition: HMS Erebus and Terror.[49]




Frank Hurley, As time wore on it became more and more evident that the ship was doomed (The Endurance trapped in pack ice), National Library of Australia.


The Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of 1914, led by Ernest Shackleton, set out to cross the continent via the pole, but their ship, the Endurance, was trapped and crushed by pack ice before they even landed. The expedition members survived after an epic journey on sledges over pack ice to Elephant Island. Then Shackleton and five others crossed the Southern Ocean, in an open boat called James Caird, and then trekked over South Georgia to raise the alarm at the whaling station Grytviken.
In 1946, US Navy Rear Admiral Richard Evelyn Byrd and more than 4,700 military personnel visited the Antarctic in an expedition called Operation Highjump. Reported to the public as a scientific mission, the details were kept secret and it may have actually been a training or testing mission for the military. The expedition was, in both military or scientific planning terms, put together very quickly. The group contained an unusually high amount of military equipment, including an aircraft carrier, submarines, military support ships, assault troops and military vehicles. The expedition was planned to last for eight months but was unexpectedly terminated after only two months. With the exception of some eccentric entries in Admiral Byrd's diaries, no real explanation for the early termination has ever been officially given.
Captain Finn Ronne, Byrd's executive officer, returned to Antarctica with his own expedition in 1947–1948, with Navy support, three planes, and dogs. Ronne disproved the notion that the continent was divided in two and established that East and West Antarctica was one single continent, i.e. that the Weddell Sea and the Ross Sea are not connected.[50] The expedition explored and mapped large parts of Palmer Land and the Weddell Sea coastline, and identified the Ronne Ice Shelf, named by Ronne after his wife Edith "Jackie" Ronne.[51] Ronne covered 3,600 miles by ski and dog sled—more than any other explorer in history.[52] The Ronne Antarctic Research Expedition discovered and mapped the last unknown coastline in the world and was the first Antarctic expedition to ever include women.[53]
Recent history[edit]




MS Explorer in Antarctica in January 1999. She sank on 23 November 2007 after hitting an iceberg.


The Antarctic Treaty was signed on 1 December 1959 and came into force on 23 June 1961. Among other provisions, this treaty limits military activity in the Antarctic to the support of scientific research.
The first person to sail single-handed to Antarctica was the New Zealander David Henry Lewis, in 1972, in a 10-metre steel sloop Ice Bird.
A baby, named Emilio Marcos de Palma, was born near Hope Bay on 7 January 1978, becoming the first baby born on the continent. He also was born further south than anyone in history.[54]
The MS Explorer was a cruise ship operated by the Swedish explorer Lars-Eric Lindblad. Observers point to the Explorer's 1969 expeditionary cruise to Antarctica as the frontrunner for today's sea-based tourism in that region.[55][56] The Explorer was the first cruise ship used specifically to sail the icy waters of the Antarctic Ocean and the first to sink there[57] when she struck an unidentified submerged object on 23 November 2007, reported to be ice, which caused a 10 by 4 inches (25 by 10 cm) gash in the hull.[58] The Explorer was abandoned in the early hours of 23 November 2007 after taking on water near the South Shetland Islands in the Southern Ocean, an area which is usually stormy but was calm at the time.[59] The Explorer was confirmed by the Chilean Navy to have sunk at approximately position: 62° 24′ South, 57° 16′ West,[60] in roughly 600 m of water.[61]

Geography[edit]
See also: List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands
The Southern Ocean, geologically the youngest of the oceans, was formed when Antarctica and South America moved apart, opening the Drake Passage, roughly 30 million years ago. The separation of the continents allowed the formation of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current.
With a northern limit at 60°S, the Southern Ocean differs from the other oceans in that its largest boundary, the northern boundary, does not abut a landmass (as it did with the first edition of Limits of Oceans and Seas). Instead, the northern limit is with the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans.
One reason for considering it as a separate ocean stems from the fact that much of the water of the Southern Ocean differs from the water in the other oceans. Water gets transported around the Southern Ocean fairly rapidly because of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current which circulates around Antarctica. Water in the Southern Ocean south of, for example, New Zealand, resembles the water in the Southern Ocean south of South America more closely than it resembles the water in the Pacific Ocean.
The Southern Ocean has typical depths of between 4,000 and 5,000 m (13,000 and 16,000 ft) over most of its extent with only limited areas of shallow water. The Southern Ocean's greatest depth of 7,236 m (23,740 ft) occurs at the southern end of the South Sandwich Trench, at 60°00'S, 024°W. The Antarctic continental shelf appears generally narrow and unusually deep, its edge lying at depths up to 800 m (2,600 ft), compared to a global mean of 133 m (436 ft).
Equinox to equinox in line with the sun's seasonal influence, the Antarctic ice pack fluctuates from an average minimum of 2.6 million square kilometres (1.0×10^6 sq mi) in March to about 18.8 million square kilometres (7.3×10^6 sq mi) in September, more than a sevenfold increase in area.
Sub-divisions of the Southern Ocean[edit]
Sub-divisions of oceans are geographical features such as "seas", "straits", "bays", "channels", and "gulfs". There are many sub-divisions of the Southern Ocean defined in the never-approved 2002 draft fourth edition of the IHO publication Limits of Oceans and Seas. In clockwise order these include (with IHO sub-division chartlet numbers in parenthesis) the Weddell Sea (10.1), the Lazarev Sea (10.2), the Riiser-Larsen Sea (10.3), the Cosmonauts Sea (10.4), the Cooperation Sea (10.5), the Davis Sea (10.6), Tryoshnikova Gulf (10.6.1), the Mawson Sea (10.7), the Dumont D'Urville Sea (10.8), the Somov Sea (10.9), the Ross Sea (10.10), McMurdo Sound (10.10.1), the Amundsen Sea (10.11), the Bellingshausen Sea (10.12), part of the Drake Passage (10.13), Bransfield Strait (10.14) and part of the Scotia Sea (4.2).[29][note 7][note 8] A number of these such as the 2002 Russian-proposed "Consmonauts Sea", "Cooperation Sea", and "Somov (mid-1950s Russian polar explorer) Sea" are not included in the 1953 IHO document which remains currently in force,[27] because they received their names largely originated from 1962 onward. Leading geographic authorities and atlases do not use these latter three names, including the 2014 10th edition World Atlas from the United States' National Geographic Society and the 2014 12th edition of the British Times Atlas of the World, but Soviet and Russian-issued maps do.[62][63]




An iceberg being pushed out of a shipping lane USS Burton Island (AGB-1), USS Atka (AGB-3), and USS Glacier (AGB-4) pushing an iceberg out of a channel in the "Silent Land" near McMurdo Station, Antarctica, 1965


Natural resources[edit]




Manganese nodule


The Southern Ocean probably contains large, and possibly giant, oil and gas fields on the continental margin. Placer deposits, accumulation of valuable minerals such as gold, formed by gravity separation during sedimentary processes are also expected to exist in the Southern Ocean.[6]
Manganese nodules are expected to exist in the Southern Ocean. Manganese nodules are rock concretions on the sea bottom formed of concentric layers of iron and manganese hydroxides around a core. The core may be microscopically small and is sometimes completely transformed into manganese minerals by crystallization. Interest in the potential exploitation of polymetallic nodules generated a great deal of activity among prospective mining consortia in the 1960s and 1970s.[6]
The icebergs that form each year around in the Southern Ocean hold enough fresh water to meet the needs of every person on Earth for several months. For several decades there have been proposals, none yet to be feasible or successful, to tow Southern Ocean icebergs to more arid northern regions (such as Australia) where they can be harvested.[64]
Natural hazards[edit]
Icebergs can occur at any time of year throughout the ocean. Some may have drafts up to several hundred meters; smaller icebergs, iceberg fragments and sea-ice (generally 0.5 to 1 m thick) also pose problems for ships. The deep continental shelf has a floor of glacial deposits varying widely over short distances.
Sailors know latitudes from 40 to 70 degrees south as the "Roaring Forties", "Furious Fifties" and "Shrieking Sixties" due to high winds and large waves that form as winds blow around the entire globe unimpeded by any land-mass. Icebergs, especially in May to October, make the area even more dangerous. The remoteness of the region makes sources of search and rescue scarce.
Physical oceanography[edit]




The Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) is the strongest current system in the world oceans, linking the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific basins.


Antarctic Circumpolar Current and Antarctic Convergence[edit]
The Antarctic Circumpolar Current moves perpetually eastward — chasing and joining itself, and at 21,000 km (13,000 mi) in length — it comprises the world's longest ocean current, transporting 130 million cubic metres per second (4.6×10^9 cu ft/s) of water – 100 times the flow of all the world's rivers.
Several processes operate along the coast of Antarctica to produce, in the Southern Ocean, types of water masses not produced elsewhere in the oceans of the Southern Hemisphere. One of these is the Antarctic Bottom Water, a very cold, highly saline, dense water that forms under sea ice.
Associated with the Circumpolar Current is the Antarctic Convergence encircling Antarctica, where cold northward-flowing Antarctic waters meet the relatively warmer waters of the subantarctic, Antarctic waters predominantly sink beneath subantarctic waters, while associated zones of mixing and upwelling create a zone very high in nutrients. These nurture high levels of phytoplankton with associated copepods and Antarctic krill, and resultant foodchains supporting fish, whales, seals, penguins, albatrosses and a wealth of other species.[65]
The Antarctic Convergence is considered to be the best natural definition of the northern extent of the Southern Ocean.[6]





Upwelling in the Southern Ocean



Upwelling[edit]
Large-scale upwelling is found in the Southern Ocean. Strong westerly (eastward) winds blow around Antarctica, driving a significant flow of water northwards. This is actually a type of coastal upwelling. Since there are no continents in a band of open latitudes between South America and the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula, some of this water is drawn up from great depths. In many numerical models and observational syntheses, the Southern Ocean upwelling represents the primary means by which deep dense water is brought to the surface. Shallower, wind-driven upwelling is also found off the west coasts of North and South America, northwest and southwest Africa, and southwest and southeast Australia, all associated with oceanic subtropical high pressure circulations.
Some models of the ocean circulation suggest that broad-scale upwelling occurs in the tropics, as pressure driven flows converge water toward the low latitudes where it is diffusively warmed from above. The required diffusion coefficients, however, appear to be larger than are observed in the real ocean. Nonetheless, some diffusive upwelling does probably occur.





Location of the Southern Ocean gyres.


Ross and Weddell Gyres[edit]
The Ross Gyre and Weddell Gyre are two gyres that exist within the Southern Ocean. The gyres are located in the Ross Sea and Weddell Sea respectively, and both rotate clockwise. The gyres are formed by interactions between the Antarctic Circumpolar Current and the Antarctic Continental Shelf.
Sea ice has been noted to persist in the central area of the Ross Gyre.[66] There is some evidence that global warming has resulted in some decrease of the salinity of the waters of the Ross Gyre since the 1950s.[67]
Due to the Coriolis effect acting to the left in the Southern Hemisphere and the resulting Ekman transport away from the centres of the Weddell Gyre, these regions are very productive due to upwelling of cold, nutrient rich water.

Climate[edit]
Sea temperatures vary from about −2 to 10 °C (28 to 50 °F). Cyclonic storms travel eastward around the continent and frequently become intense because of the temperature contrast between ice and open ocean. The ocean-area from about latitude 40 south to the Antarctic Circle has the strongest average winds found anywhere on Earth.[68] In winter the ocean freezes outward to 65 degrees south latitude in the Pacific sector and 55 degrees south latitude in the Atlantic sector, lowering surface temperatures well below 0 degrees Celsius. At some coastal points, however, persistent intense drainage winds from the interior keep the shoreline ice-free throughout the winter.






Clouds over Southern Ocean with Continent labels.



Biodiversity[edit]
See also: Antarctic ecozone, Antarctic microorganism, and Wildlife of Antarctica




Orca (Orcinus orca) hunting a Weddell seal in the Southern Ocean.


Animals[edit]
A variety of marine animals exist and rely, directly or indirectly, on the phytoplankton in the Southern Ocean. Antarctic sea life includes penguins, blue whales, orcas, colossal squids and fur seals. The emperor penguin is the only penguin that breeds during the winter in Antarctica, while the Adélie penguin breeds farther south than any other penguin. The rockhopper penguin has distinctive feathers around the eyes, giving the appearance of elaborate eyelashes. King penguins, chinstrap penguins, and gentoo penguins also breed in the Antarctic.
The Antarctic fur seal was very heavily hunted in the 18th and 19th centuries for its pelt by sealers from the United States and the United Kingdom. The Weddell seal, a "true seal", is named after Sir James Weddell, commander of British sealing expeditions in the Weddell Sea. Antarctic krill, which congregates in large schools, is the keystone species of the ecosystem of the Southern Ocean, and is an important food organism for whales, seals, leopard seals, fur seals, squid, icefish, penguins, albatrosses and many other birds.[69]
The benthic communities of the seafloor are diverse and dense, with up to 155,000 animals found in 1 square metre (10.8 sq ft). As the seafloor environment is very similar all around the Antarctic, hundreds of species can be found all the way around the mainland, which is a uniquely wide distribution for such a large community. Deep-sea gigantism is common among these animals.[70]
A census of sea life carried out during the International Polar Year and which involved some 500 researchers was released in 2010. The research is part of the global Census of Marine Life (CoML) and has disclosed some remarkable findings. More than 235 marine organisms live in both polar regions, having bridged the gap of 12,000 km (7,456 mi). Large animals such as some cetaceans and birds make the round trip annually. More surprising are small forms of life such as mudworms, sea cucumbers and free-swimming snails found in both polar oceans. Various factors may aid in their distribution – fairly uniform temperatures of the deep ocean at the poles and the equator which differ by no more than 5 °C, and the major current systems or marine conveyor belt which transport egg and larva stages.[71]




A wandering albatross (Diomedea exulans) on South Georgia


Birds[edit]
See also: List of birds of Antarctica
The rocky shores of mainland Antarctica and its offshore islands provide nesting space for over 100 million birds every spring. These nesters include species of albatrosses, petrels, skuas, gulls and terns.[72] The insectivorous South Georgia pipit is endemic to South Georgia and some smaller surrounding islands. Freshwater ducks inhabit South Georgia and the Kerguelen Islands.[73]
The flightless penguins are all located in the Southern Hemisphere, with the greatest concentration located on and around Antarctica. Four of the 18 penguin species live and breed on the mainland and its close offshore islands. Another four species live on the subantarctic islands.[74] Emperor penguins have four overlapping layers of feathers, keeping them warm. They are the only Antarctic animal to breed during the winter.[75]
Fish[edit]
There are relatively few fish species in few families in the Southern Ocean. The most species-rich family are the snailfish (Liparidae), followed by the cod icefish (Nototheniidae)[76] and eelpout (Zoarcidae). Together the snailfish, eelpouts and notothenioids (which includes cod icefish and several other families) account for almost ​9⁄10 of the more than 320 described fish species of the Southern Ocean (tens of undescribed species also occur in the region, especially among the snailfish).[77] Southern Ocean snailfish are generally found in deep waters, while the icefish also occur in shallower waters.[76]
Icefish[edit]




Fish of the Notothenioidei suborder, such as this young icefish, are mostly restricted to the Antarctic and Subantarctic


Cod icefish (Nototheniidae), as well as several other families, are part of the Notothenioidei suborder, collectively sometimes referred to as icefish. The suborder contains many species with antifreeze proteins in their blood and tissue, allowing them to live in water that is around or slightly below 0 °C (32 °F).[78][79] Antifreeze proteins are also known from Southern Ocean snailfish.[80]
The crocodile icefish (family Channichthyidae), also known as white-blooded fish, are only found in the Southern Ocean. They lack hemoglobin in their blood, resulting in their blood being colourless. One Channichthyidae species, the mackerel icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari), was once the most common fish in coastal waters less than 400 metres (1,312 ft) deep, but was overfished in the 1970s and 1980s. Schools of icefish spend the day at the seafloor and the night higher in the water column eating plankton and smaller fish.[78]
There are two species from the Dissostichus genus, the Antarctic toothfish (Dissostichus mawsoni) and the Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides). These two species live on the seafloor 100–3,000 metres (328–9,843 ft) deep, and can grow to around 2 metres (7 ft) long weighing up to 100 kilograms (220 lb), living up to 45 years. The Antarctic toothfish lives close to the Antarctic mainland, whereas the Patagonian toothfish lives in the relatively warmer subantarctic waters. Toothfish are commercially fished, and overfishing has reduced toothfish populations.[78]
Another abundant fish group is the Notothenia genus, which like the Antarctic toothfish have antifreeze in their bodies.[78]
An unusual species of icefish is the Antarctic silverfish (Pleuragramma antarcticum), which is the only truly pelagic fish in the waters near Antarctica.[81]




Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) are the most southerly of Antarctic mammals.


Mammals[edit]
See also: List of mammals of Antarctica
Seven pinniped species inhabit Antarctica. The largest, the elephant seal (Mirounga leonina), can reach up to 4,000 kilograms (8,818 lb), while females of the smallest, the Antarctic fur seal (Arctocephalus gazella), reach only 150 kilograms (331 lb). These two species live north of the sea ice, and breed in harems on beaches. The other four species can live on the sea ice. Crabeater seals (Lobodon carcinophagus) and Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) form breeding colonies, whereas leopard seals (Hydrurga leptonyx) and Ross seals (Ommatophoca rossii) live solitary lives. Although these species hunt underwater, they breed on land or ice and spend a great deal of time there, as they have no terrestrial predators.[82]
The four species that inhabit sea ice are thought to make up 50% of the total biomass of the world's seals.[83] Crabeater seals have a population of around 15 million, making them one of the most numerous large animals on the planet.[84] The New Zealand sea lion (Phocarctos hookeri), one of the rarest and most localised pinnipeds, breeds almost exclusively on the subantarctic Auckland Islands, although historically it had a wider range.[85] Out of all permanent mammalian residents, the Weddell seals live the furthest south.[86]
There are 10 cetacean species found in the Southern Ocean; six baleen whales, and four toothed whales. The largest of these, the blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus), grows to 24 metres (79 ft) long weighing 84 tonnes. Many of these species are migratory, and travel to tropical waters during the Antarctic winter.[87]




Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) are a keystone species of the food web.


Invertebrates[edit]
Arthropods[edit]
Five species of krill, small free-swimming crustaceans, are found in the Southern Ocean.[88] The Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) is one of the most abundant animal species on earth, with a biomass of around 500 million tonnes. Each individual is 6 centimetres (2.4 in) long and weighs over 1 gram (0.035 oz).[89] The swarms that form can stretch for kilometres, with up to 30,000 individuals per 1 cubic metre (35 cu ft), turning the water red.[88] Swarms usually remain in deep water during the day, ascending during the night to feed on plankton. Many larger animals depend on krill for their own survival.[89] During the winter when food is scarce, adult Antarctic krill can revert to a smaller juvenile stage, using their own body as nutrition.[88]
Many benthic crustaceans have a non-seasonal breeding cycle, and some raise their young in a brood pouch. Glyptonotus antarcticus is an unusually large benthic isopod, reaching 20 centimetres (8 in) in length weighing 70 grams (2.47 oz). Amphipods are abundant in soft sediments, eating a range of items, from algae to other animals.[70]
Slow moving sea spiders are common, sometimes growing as large as a human hand. They feed on the corals, sponges, and bryozoans that litter the seabed.[70]




A female warty squid (Moroteuthis ingens)


Others[edit]
Many aquatic molluscs are present in Antarctica. Bivalves such as Adamussium colbecki move around on the seafloor, while others such as Laternula elliptica live in burrows filtering the water above.[70] There are around 70 cephalopod species in the Southern Ocean,[90] the largest of which is the colossal squid (Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni), which at up to 14 metres (46 ft) is among the largest invertebrate in the world.[91] Squid makes up most of the diet of some animals, such as grey-headed albatrosses and sperm whales, and the warty squid (Moroteuthis ingens) is one of the subantarctic's most preyed upon species by vertebrates.[90]
The sea urchin genus Abatus burrow through the sediment eating the nutrients they find in it.[70] Two species of salps are common in Antarctic waters, Salpa thompsoni and Ihlea racovitzai. Salpa thompsoni is found in ice-free areas, whereas Ihlea racovitzai is found in the high latitude areas near ice. Due to their low nutritional value, they are normally only eaten by fish, with larger animals such as birds and marine mammals only eating them when other food is scarce.[92]
Antarctic sponges are long lived, and sensitive to environmental changes due to the specificity of the symbiotic microbial communities within them. As a result, they function as indicators of environmental health.[93]
Environment[edit]
Current issues[edit]
Increased solar ultraviolet radiation resulting from the Antarctic ozone hole has reduced marine primary productivity (phytoplankton) by as much as 15% and has started damaging the DNA of some fish.[94] Illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, especially the landing of an estimated five to six times more Patagonian toothfish than the regulated fishery, likely affects the sustainability of the stock. Long-line fishing for toothfish causes a high incidence of seabird mortality.
International agreements[edit]
All international agreements regarding the world's oceans apply to the Southern Ocean. In addition, it is subject to these agreements specific to the region:

The Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) prohibits commercial whaling south of 40 degrees south (south of 60 degrees south between 50 degrees and 130 degrees west). Japan regularly does not recognize this provision, because the sanctuary violates IWC charter. Since the scope of the sanctuary is limited to commercial whaling, in regard to its whaling permit and whaling for scientific research, a Japanese fleet carried out an annual whale-hunt in the region. On 31 March 2014, the International Court of Justice ruled that Japan's whaling program, which Japan has long claimed is for scientific purposes, was a cloak for commercial whaling, and no further permits would be granted.
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals is part of the Antarctic Treaty System. It was signed at the conclusion of a multilateral conference in London on 11 February 1972.[95]
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) is part of the Antarctic Treaty System. The Convention was entered into force on 7 April 1982 and has its goal is to preserve marine life and environmental integrity in and near Antarctica. It was established in large part to concerns that an increase in krill catches in the Southern Ocean could have a serious impact on populations of other marine life which are dependent upon krill for food.[96]

Many nations prohibit the exploration for and the exploitation of mineral resources south of the fluctuating Antarctic Convergence,[97] which lies in the middle of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current and serves as the dividing line between the very cold polar surface waters to the south and the warmer waters to the north. The Antarctic Treaty covers the portion of the globe south of sixty degrees south,[98] it prohibits new claims to Antarctica.[99]
The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources applies to the area south of 60° South latitude as well as the areas further north up to the limit of the Antarctic Convergence.[100]
Economy[edit]
Between 1 July 1998 and 30 June 1999, fisheries landed 119,898 tonnes, of which 85% consisted of krill and 14% of Patagonian toothfish. International agreements came into force in late 1999 to reduce illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, which in the 1998–99 season landed five to six times more Patagonian toothfish than the regulated fishery.
Ports and harbors[edit]




Severe cracks in an ice pier in use for four seasons at McMurdo Station slowed cargo operations in 1983 and proved a safety hazard.


Major operational ports include: Rothera Station, Palmer Station, Villa Las Estrellas, Esperanza Base, Mawson Station, McMurdo Station, and offshore anchorages in Antarctica.
Few ports or harbors exist on the southern (Antarctic) coast of the Southern Ocean, since ice conditions limit use of most shores to short periods in midsummer; even then some require icebreaker escort for access. Most Antarctic ports are operated by government research stations and, except in an emergency, remain closed to commercial or private vessels; vessels in any port south of 60 degrees south are subject to inspection by Antarctic Treaty observers.
The Southern Ocean's southernmost port operates at McMurdo Station at 77°50′S 166°40′E﻿ / ﻿77.833°S 166.667°E﻿ / -77.833; 166.667. Winter Quarters Bay forms a small harbor, on the southern tip of Ross Island where a floating ice pier makes port operations possible in summer. Operation Deep Freeze personnel constructed the first ice pier at McMurdo in 1973.[101]
Based on the original 1928 IHO delineation of the Southern Ocean (and the 1937 delineation if the Great Australian Bight is considered integral), Australian ports and harbors between Cape Leeuwin and Cape Otway on the Australian mainland and along the west coast of Tasmania would also be identified as ports and harbors existing in the Southern Ocean. These would include the larger ports and harbors of Albany, Thevenard, Port Lincoln, Whyalla, Port Augusta, Port Adelaide, Portland, Warrnambool, and Macquarie Harbour.

Yacht races have been held in the Southern Ocean, such as the Volvo Ocean Race, Velux 5 Oceans Race, Vendée Globe, Jules Verne Trophy and Global Challenge.
See also[edit]

Extreme points of the Antarctic
Seven Seas
Borders of the oceans



Environment portal
Ecology portal
Geography portal
Weather portal


Notes[edit]



^ Also a translation of its former French name (Grand Océan Austral) in reference to its position below the Pacific, the "Grand Océan".
^ Used by Dr Hooker in his accounts of his Antarctic voyages.[5] Also a translation of the ocean's Japanese name Nankyoku Kai (南極海).
^ Also a translation of the ocean's Chinese name Nánbīng Yáng (南冰洋).
^ Historic names include the "South Sea",[3] the "Great Southern Ocean",[4][note 1] the "South Polar Ocean" or "South-Polar Ocean",[note 2] and the "Southern Icy Ocean".[3][note 3]
^ A subsidiary of Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
^ In violation of their Style Guide,[2] however, some of National Geographic's online news blogs do use the term.[14]
^ Reservation by Norway: Norway recognizes the name Kong Håkon VII Hav which covers the sea area adjacent to Dronning Maud Land and stretching from 20°W to 45°E.[29]
^ The Drake Passage is situated between the southern and eastern extremities of South America and the South Shetland Islands, lying north of the Antarctic Peninsula. The Scotia Sea is an area defined by the southeastern extremity of South America and the South Shetland Islands on the west and by South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands to the north and east. As they extend north of 60°S, Drake Passage and the Scotia Sea are also described as forming part of the South Atlantic Ocean.[29]





^ EB (1878).
^ a b c NGS (2014).
^ a b Sherwood, Mary Martha (1823), An Introduction to Geography, Intended for Little Children, 3rd ed., Wellington: F. Houlston & Son, p. 10 .
^ EB (1911).
^ Hooker, Joseph Dalton (1844), Flora Antarctica: The Botany of the Antarctic Voyage, London: Reeve .
^ a b c d e "Geography - Southern Ocean". CIA Factbook. Retrieved 16 July 2012. ... the Southern Ocean has the unique distinction of being a large circumpolar body of water totally encircling the continent of Antarctica; this ring of water lies between 60 degrees south latitude and the coast of Antarctica and encompasses 360 degrees of longitude. 
^ a b c "Introduction - Southern Ocean". CIA Factbook. Retrieved 16 July 2012. ...As such, the Southern Ocean is now the fourth largest of the world's five oceans (after the Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, and Indian Ocean, but larger than the Arctic Ocean). 
^ The Southern Ocean is the Fifth and Newest World Ocean
^ Pyne, Stephen J.; The Ice: A Journey to Antarctica. University of Washington Press, 1986. (A study of Antarctica's exploration, earth-sciences, icescape, esthetics, literature, and geopolitics)
^ a b "Southern Ocean". Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary. Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 
^ Darby, Andrew (22 December 2003). "Canberra all at sea over position of Southern Ocean". The Age. Retrieved 13 January 2013. 
^ a b "Indian Ocean". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 13 January 2013. 
^ "Maps Home". National Geographic Society. Retrieved 31 March 2014. 
^ a b c "Southern Ocean - News Watch". National Geographic. Retrieved 26 April 2013. 
^ "Upside Down World Map". Hema Maps. Retrieved 22 July 2014. 
^ "Classic World Wall Map". GeoNova. Retrieved 22 July 2014. 
^ "Balboa, or Pan-Pacific Day". The Mid-Pacific Magazine. Pan-Pacific Union. 20 (10): 16. He named it the Southern Ocean, but in 1520 Magellan sailed into the Southern Ocean and named it Pacific 
^ Tomlins, Sir Thomas Edlyne; Raithby, John (1811). "18 George II c.17". The statutes at large, of England and of Great-Britain: from Magna Carta to the union of the kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland. Printed by G. Eyre and A. Strahan. p. 153. Retrieved 1 November 2015. 
^ Cook, James (1821). "March 1775". Three Voyages of Captain James Cook Round the World. Longman. p. 244. Retrieved 1 November 2015. These voyages of the French, though undertaken by private adventurers, have contributed something towards exploring the Southern Ocean. That of Captain Surville, clears up a mistake, which I was led into, in imagining the shoals off the west end of New Caledonia to extend to the west, as far as New Holland. 
^ A Compendious Geographical Dictionary, Containing, a Concise Description of the Most Remarkable Places, Ancient and Modern, in Europe, Asia, Africa, & America, .. (2nd ed.). London: W. Peacock. 1795. p. 29. 
^ Payne, John (1796). Geographical extracts, forming a general view of earth and nature... illustrated with maps. London: G. G. and J. Robinson. p. 80. Retrieved 1 November 2015. 
^ The Edinburgh Gazetteer: Or, Geographical Dictionary: Containing a Description of the Various Countries, Kingdoms, States, Cities, Towns, Mountains, &c. of the World; an Account of the Government, Customs, and Religion of the Inhabitants; the Boundaries and Natural Productions of Each Country, &c. &c. Forming a Complete Body of Geography, Physical, Political, Statistical, and Commercial with Addenda, Containing the Present State of the New Governments in South America.. 1. London: Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green. 1827. p. LIX. 
^ "Physical Geography". Family Magazine: Or Monthly Abstract of General Knowledge. New York: Redfield & Lindsay. 3 (1): 16. June 1835. 
^ "45 Vict. No.702" (PDF). Australasian Legal Information Institute. 28 November 1881. p. 87. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ a b "Map accompanying first edition of IHO Publication Limits of Oceans and Seas, Special Publication 23". NOAA Photo Library. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Retrieved 19 January 2014. 
^ a b "Map accompanying second edition of IHO Publication Limits of Oceans and Seas, Special Publication 23". NOAA Photo Library. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Retrieved 18 January 2014. 
^ a b c "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF). International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Retrieved 7 February 2010. 
^ "Pacific Ocean". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 27 November 2010. 
^ a b c d "IHO PUBLICATION S-23, Limits of Oceans and Seas, Draft 4th Edition". International Hydrographic Organisation. 2002. Retrieved 22 January 2002. 
^ "IHO Special Publication 23". Korean Hydrographic and Oceanographic Administration. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 19 January 2014. 
^ Darby, Andrew (22 December 2003). "Canberra all at sea over position of Southern Ocean". The Age. Retrieved 21 December 2009. 
^ Schenke, Hans Werner (September 2003). "Proposal for the preparation of a new International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean" (PDF). IHO International Hydrographic Committee on Antarctica (HCA). Third HCA Meeting, 8–10 September 2003. Monaco: International Hydrographic Organization (IHO). Retrieved 17 January 2014. 
^ "Southern Ocean". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 24 January 2013. 
^ "AHS – AA609582" (PDF) (PDF). The Australian Hydrographic Service. 5 July 2012. Retrieved 30 May 2013. 
^ For example: Chart Aus343: Australia South Coast - South Australia - Whidbey Isles to Cape Du Couedic, Australian Hydrographic Service, 29 June 1990, archived from the original on 26 May 2009, retrieved 11 October 2010 , Chart Aus792: Australia - Tasmania - Trial Harbour to Low Rocky Point, Australian Hydrographic Service, 18 July 2008, retrieved 11 October 2010 
^ "- Assessment Documentation for Cape Leeuwin Lighthouse" (PDF). Register of Heritage Places. 13 May 2005. p. 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 August 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2010. 
^ Joost Depuydt, ‘Ortelius, Abraham (1527–1598)’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004
^ Peter Barber, "Ortelius' great world map", National Library of Australia, Mapping our World: Terra Incognita to Australia, Canberra, National Library of Australia, 2013, p.95.
^ Dalrymple, Alexander. (1771). A Collection of Voyages Made to the Ocean Between Cape Horn and Cape of Good Hope. Two volumes. London.
^ Headland, Robert K. (1984). The Island of South Georgia, Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-25274-1
^ Cook, James. (1777). A Voyage Towards the South Pole, and Round the World. Performed in His Majesty's Ships the Resolution and Adventure, In the Years 1772, 1773, 1774, and 1775. In which is included, Captain Furneaux's Narrative of his Proceedings in the Adventure during the Separation of the Ships. Volume II. London: Printed for W. Strahan and T. Cadell. (Relevant fragment)
^ a b  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Polar Regions". Encyclopædia Britannica. 21 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 
^ Dance, Nathaniel (c. 1776). "Captain James Cook, 1728-79". Royal Museums Greenwich. Commissioned by Sir Joseph Banks. Retrieved 23 January 2014. 
^ Weddel, James (1970) [1825]. A voyage towards the South Pole: performed in the years 1822-24, containing an examination of the Antarctic Sea. United States Naval Institute. pp. 44, map. 
^ U.S. Antarctic Program External Panel. "Antarctica —past and present" (PDF). NSF. Retrieved 14 November 2007. 
^ Guy G. Guthridge. "Nathaniel Brown Palmer". NASA. Archived from the original on 2 February 2006. Retrieved 14 November 2007. 
^ Palmer Station. ucsd.edu
^ Erki Tammiksaar (14 December 2013). "Punane Bellingshausen" [Red Bellingshausen]. Postimees. Arvamus. Kultuur (in Estonian). 
^ "South-Pole – Exploring Antarctica". South-Pole.com. Archived from the original on 14 February 2006. Retrieved 12 February 2006. 
^ "Milestones, 28 January 1980". Time. 28 January 1980. Retrieved 4 May 2010. 
^ Historic Names — Norwegian-American Scientific Traverse of East Antarctica. Traverse.npolar.no. Retrieved on 29 January 2012.
^ Navy Military History Archived 2 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. History.navy.mil. Retrieved on 29 January 2012.
^ Finn Ronne. The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition 2008
^ antarctica.org Archived 6 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine.—Science: in force...
^ "Mar 28 – Hump Day" Archived 7 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine., British Antarctic Survey.
^ Scope of Antarctic Tourism — A Background Presentation Archived 16 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine., IAATO official website.
^ Reel, Monte (24 November 2007). "Cruise Ship Sinks Off Antarctica". The Washington Post. Retrieved 13 May 2010. 
^ "154 Rescued From Sinking Ship In Antarctic: Passengers, Crew Boarding Another Ship After Wait In Lifeboats; No Injuries Reported". CBS News. 23 November 2007. Retrieved 23 November 2007. 
^ "Doomed Ship Defies Antarctica Odds". Reuters. 25 November 2007. Archived from the original on 27 November 2007. Retrieved 28 November 2007. 
^ "MS Explorer — situation report". The Falkland Islands News. 23 November 2007. 
^ MV EXPLORER Cruise Ship Sinking In South Atlantic, The Shipping Times, 23 November 2007
^ [1]
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 10 September 2015. Retrieved 6 June 2015. 
^ "Water from Icebergs". Ocean Explorer. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 23 January 2014. 
^ "Antarctica Detail". U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey. 18 October 2000. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 
^ Michael L., Van Woert; et al. (2003). "The Ross Sea Circulation During the 1990s". In DiTullio, Giacomo R.; Dunbar, Robert B. Biogeochemistry of the Ross Sea. American Geophysical Union. pp. 4–34. ISBN 0-87590-972-8.  p. 10.
^ Florindo, Fabio; Siegert, Martin J. (2008). Antarctic Climate Evolution. Elsevier. p. 106. ISBN 978-0-444-52847-6. 
^ "The World Fact Book: Climate". U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 19 January 2014. 
^ "Creatures of Antarctica". Archived from the original on 14 February 2005. Retrieved 6 February 2006. 
^ a b c d e Australian Antarctic Division. "Seabed (benthic) communities". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Kinver, Mark (15 February 2009). "Ice oceans 'are not poles apart'". BBC News. British Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Flying Birds". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ British Antarctic Survey. "Land Animals of Antarctica". Natural Environment Research Council. Archived from the original on 22 November 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2013. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Penguins". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Adapting to the cold". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 18 January 2013. Retrieved 5 April 2013. 
^ a b Eastman, J.T.; M.J. Lannoo (1998). "Morphology of the Brain and Sense Organs in the Snailfish Paraliparis devriesi: Neural Convergence and Sensory Compensation on the Antarctic Shelf". Journal of Morphology. 237: 213–236. 
^ Eastman, J.T. (2005). "The nature of the diversity of Antarctic fishes". Polar Biol. 28: 93–107. doi:10.1007/s00300-004-0667-4. 
^ a b c d Australian Antarctic Division. "Fish". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 5 April 2013. 
^ Cheng, C.-H.C.; L. Chen; T.J. Near; Y. Jin (2003). "Functional Antifreeze Glycoprotein Genes in Temperate-Water New Zealand Nototheniid Fish Infer an Antarctic Evolutionary Origin". Mol. Biol. Evol. 20 (11): 1897–1908. doi:10.1093/molbev/msg208. 
^ Jung, A.; P. Johnson; J.T. Eastman; A.L. Devries (1995). "Protein content and freezing avoidance properties of the subdermal extracellular matrix and serum of the Antarctic snailfish, Paraliparis devriesi". Fish Physiol Biochem. 14 (1): 71–80. doi:10.1007/BF00004292. 
^ Froese, Rainer and Pauly, Daniel, eds. (2017). "Pleuragramma antarcticum" in FishBase. December 2017 version.
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Seals and sea lions". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Pack-ice seal species". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 26 August 2012. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Salps". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 August 2012. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Sea lions". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 3 August 2012. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Weddell seals". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 4 August 2012. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "What is a whale?". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 30 May 2012. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ a b c Australian Antarctic Division. "Krill: magicians of the Southern Ocean". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 29 September 2012. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ a b Australian Antarctic Division. "Krill". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 22 January 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ a b Australian Antarctic Division. "Squid". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Anderton, J. (23 February 2007). "Amazing specimen of world's largest squid in NZ". beehive.govt.nz. Retrieved 27 December 2017. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Salps". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Australian Antarctic Division. "Sponges". Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. 
^ Smith RC, Prézelin BB, Baker KS, Bidigare RR, Boucher NP, Coley T, Karentz D, MacIntyre S, Matlick HA, Menzies D, et al. (1992). "Ozone depletion: ultraviolet radiation and phytoplankton biology in antarctic waters". Science. 255 (5047): 952–9. doi:10.1126/science.1546292. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 1546292. 
^ Antarctic Challenge: Conflicting Interests, Cooperation, Environmental Protection, Economic Development Proceedings of an Interdisciplinary Symposium, 22–24 June 1983; Volume 88 of Veröffentlichungen des Instituts für Internationales Recht an der Universität Kiel (Rüdiger Wolfrum and Klaus Bockslaff, eds.), Duncker & Humblot, 1984, p99
^ "Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources". ccamlr.org. 2011. Retrieved 11 October 2011. 
^ "The World Fact Book: Environment - International Agreements". U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 19 January 2014. 
^ The Antarctic Treaty, article 6
^ The Antarctic Treaty, article 4, clause 2
^ "Text of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources" (PDF). ccamlr.org. Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources. 1972. Retrieved 23 January 2014. 
^ "Unique ice pier provides harbor for ships," Archived 30 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine. Antarctic Sun. 8 January 2006; McMurdo Station, Antarctica.


References[edit]

 Baynes, T.S., ed. (1878), "Antarctic Ocean", Encyclopædia Britannica, 2 (9th ed.), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, p. 100 
 Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911), "Great Southern Ocean", Encyclopædia Britannica, 12 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, p. 422 
Brindley, David, ed. (2014), "Antarctic Ocean, Austral Ocean, Southern Ocean", Style Manual, Washington: National Geographic Society, retrieved 31 July 2015 .

Further reading[edit]

Gille, Sarah T. 2002. "Warming of the Southern Ocean since the 1950s": abstract, article. Science: vol. 295 (no. 5558), pp. 1275–1277.
Descriptive Regional Oceanography, P. Tchernia, Pergamon Press, 1980.
Matthias Tomczak and J. Stuart Godfrey. 2003. Regional Oceanography: an Introduction. (see the site)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Southern Ocean.





Look up southern ocean in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Great Southern Ocean.



Oceanography Image of the Day, from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
The CIA World Factbook's entry on the Southern Ocean
The Fifth Ocean from Geography.About.com
The International Bathymetric Chart of the Southern Ocean (IBCSO) National Geophysical Data Center
U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA): Limits of Oceans and Seas (2nd Edition), extant 1937 to 1953, with limits of Southern Ocean.
NOAA In-situ Ocean Data Viewer Plot and download ocean observations
NOAA FAQ about the number of oceans
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources


Coordinates: 70°S 150°W﻿ / ﻿70°S 150°W﻿ / -70; -150






v
t
e


Marine realms






Arctic
Temperate Northern Pacific
Tropical Atlantic
Western Indo-Pacific
Central Indo-Pacific
Tropical Eastern Pacific
Southern Ocean












v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category












v
t
e


Regions of the world











v
t
e


Regions of Africa



Central Africa



Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland

Mbaise


Maputaland
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Congolese rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau





East Africa



African Great Lakes

Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Swahili coast
Virunga Mountains
Zanj


Horn of Africa

Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbara
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura


Indian Ocean islands

Comoros Islands







North Africa



Maghreb

Barbary Coast
Bashmur
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains


Nile Valley

Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Gulf of Aqaba
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt


Western Sahara





West Africa



Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Niger Basin
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta





Southern Africa



Madagascar

Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands


Rhodesia

North
South


Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Highveld
Fynbos
Cape Floristic Region
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
False Bay
Hydra Bay





Macro-regions



Aethiopia
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
East African montane forests
Eastern Desert
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Gibraltar Arc
Greater Middle East
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian Savanna
Tibesti Mountains
Tropical Africa












v
t
e


Regions of Asia



Central



Greater Middle East
Aral Sea

Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee


Transoxiana

Turan


Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Khwarezm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Eurasian Steppe

Asian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe


Mongolian-Manchurian grassland
Wild Fields

Yedisan
Muravsky Trail


Ural

Ural Mountains


Volga region
Idel-Ural
Kolyma
Transbaikal
Pryazovia
Bjarmaland
Kuban
Zalesye
Ingria
Novorossiya
Gornaya Shoriya
Tulgas
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram

Trans-Karakoram Tract


Siachen Glacier





North



Inner Asia
Northeast
Far East

Russian Far East
Okhotsk-Manchurian taiga


Extreme North
Siberia

Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Transbaikal
Khatanga Gulf
Baraba steppe


Kamchatka Peninsula
Amur Basin
Yenisei Gulf
Yenisei Basin
Beringia
Sikhote-Alin





East



Japanese archipelago

Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc


Korean Peninsula
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria

Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian-Manchurian grassland


North China Plain

Yan Mountains


Kunlun Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau

Tibet


Tarim Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Nanzhong
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop

Loess Plateau
Shaanbei


Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze River Delta
Pearl River Delta
Yenisei Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass





West



Greater Middle East

MENA
MENASA
Middle East


Red Sea
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Persian Gulf

Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs


Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula

Najd
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia

Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert




Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia

Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia


Canaan
Aram
Eber-Nari
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Kurdistan
Levant

Southern Levant
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley


Levantine Sea
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Gaza Strip
West Bank
Galilee
Gilead
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Syrian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Syria
Palestine
Iranian Plateau
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus

Caucasus Mountains

Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus


North Caucasus
South Caucasus

Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula




Anatolia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Alpide belt





South



Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Hindu Kush
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Kashmir

Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range


Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern coastal plains
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
MENASA
Lower Gangetic plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan

Baltistan
Shigar Valley


Karakoram

Saltoro Mountains


Siachen Glacier
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Mannar
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Andaman and Nicobar Islands

Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands


Maldive Islands
Alpide belt





Southeast



Mainland

Indochina
Malay Peninsula


Maritime

Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands


Indonesian Archipelago
Timor
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


Philippine Archipelago

Luzon
Visayas
Mindanao


Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt








Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of Europe



North



Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Sápmi
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands





East



Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Donbass
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula

Amber Coast


Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia

East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus


Lokhaniemi
Southeastern

Balkans
Aegean Islands
Gulf of Chania
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia

Southern Russia









Central



Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Mitteleuropa
Visegrád Group





West



Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Normandy
Brittany
Gulf of Lion
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Pyrenees
Alpide belt





South



Italian Peninsula
Insular Italy
Tuscan Archipelago
Aegadian Islands
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Mediterranean
Crimea
Alpide belt








Germanic
Celtic
Slavic countries
Uralic
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin

Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland














v
t
e


Regions of North America



Canada



Eastern Canada
Western Canada
Canadian Prairies
Central Canada
Northern Canada
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
French Canada
English Canada
Acadia

Acadian Peninsula


Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Peace River Country
Cypress Hills
Palliser's Triangle
Canadian Shield
Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Newfoundland (island)
Vancouver island
Gulf Islands
Strait of Georgia
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Labrador Peninsula
Gaspé Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula

Bay de Verde Peninsula


Brodeur Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Cook Peninsula
Gulf of Boothia
Georgian Bay
Hudson Bay
James Bay
Greenland





United States



Pacific Northwest
Inland Northwest
Northeast

New England
Mid-Atlantic
Commonwealth


West

Midwest
Upper Midwest
Mountain States
Intermountain West
Basin and Range Province


Oregon Trail
Mormon Corridor
Calumet Region
Southwest

Old Southwest


Llano Estacado
Central United States

Tallgrass prairie


South

South Central
Deep South
Upland South


Four Corners
East Coast
West Coast
Gulf Coast
Third Coast
Coastal states
Eastern United States

Appalachia


Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Lakes
Great Basin

Great Basin Desert


Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
The Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area

San Francisco Bay
North Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
East Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
Silicon Valley


Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
Great Basin
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
Beringia
Belt regions

Bible Belt
Black Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Frost Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt







Mexico



Northern Mexico
Baja California Peninsula
Gulf of California

Colorado River Delta


Gulf of Mexico
Soconusco
Tierra Caliente
La Mixteca
La Huasteca
Bajío
Valley of Mexico
Mezquital Valley
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Yucatán Peninsula
Basin and Range Province





Central



Western Caribbean Zone
Isthmus of Panama
Gulf of Panama

Pearl Islands


Azuero Peninsula
Mosquito Coast





Caribbean



West Indies
Antilles

Greater Antilles
Lesser Antilles

Leeward
Leeward Antilles
Windward




Lucayan Archipelago
Southern Caribbean








Aridoamerica
Mesoamerica
Oasisamerica
Northern
Middle
Anglo
Latin

French
Hispanic


American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Regions of Oceania



Australasia



Gulf of Carpentaria
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


New Zealand

South Island
North Island

Coromandel Peninsula




Zealandia
New Caledonia
Solomon Islands (archipelago)
Vanuatu

Kula Gulf


Australia
Capital Country
Eastern Australia
Lake Eyre basin
Murray–Darling basin
Northern Australia
Nullarbor Plain
Outback
Southern Australia

Maralinga


Sunraysia
Great Victoria Desert
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf St Vincent
Lefevre Peninsula
Fleurieu Peninsula
Yorke Peninsula
Eyre Peninsula
Mornington Peninsula
Bellarine Peninsula
Mount Henry Peninsula





Melanesia



Islands Region

Bismarck Archipelago
Solomon Islands Archipelago


Fiji
New Caledonia
Papua New Guinea
Vanuatu





Micronesia



Caroline Islands

Federated States of Micronesia
Palau


Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island





Polynesia



Easter Island
Hawaiian Islands
Cook Islands
French Polynesia

Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu


Kermadec Islands
Mangareva Islands
Samoa
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu








Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of South America



East



Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado





North



Caribbean South America
West Indies
Los Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin

Amazon rainforest


Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta





South



Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula





West



Andes

Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range


Altiplano
Atacama Desert








Latin
Hispanic
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Polar regions



Antarctic



Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands





Arctic



Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic












v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category

















v
t
e


Antarctica



General



Antarctic Treaty System
Climate
Colonization
Demographics
Economy
Expeditions
Field camps
Flags
Geography
Geology
History
Mammals
Military activity
Protected areas
Religion
Research stations
Telecommunications
Territorial claims
Time
Tourism
Transport
Volcanoes
Wildlife








Geographic regions



Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands





Waterways



Lake Vostok
List of rivers
McMurdo Sound
Ross Sea
Southern Ocean
Weddell Sea
Lake CECs





Famous explorers



Roald Amundsen
Richard E. Byrd
Douglas Mawson
James Clark Ross
Robert Falcon Scott
Ernest Shackleton
more...








 Category
 Commons
 Antarctica portal
Index












v
t
e


Polar exploration








Arctic










Ocean
History
Expeditions
Research stations





Farthest North
North Pole



Barentsz
Hudson
Marmaduke
Carolus
Parry
North Magnetic Pole

J. Ross
J. C. Ross
Abernethy
Kane
Hayes


Polaris

Polaris
C. F. Hall


British Arctic Expedition

HMS Alert
Nares
HMS Discovery
Stephenson
Markham


Lady Franklin Bay Expedition

Greely
Lockwood
Brainard


1st Fram expedition

Fram
Nansen
Johansen
Sverdrup


Jason

Amedeo


F. Cook
Peary
Sedov
Byrd
Airship Norge

Amundsen
Nobile
Wisting
Riiser-Larsen
Ellsworth


Airship Italia
Nautilus

Wilkins


ANT-25

Chkalov
Baydukov
Belyakov


"North Pole" manned drifting ice stations
NP-1

Papanin
Shirshov
E. Fyodorov
Krenkel


NP-36
NP-37
Sedov

Badygin
Wiese


USS Nautilus
USS Skate
Plaisted
Herbert
NS Arktika
Barneo
Arktika 2007

Mir submersibles
Sagalevich
Chilingarov







Iceland
Greenland



Pytheas
Brendan
Papar
Vikings
Naddodd
Svavarsson
Arnarson
Norse colonization of the Americas
Ulfsson
Galti
Erik the Red
Christian IV's expeditions

J. Hall
Cunningham
Lindenov
C. Richardson


Danish colonization

Egede


Scoresby
Jason

Nansen
Sverdrup


Peary
Rasmussen





Northwest Passage
Northern Canada



Cabot
G. Corte-Real
M. Corte-Real
Frobisher
Gilbert
Davis
Hudson
Discovery

Bylot
Baffin


Munk
I. Fyodorov
Gvozdev
HMS Resolution

J. Cook


HMS Discovery

Clerke


Mackenzie
Kotzebue
J. Ross
HMS Griper

Parry


HMS Hecla

Lyon


HMS Fury

Hoppner


Crozier
J. C. Ross
Coppermine Expedition
Franklin
Back
Dease
Simpson
HMS Blossom

Beechey


Franklin's lost expedition

HMS Erebus
HMS Terror


Collinson
Rae–Richardson Expedition

Rae
J. Richardson


Austin
McClure Expedition

HMS Investigator
McClure
HMS Resolute
Kellett


Belcher
Kennedy
Bellot
Isabel

Inglefield


2nd Grinnell Expedition

USS Advance
Kane


Fox

McClintock


HMS Pandora

Young


Fram

Sverdrup


Gjøa

Amundsen


Rasmussen
Karluk

Stefansson
Bartlett


St. Roch

H. Larsen


Cowper





North East Passage
Russian Arctic



Pomors
Koch boats
Willoughby
Chancellor
Barentsz
Mangazeya
Hudson
Poole
Siberian Cossacks
Perfilyev
Stadukhin
Dezhnev
Popov
Ivanov
Vagin
Permyakov
Great Northern Expedition

Bering
Chirikov
Malygin
Ovtsyn
Minin
V. Pronchishchev
M. Pronchishcheva
Chelyuskin
Kh. Laptev
D. Laptev


Chichagov
Lyakhov
Billings
Sannikov
Gedenschtrom
Wrangel
Matyushkin
Anjou
Litke
Lavrov
Pakhtusov
Tsivolko
Middendorff
Austro-Hungarian Expedition

Weyprecht
Payer


Vega Expedition

A. E. Nordenskiöld
Palander


USS Jeannette

De Long


Yermak

Makarov


Zarya

Toll
Kolomeitsev
Matisen
Kolchak


Sedov
Rusanov
Kuchin
Brusilov Expedition

Sv. Anna
Brusilov
Albanov
Konrad


Wiese
Nagórski
Taymyr / Vaygach

Vilkitsky


Maud

Amundsen


AARI

Samoylovich


Begichev
Urvantsev
Sadko

Ushakov


Glavsevmorput

Schmidt


Aviaarktika

Shevelev


Sibiryakov

Voronin


Chelyuskin
Krassin
Gakkel
Nuclear-powered icebreakers

NS Lenin
Arktika class


















Antarctic










Continent
History
Expeditions





Southern Ocean



Roché
Bouvet
Kerguelen
HMS Resolution

J. Cook


HMS Adventure

Furneaux


Smith
San Telmo
Vostok

Bellingshausen


Mirny

Lazarev


Bransfield
Palmer
Davis
Weddell
Morrell
Astrolabe

Dumont d'Urville


United States Exploring Expedition

USS Vincennes
Wilkes


USS Porpoise

Ringgold


Ross expedition

HMS Erebus (J. C. Ross
Abernethy)
HMS Terror (Crozier)


Cooper
Challenger expedition

HMS Challenger
Nares
Murray


Jason

C. A. Larsen







"Heroic Age"



Belgian Antarctic Expedition

Belgica
de Gerlache
Lecointe
Amundsen
Cook
Arctowski
Racoviță
Dobrowolski


Southern Cross

Southern Cross
Borchgrevink


Discovery

Discovery
Discovery Hut


Gauss

Gauss
Drygalski


Swedish Antarctic Expedition

Antarctic
O. Nordenskjöld
C. A. Larsen


Scottish Antarctic Expedition

Bruce
Scotia


Orcadas Base
Nimrod Expedition

Nimrod


French Antarctic Expeditions

Pourquoi-Pas
Charcot


Japanese Antarctic Expedition

Shirase


Amundsen's South Pole expedition

Fram
Amundsen
Framheim
Polheim


Terra Nova

Terra Nova
Scott
Wilson
E. R. Evans
Crean
Lashly


Filchner
Australasian Antarctic Expedition

SY Aurora
Mawson


Far Eastern Party
Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition

Endurance
Ernest Shackleton
Wild


James Caird
Ross Sea party

Mackintosh


Shackleton–Rowett Expedition

Quest







IPY · IGY
Modern research



Christensen
Byrd
BANZARE
BGLE

Rymill


New Swabia

Ritscher


Operation Tabarin

Marr


Operation Highjump
Captain Arturo Prat Base
British Antarctic Survey
Operation Windmill

Ketchum


Ronne Expedition

F. Ronne
E. Ronne
Schlossbach


Operation Deep Freeze
McMurdo Station
Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition

Hillary
V. Fuchs


Soviet Antarctic Expeditions

1st

Somov
Klenova
Mirny


2nd

Tryoshnikov


3rd

Tolstikov




Antarctic Treaty System
Transglobe Expedition

Fiennes
Burton


Lake Vostok
Kapitsa





Farthest South
South Pole



HMS Resolution

J. Cook


HMS Adventure

Furneaux


Weddell
HMS Erebus

J. C. Ross


HMS Terror

Crozier


Southern Cross

Borchgrevink


Discovery

Barne


Nimrod

Shackleton
Wild
Marshall
Adams


South Magnetic Pole

Mawson
David
Mackay


Amundsen's South Pole expedition

Fram
Amundsen
Bjaaland
Helmer
Hassel
Wisting
Polheim


Terra Nova

Scott
E. Evans
Oates
Wilson
Bowers


Byrd
Balchen
McKinley
Dufek
Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station
Hillary
V. Fuchs
Pole of Cold

Vostok Station


Pole of inaccessibility

Pole of Inaccessibility Station
Tolstikov


Crary
A. Fuchs
Messner















Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 248079071
GND: 4058444-6
NDL: 00643931











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Southern_Ocean&oldid=817405119"					Categories: Southern OceanOceansLandforms of the Southern OceanHidden categories: Articles containing French-language textArticles containing Japanese-language textArticles containing Chinese-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica without Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaCS1 Estonian-language sources (et)Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from September 2016Articles containing German-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers