"Southern America" redirects here. For the region of the United States of America, see Southern United States. For the botanical continent defined in the World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions, see Southern America (WGSRPD).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




South America




Area
17,840,000 km2
(6,890,000 sq mi)


Population
420,458,044 (2016, 5th)[1]


Population density
21.4/km2 (56.0/sq mi)


GDP (nominal)
$3.9 trillion (2016, 4th)


GDP (PPP)
$6.56 trillion (2017, 4th)


Demonym
South American


Countries
12


Dependencies
3


Largest cities
List of cities in South America

List

São Paulo
Lima
Bogotá
Rio de Janeiro
Santiago
Caracas
Buenos Aires
Salvador
Brasília
Fortaleza





South America is a continent located in the western hemisphere, mostly in the southern hemisphere, with a relatively small portion in the northern hemisphere. It may also be considered a subcontinent of the Americas,[2][3] which is how it is viewed in the Spanish and Portuguese-speaking regions of the Americas. The reference to South America instead of other regions (like Latin America or the Southern Cone) has increased in the last decades due to changing geopolitical dynamics (in particular, the rise of Brazil).[4]
It is bordered on the west by the Pacific Ocean and on the north and east by the Atlantic Ocean; North America and the Caribbean Sea lie to the northwest. It includes twelve sovereign states (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela), a part of France (French Guiana), and a non-sovereign area (the Falkland Islands, a British Overseas Territory though this is disputed by Argentina). In addition to this, the ABC islands of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Trinidad and Tobago, and Panama may also be considered part of South America.
South America has an area of 17,840,000 square kilometers (6,890,000 sq mi). Its population as of 2016[update] has been estimated at more than 420 million.[1] South America ranks fourth in area (after Asia, Africa, and North America) and fifth in population (after Asia, Africa, Europe, and North America). Brazil is by far the most populous South American country, with more than half of the continent's population, followed by Colombia, Argentina, Venezuela and Peru. In recent decades Brazil has also concentrated half of the region's GDP and has become a first regional power.[4]
Most of the population lives near the continent's western or eastern coasts while the interior and the far south are sparsely populated. The geography of western South America is dominated by the Andes mountains; in contrast, the eastern part contains both highland regions and large lowlands where rivers such as the Amazon, Orinoco, and Paraná flow. Most of the continent lies in the tropics.
The continent's cultural and ethnic outlook has its origin with the interaction of indigenous peoples with European conquerors and immigrants and, more locally, with African slaves. Given a long history of colonialism, the overwhelming majority of South Americans speak Portuguese or Spanish, and societies and states commonly reflect Western traditions.



Contents


1 Geography

1.1 Outlying islands
1.2 Climate


2 History

2.1 Prehistory
2.2 Pre-Columbian civilizations
2.3 European colonization
2.4 Slavery in South America
2.5 Independence from Spain and Portugal
2.6 Nation-building and fragmentation
2.7 Wars and conflicts
2.8 Rise and fall of military dictatorships


3 Countries and territories
4 Politics
5 Demographics

5.1 Language
5.2 Religion
5.3 Ethnic demographics

5.3.1 Indigenous people


5.4 Populace


6 Economy

6.1 Economically largest cities as of 2014
6.2 Tourism


7 Culture

7.1 Plastic arts
7.2 Sport


8 Infrastructure

8.1 Energy
8.2 Transport


9 See also
10 Notes and references

10.1 Content notes
10.2 References
10.3 Sources


11 External links



Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of South America
See also: Category:Environment of South America




A composite relief image of South America


South America occupies the southern portion of the Americas. The continent is generally delimited on the northwest by the Darién watershed along the Colombia–Panama border, although some may consider the border instead to be the Panama Canal. Geopolitically and geographically[5] all of Panama – including the segment east of the Panama Canal in the isthmus – is typically included in North America alone[6][7][8] and among the countries of Central America.[9][10] Almost all of mainland South America sits on the South American Plate.
South America is home to the world's highest uninterrupted waterfall, Angel Falls in Venezuela; the highest single drop waterfall Kaieteur Falls in Guyana; the largest river (by volume), the Amazon River; the longest mountain range, the Andes (whose highest mountain is Aconcagua at 6,962 m [22,841 ft]); the driest non-polar place on earth, the Atacama Desert;[11][12][13] the largest rainforest, the Amazon Rainforest; the highest capital city, La Paz, Bolivia; the highest commercially navigable lake in the world, Lake Titicaca; and, excluding research stations in Antarctica, the world's southernmost permanently inhabited community, Puerto Toro, Chile.
South America's major mineral resources are gold, silver, copper, iron ore, tin, and petroleum. These resources found in South America have brought high income to its countries especially in times of war or of rapid economic growth by industrialized countries elsewhere. However, the concentration in producing one major export commodity often has hindered the development of diversified economies. The fluctuation in the price of commodities in the international markets has led historically to major highs and lows in the economies of South American states, often causing extreme political instability. This is leading to efforts to diversify production to drive away from staying as economies dedicated to one major export.
South America is one of the most biodiverse continents on earth. South America is home to many interesting and unique species of animals including the llama, anaconda, piranha, jaguar, vicuña, and tapir. The Amazon rainforests possess high biodiversity, containing a major proportion of the Earth's species.
Brazil is the largest country in South America, encompassing around half of the continent's land area and population. The remaining countries and territories are divided among three regions: The Andean States, the Guianas and the Southern Cone.

Geography of South America






Torres del Paine in Chile.









Ausangate mountain in Peru.









Porto de Galinhas beach in Brazil.









Amazon rainforest, the richest and most megadiverse forest in the world.









Angel Falls in Venezuela, the highest waterfall in the world.









Quebrada de Cafayate in Argentina.









Atacama Desert (Chile) the driest desert in the world.









Pirineus State Park in Brazil.









Serra da Capivara National Park in Brazil.









Monte Roraima between Brazil, Venezuela and Guyana.




Outlying islands[edit]
Traditionally, South America also includes some of the nearby islands. Aruba, Bonaire, Curaçao, Trinidad, Tobago, and the federal dependencies of Venezuela sit on the northerly South American continental shelf and are often considered part of the continent. Geo-politically, the island states and overseas territories of the Caribbean are generally grouped as a part or subregion of North America, since they are more distant on the Caribbean Plate, even though San Andres and Providencia are politically part of Colombia and Aves Island is controlled by Venezuela.[8][14][15]
Other islands that are included with South America are the Galápagos Islands that belong to Ecuador and Easter Island (in Oceania but belonging to Chile), Robinson Crusoe Island, Chiloé (both Chilean) and Tierra del Fuego (split between Chile and Argentina). In the Atlantic, Brazil owns Fernando de Noronha, Trindade and Martim Vaz, and the Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago, while the Falkland Islands are governed by the United Kingdom, whose sovereignty over the islands is disputed by Argentina. South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands may be associated with either South America or Antarctica.[citation needed]

Islands of South America






Falkland Islands, overseas of the United Kingdom.









Easter Island, in the picture Rano Raraku volcano.









Fernando de Noronha, Brazilian archipelago.









Trindade and Martin Vaz, a volcanic archipelago of Brazil.









Galápagos Islands off coast of Ecuador





Climate[edit]




Map of South America according to Köppen climate classification


The distribution of the average temperatures in the region presents a constant regularity from the 30° of latitude south, when the isotherms tend, more and more, to be confused with the degrees of latitude.[16]
In temperate latitudes, winters are milder and summers warmer than in North America. Because its most extensive part of the continent is located in the equatorial zone, the region has more areas of equatorial plains than any other region.[16]
The average annual temperatures in the Amazon basin oscillate around 27 °C, with low thermal amplitudes and high rainfall indices. Between the Maracaibo Lake and the mouth of the Orinoco, predominates an equatorial climate of the type Congolese, that also includes parts of the Brazilian territory.[16]
The east-central Brazilian plateau has a humid and warm tropical climate. The northern and eastern parts of the Argentine pampas have a humid subtropical climate with dry winters and humid summers of the Chinese type, while the western and eastern ranges have a subtropical climate of the dinaric type. At the highest points of the Andean region, climates are colder than the ones occurring at the highest point of the Norwegian fjords. In the Andean plateaus, the warm climate prevails, although it is tempered by the altitude, while in the coastal strip, there is an equatorial climate of the Guinean type. From this point until the north of the Chilean coast appear, successively, Mediterranean oceanic climate, temperate of the Breton type and, already in Tierra del Fuego, cold climate of the Siberian type.[16]
The distribution of rainfall is related to the regime of winds and air masses. In most of the tropical region east of the Andes, winds blowing from the northeast, east and southeast carry moisture from the Atlantic, causing abundant rainfall. In the Orinoco lhanos and in the Guianas plateau, the precipitations go from moderate to high. The Pacific coast of Colombia and northern Ecuador are rainy regions. The Atacama Desert, along this stretch of coast, is one of the driest regions in the world. The central and southern parts of Chile are subject to cyclones, and most of the Argentine Patagonia is desert. In the pampas of Argentina, Uruguay and South of Brazil the rainfall is moderate, with rains well distributed during the year. The moderately dry conditions of the Chaco oppose the intense rainfall of the eastern region of Paraguay. In the semiarid coast of the Brazilian Northeast the rains are linked to a monsoon regime.[16]
Important factors in the determination of climates are sea currents, such as the current Humboldt and Falklands. The equatorial current of the South Atlantic strikes the coast of the Northeast and there is divided into two others: the current of Brazil and a coastal current that flows to the northwest towards the Antilles, where there it moves towards northeast course thus forming the most Important and famous ocean current in the world, the Gulf Stream.[16][17]





Perito Moreno Glacier, Los Glaciares National Park, Santa Cruz Province, Argentina; declared World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1981.


History[edit]
Main article: History of South America
Prehistory[edit]
Further information: History of South America § Pre-Columbian era




The prehistoric Cueva de las Manos, or Cave of the Hands, in Argentina


South America is believed to have been joined with Africa from the late Paleozoic Era to the early Mesozoic Era, until the supercontinent Pangaea began to rift and break apart about 225 million years ago. Therefore, South America and Africa share similar fossils and rock layers.
South America is thought to have been first inhabited by humans when people were crossing the Bering Land Bridge (now the Bering Strait) at least 15,000 years ago from the territory that is present-day Russia. They migrated south through North America, and eventually reached South America through the Isthmus of Panama.
The first evidence for the existence of the human race in South America dates back to about 9000 BC, when squashes, chili peppers and beans began to be cultivated for food in the highlands of the Amazon Basin. Pottery evidence further suggests that manioc, which remains a staple food today, was being cultivated as early as 2000 BC.[18]
By 2000 BC, many agrarian communities had been settled throughout the Andes and the surrounding regions. Fishing became a widespread practice along the coast, helping establish fish as a primary source of food. Irrigation systems were also developed at this time, which aided in the rise of an agrarian society.[18]
South American cultures began domesticating llamas, vicuñas, guanacos, and alpacas in the highlands of the Andes circa 3500 BC. Besides their use as sources of meat and wool, these animals were used for transportation of goods.[18]
Pre-Columbian civilizations[edit]
Main article: Pre-Columbian era § South America




The Inca estate of Machu Picchu, Peru is one of the New Seven Wonders of the World.


The rise of plant growing and the subsequent appearance of permanent human settlements allowed for the multiple and overlapping beginnings of civilizations in South America.
One of the earliest known South American civilizations was at Norte Chico, on the central Peruvian coast. Though a pre-ceramic culture, the monumental architecture of Norte Chico is contemporaneous with the pyramids of Ancient Egypt. Norte Chico governing class established a trade network and developed agriculture then followed by Chavín by 900 BC, according to some estimates and archaeological finds. Artifacts were found at a site called Chavín de Huantar in modern Peru at an elevation of 3,177 meters. Chavín civilization spanned 900 BC to 300 BC.
In the central coast of Peru, around the beginning of the 1st millennium AD, Moche (100 BC – 700 AD, at the northern coast of Peru), Paracas and Nazca (400 BC – 800 AD, Peru) cultures flourished with centralized states with permanent militia improving agriculture through irrigation and new styles of ceramic art. At the Altiplano, Tiahuanaco or Tiwanaku (100 BC – 1200 AD, Bolivia) managed a large commercial network based on religion.
Around the 7th century, both Tiahuanaco and Wari or Huari Empire (600–1200, Central and northern Peru) expanded its influence to all the Andean region, imposing the Huari urbanism and Tiahuanaco religious iconography.
The Muisca were the main indigenous civilization in what is now Colombia. They established the Muisca Confederation of many clans, or cacicazgos, that had a free trade network among themselves. They were goldsmiths and farmers.
Other important Pre-Columbian cultures include: the Cañaris (in south central Ecuador), Chimú Empire (1300–1470, Peruvian northern coast), Chachapoyas, and the Aymaran kingdoms (1000–1450, Western Bolivia and southern Peru).
Holding their capital at the great city of Cusco, the Inca civilization dominated the Andes region from 1438 to 1533. Known as Tawantin suyu, and "the land of the four regions," in Quechua, the Inca Empire was highly distinct and developed. Inca rule extended to nearly a hundred linguistic or ethnic communities, some 9 to 14 million people connected by a 25,000 kilometer road system. Cities were built with precise, unmatched stonework, constructed over many levels of mountain terrain. Terrace farming was a useful form of agriculture.
The Mapuche in Central and Southern Chile resisted the European and Chilean settlers, waging the Arauco War for more than 300 years.
European colonization[edit]
Main articles: Spanish colonization of the Americas and Portuguese colonization of the Americas




The Portuguese arrival in Brazil on 22 April 1500 was led by Pedro Álvares Cabral.






The Inca–Spanish confrontation in the Battle of Cajamarca left thousands of natives dead.






The Dutch colonial houses located in the historic center of Paramaribo, Suriname.






Illustration of the Demerara rebellion in British Guiana in 1823.


In 1494, Portugal and Spain, the two great maritime European powers of that time, on the expectation of new lands being discovered in the west, signed the Treaty of Tordesillas, by which they agreed, with the support of the Pope, that all the land outside Europe should be an exclusive duopoly between the two countries.
The treaty established an imaginary line along a north-south meridian 370 leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands, roughly 46° 37' W. In terms of the treaty, all land to the west of the line (known to comprise most of the South American soil) would belong to Spain, and all land to the east, to Portugal. As accurate measurements of longitude were impossible at that time, the line was not strictly enforced, resulting in a Portuguese expansion of Brazil across the meridian.
Beginning in the 1530s, the people and natural resources of South America were repeatedly exploited by foreign conquistadors, first from Spain and later from Portugal. These competing colonial nations claimed the land and resources as their own and divided it in colonies.
European infectious diseases (smallpox, influenza, measles, and typhus) – to which the native populations had no immune resistance – caused large-scale depopulation of the native population under Spanish control. Systems of forced labor, such as the haciendas and mining industry's mit'a also contributed to the depopulation. After this, African slaves, who had developed immunities to these diseases, were quickly brought in to replace them.
The Spaniards were committed to convert their native subjects to Christianity and were quick to purge any native cultural practices that hindered this end; however, many initial attempts at this were only partially successful, as native groups simply blended Catholicism with their established beliefs and practices. Furthermore, the Spaniards brought their language to the degree they did with their religion, although the Roman Catholic Church's evangelization in Quechua, Aymara, and Guaraní actually contributed to the continuous use of these native languages albeit only in the oral form.
Eventually, the natives and the Spaniards interbred, forming a mestizo class. At the beginning, many mestizos of the Andean region were offspring of Amerindian mothers and Spanish fathers. After independence, most mestizos had native fathers and European or mestizo mothers.
Many native artworks were considered pagan idols and destroyed by Spanish explorers; this included many gold and silver sculptures and other artifacts found in South America, which were melted down before their transport to Spain or Portugal. Spaniards and Portuguese brought the western European architectural style to the continent, and helped to improve infrastructures like bridges, roads, and the sewer system of the cities they discovered or conquered. They also significantly increased economic and trade relations, not just between the old and new world but between the different South American regions and peoples. Finally, with the expansion of the Portuguese and Spanish languages, many cultures that were previously separated became united through that of Latin American.
Guyana was first a Dutch, and then a British colony, though there was a brief period during the Napoleonic Wars when it was colonized by the French. The country was once partitioned into three parts, each being controlled by one of the colonial powers until the country was finally taken over fully by the British.





Plaza of San Francisco in the Historic Center of Quito, Ecuador, is one of the largest, least-altered and best-preserved historic centers in the Americas.[19]



Slavery in South America[edit]


Part of a series on
Slavery







Contemporary


Child labour
Conscription
Debt
Forced marriage

Bride buying
Wife selling


Forced prostitution
Human trafficking
Peonage
Penal labour
Sexual slavery
Wage slavery








Historical


Antiquity


Ancient Rome
Babylonia
Ancient Greece


Topics and practices


Atlantic slave trade

Middle Passage


Arab slave trade

Ghilman
Mamluk
Saqaliba


Aztec
Blackbirding
Byzantine Empire
Coolie
Corvée labor
Field slaves in the United States
House slaves
Kholop
Medieval Europe
Panyarring
Thrall
Serfs

History
Russia


Slave market
Slave raiding


Naval


Galley slave
Impressment
Pirates
Shanghaiing
Slave ship








By country or region


Sub-Saharan Africa


Contemporary Africa
Slavery on the Barbary Coast
Barbary slave trade
Slave Coast
Angola
Chad
Ethiopia
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Seychelles


North and South America


Americas indigenous

U.S. Natives


Brazil

Lei Áurea


Canada
Caribbean

Barbados
Code Noir


Cuba
Haiti

revolt
Restavek


Latin America
Puerto Rico
Trinidad
United States

colonial
maps
female
partus
penal labor
Slave codes
interregional
Human trafficking


Virgin Islands


Central, East, and South Asia


Human trafficking in Southeast Asia
Bhutan
China

Booi Aha
Laogai


India

Debt bondage
Chukri System


Japan

comfort women


South Korea

Yankee princess


North Korea
Vietnam


Australia and Oceania


Blackbirding in Australia
Human trafficking in Australia
Slave raiding in Easter Island
Human trafficking in Papua New Guinea
Blackbirding in Polynesia


Europe and North Asia


Sex trafficking in Europe
Britain
Denmark
Dutch Republic
Germany in World War II
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Spain

colonies


Sweden


North Africa and West Asia


Iran
Libya
Human trafficking in the Middle East
Ottoman Empire
Yemen








Religion


Bible
Christianity

Catholicism
Mormonism


Islam

21st century


Judaism
Bahá'í Faith








Opposition and resistance


Timeline
Abolitionism

U.K.
U.S.


Anti-Slavery International
Blockade of Africa

U.K.
U.S.


Compensated emancipation
Freedman

manumission


Freedom suit
Abolitionists
Slave Power
Underground Railroad

songs


Slave rebellion
Slave Trade Acts
International law
13th Amendment to the United States Constitution








Related


Common law
Indentured servitude
Unfree labour
Fugitive slaves

laws
Great Dismal Swamp maroons


List of slaves

owners


Slave narrative

films
songs


Slave name
Slave catcher
Slave patrol
Slave Route Project
Treatment in U.S.

breeding
court cases
Washington
Jefferson
Adams
Lincoln
40 acres
Freedmen's Bureau
bit


Emancipation Day









v
t
e





See also: Slavery among the indigenous peoples of the Americas and Atlantic slave trade




A slave owner punishes a slave in 19th-century Brazil.


Indigenous peoples of the Americas in various European colonies were forced to work in European plantations and mines; along with African slaves who were also introduced in the proceeding centuries. The colonists were heavily dependent on indigenous labor during the initial phases of European settlement to maintain the subsistence economy, and natives were often captured by expeditions. The importation of African slaves began midway through the 16th century, but the enslavement of indigenous peoples continued well into the 17th and 18th centuries. The Atlantic slave trade brought African slaves primarily to South American colonies, beginning with the Portuguese since 1502.[20] The main destinations of this phase were the Caribbean colonies and Brazil, as European nations built up economically slave-dependent colonies in the New World. Nearly 40% of all African slaves trafficked to the Americas went to Brazil. An estimated 4.9 million slaves from Africa came to Brazil during the period from 1501 to 1866.[21][22]
While the Portuguese, English and French settlers enslaved mainly African blacks, the Spaniards became very disposed of the natives. In 1750 Portugal abolished native slavery in the colonies because they considered them unfit for labour and began to import even more African slaves. Slaves were brought to the mainland on so-called slave ships, under subhuman conditions and ill-treatment, and those who survived were sold into the slave markets.
After independence, all South American countries maintained slavery for some time. The first South American country to abolish slavery was Chile in 1823, Uruguay in 1830, Bolivia in 1831, Colombia and Ecuador in 1851, Argentina in 1853, Peru and Venezuela in 1854, Paraguay in 1869, and in 1888 Brazil was the last South American nation and the last country in western world to abolish slavery.
Independence from Spain and Portugal[edit]
Main articles: Spanish American wars of independence and Independence of Brazil




The Guayaquil conference between José de San Martín and Simón Bolívar






The proclamation of the Independence of Brazil by Prince Pedro on 7 September 1822.



Coronation of Pedro I as 1st Emperor of Brazil.







Bernardo O'Higgins swears officially the independence of Chile.


The European Peninsular War (1807–1814), a theater of the Napoleonic Wars, changed the political situation of both the Spanish and Portuguese colonies. First, Napoleon invaded Portugal, but the House of Braganza avoided capture by escaping to Brazil. Napoleon also captured King Ferdinand VII of Spain, and appointed his own brother instead. This appointment provoked severe popular resistance, which created Juntas to rule in the name of the captured king.
Many cities in the Spanish colonies, however, considered themselves equally authorized to appoint local Juntas like those of Spain. This began the Spanish American wars of independence between the patriots, who promoted such autonomy, and the royalists, who supported Spanish authority over the Americas. The Juntas, in both Spain and the Americas, promoted the ideas of the Enlightenment. Five years after the beginning of the war, Ferdinand VII returned to the throne and began the Absolutist Restoration as the royalists got the upper hand in the conflict.
The independence of South America was secured by Simón Bolívar (Venezuela) and José de San Martín (Argentina), the two most important Libertadores. Bolívar led a great uprising in the north, then led his army southward towards Lima, the capital of the Viceroyalty of Peru. Meanwhile, San Martín led an army across the Andes Mountains, along with Chilean expatriates, and liberated Chile. He organized a fleet to reach Peru by sea, and sought the military support of various rebels from the Viceroyalty of Peru. The two armies finally met in Guayaquil, Ecuador, where they cornered the Royal Army of the Spanish Crown and forced its surrender.
In the Portuguese Kingdom of Brazil, Dom Pedro I (also Pedro IV of Portugal), son of the Portuguese King Dom João VI, proclaimed the independent Kingdom of Brazil in 1822, which later became the Empire of Brazil. Despite the Portuguese loyalties of garrisons in Bahia, Cisplatina and Pará, independence was diplomatically accepted by the crown in Portugal in 1825, on condition of a high compensation paid by Brazil mediatized by the United Kingdom.
Nation-building and fragmentation[edit]




The Thirty-Three Orientals proclaimed the independence of Cisplatine Province.






Battle of Fanfa, battle scene in Southern Brazil during the Ragamuffin War


The newly independent nations began a process of fragmentation, with several civil and international wars. However, it was not as strong as in Central America. Some countries created from provinces of larger countries stayed as such up to modern day (such as Paraguay or Uruguay), while others were reconquered and reincorporated into their former countries (such as the Republic of Entre Ríos and the Riograndense Republic).
The first separatist attempt was in 1820 by the Argentine province of Entre Ríos by a caudillo.[23] In spite of the "Republic" in its title, General Ramírez, its caudillo, never really intended to declare an independent Entre Rios. Rather, he was making a political statement in opposition to the monarchist and centralist ideas that back then permeated Buenos Aires politics. The "country" was reincorporated at the United Provinces in 1821.
In 1825 the Cisplatine Province declared its independence from the Empire of Brazil, which led the Cisplatine War between the imperials and the Argentine from the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata to control the region. Three years later, the United Kingdom intervened in question by proclaiming a tie and creating in the former Cisplatina a new independent country: The Oriental Republic of Uruguay which was the only separatist province that maintained its independence.
Later in 1836, while Brazil was experiencing the chaos of the regency, Rio Grande do Sul proclaimed its independence motivated by a tax crisis. This was the longest and most bloody separatist conflict in South America. With the anticipation of the coronation of Pedro II to the throne of Brazil, the country could stabilize and fight the separatists, which the province of Santa Catarina had joined in 1839. The Conflict came to an end with the total defeat of both Riograndense Republic and Juliana Republic and their reincorporation as provinces in 1845.[24][25]
The Peru–Bolivian Confederation, a short-lived union of Peru and Bolivia, was blocked by Chile in the War of the Confederation (1836–1839) and again during the War of the Pacific (1879–1883). Paraguay was virtually destroyed by Argentina and Brazil in the Paraguayan War.
Wars and conflicts[edit]




Imperial Brazilian Navy and army troops during the Siege of Paysandú, 1865






The Uruguayan Army at the Battle of Sauce, 1866






The Imperial Brazilian Army during a procession in Paraguay, 1868






The Chilean Army in the battlefield of the Battle of Chorrillos, 1883






A German submarine under attack by Brazilian Air Force PBY Catalina, 31 July 1943


South-American history in early 19th century was built almost exclusively on wars. Despite the Spanish American wars of independence and the Brazilian War of Independence, the new nations quickly began to suffer with internal conflicts and wars among themselves.
In 1825 the proclamation of independence of Cisplatina led to the Cisplatine War between historical rivals the Empire of Brazil and the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata, Argentina's predecessor. The result was a stalemate with the British ending in the independence of Uruguay. Soon after, another Brazilian province proclaimed its independence leading to the Ragamuffin War which Brazil won.
Between 1836 and 1839 the War of the Confederation broke out between the short-lived Peru-Bolivian Confederation and Chile, with the support of the Argentine Confederation. The war was fought mostly in the actual territory of Peru and ended with a Confederate defeat and the dissolution of the Confederacy and annexation of many territories by Argentina.
Meanwhile, the Argentine Civil Wars plagued Argentina since its independence. The conflict was mainly between those who defended the centralization of power in Buenos Aires and those who defended a confederation. During this period it can be said that "there were two Argentines": the Argentine Confederation and the Argentine Republic. At the same time the political instability in Uruguay led to the Uruguayan Civil War among the main political factions of the country. All this instability in the platine region interfered with the goals of other countries such as Brazil, which was soon forced to take sides. In 1851 the Brazilian Empire, supporting the centralizing unitarians, and the uruguayn government invaded Argentina and deposed the caudillo, Juan Manuel Rosas, who ruled the confederation with an iron hand. Although the Platine War did not put an end to the political chaos and civil war in Argentina, it brought temporary peace to Uruguay where the Colorados faction won, supported by the Brazilian Empire, British Empire, French Empire and the Unitarian Party of Argentina.[26]
Peace lasted only a short time: in 1864 the Uruguayan factions faced each other again in the Uruguayan War. The Blancos supported by Paraguay started to attack Brazilian and Argentine farmers near the borders. The Empire made an initial attempt to settle the dispute between Blancos and Colorados without success. In 1864, after a Brazilian ultimatum was refused, the imperial government declared that Brazil's military would begin reprisals. Brazil declined to acknowledge a formal state of war, and, for most of its duration, the Uruguayan–Brazilian armed conflict was an undeclared war which led to the deposition of the Blancos and the rise of the pro-Brazilian Colorados to power again. This angered the Paraguayan government, which even before the end of the war invaded Brazil, beginning the biggest and deadliest war in both South American and Latin American histories: the Paraguayan War.
The Paraguayan War began when the Paraguayan dictator Francisco Solano López ordered the invasion of the Brazilian provinces of Mato Grosso and Rio Grande do Sul. His attempt to cross Argentinian territory without Argentinian approval led the pro-Brazilian Argentine government into the war. The pro-Brazilian Uruguayan government showed its support by sending troops. In 1865 the three countries signed the Treaty of the Triple Alliance against Paraguay. At the beginning of the war, the Paraguayans took the lead with several victories, until the Triple Alliance organized to repel the invaders and fight effectively. This was the second total war experience in the world after the American Civil War. It was deemed the greatest war effort in the history of all participating countries, taking almost 6 years and ending with the complete devastation of Paraguay. The country lost 40% of its territory to Brazil and Argentina and lost 60% of its population, including 90% of the men. The dictator Lopez was killed in battle and a new government was instituted in alliance with Brazil, which maintained occupation forces in the country until 1876.[27]
The last South American war in the 19th century was the War of the Pacific with Bolivia and Peru on one side and Chile on the other. In 1879 the war began with Chilean troops occupying Bolivian ports, followed by Bolivia declaring war on Chile which activated an alliance treaty with Peru. The Bolivians were completely defeated in 1880 and Lima was occupied in 1881. The peace was signed with Peru in 1883 while a truce was signed with Bolivia in 1884. Chile annexed territories of both countries leaving Bolivia with no path to the sea.[28]
In the new century, as wars became less violent and less frequent, Brazil entered into a small conflict with Bolivia for the possession of the Acre, which was acquired by Brazil in 1902. In 1917 Brazil declared war on the Central Powers and join the allied side in the World War I, sending a small fleet to the Mediterranean Sea and some troops to be integrated with the British and French troops. Brazil was the only South American country that fought in WWI.[29][30] Later in 1932 Colombia and Peru entered a short armed conflict for territory in the Amazon. In the same year Paraguay declared war on Bolivia for possession of the Chaco, in a conflict that ended three years later with Paraguay's victory. Between 1941 and 1942 Peru and Ecuador fought decisively for territories claimed by both that were annexed by Peru, usurping Ecuador's frontier with Brazil.[31]
Also in this period the first naval battle of World War II was fought on the continent, in the River Plate, between British forces and German submarines.[32] The Germans still made numerous attacks on Brazilian ships on the coast, causing Brazil to declare war on the Axis powers in 1942, being the only South American country to fight in this war (and in both World Wars). Brazil sent naval and air forces to combat German and Italian submarines off the continent and throughout the South Atlantic, in addition to sending an expeditionary force to fight in the Italian Campaign.[33][34][33]
The last war to be fought on South American soil was the Falkland War between Argentina and the United Kingdom for possession of the islands of the same name. Argentina was defeated in 1982.
Rise and fall of military dictatorships[edit]




Argentine soldiers during the Falklands War






The Brazilian Minas Geraes class kindled an Argentine–Brazilian–Chilean naval arms race.


Wars became less frequent in the 20th century, with Bolivia-Paraguay and Peru-Ecuador fighting the last inter-state wars. Early in the 20th century, the three wealthiest South American countries engaged in a vastly expensive naval arms race which was catalyzed by the introduction of a new warship type, the "dreadnought". At one point, the Argentine government was spending a fifth of its entire yearly budget for just two dreadnoughts, a price that did not include later in-service costs, which for the Brazilian dreadnoughts was sixty percent of the initial purchase.[35][36]
The continent became a battlefield of the Cold War in the late 20th century. Some democratically elected governments of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Paraguay were overthrown or displaced by military dictatorships in the 1960s and 1970s. To curtail opposition, their governments detained tens of thousands of political prisoners, many of whom were tortured and/or killed on inter-state collaboration. Economically, they began a transition to neoliberal economic policies. They placed their own actions within the US Cold War doctrine of "National Security" against internal subversion. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Peru suffered from an internal conflict.
Argentina and Britain fought the Falklands War in 1982.
Colombia has had an ongoing, though diminished internal conflict, which started in 1964 with the creation of Marxist guerrillas (FARC-EP) and then involved several illegal armed groups of leftist-leaning ideology as well as the private armies of powerful drug lords. Many of these are now defunct, and only a small portion of the ELN remains, along with the stronger, though also greatly reduced, FARC. These leftist groups smuggle narcotics out of Colombia to fund their operations, while also using kidnapping, bombings, land mines and assassinations as weapons against both elected and non-elected citizens.




Presidents of UNASUR member states at the Second Brasília Summit on 23 May 2008.


Revolutionary movements and right-wing military dictatorships became common after World War II, but since the 1980s, a wave of democratization passed through the continent, and democratic rule is widespread now.[37] Nonetheless, allegations of corruption are still very common, and several countries have developed crises which have forced the resignation of their governments, although, on most occasions, regular civilian succession has continued.
International indebtedness turned into a severe problem in the late 1980s, and some countries, despite having strong democracies, have not yet developed political institutions capable of handling such crises without resorting to unorthodox economic policies, as most recently illustrated by Argentina's default in the early 21st century.[38][neutrality is disputed] The last twenty years have seen an increased push towards regional integration, with the creation of uniquely South American institutions such as the Andean Community, Mercosur and Unasur. Notably, starting with the election of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela in 1998, the region experienced what has been termed a pink tide – the election of several leftist and center-left administrations to most countries of the area, except for the Guianas and Colombia.
Countries and territories[edit]
See also: List of South American countries by population and List of sovereign states and dependent territories in South America by median age of population


Arms
Flag
Country or
territory with flag
Area
(km²)[39] (sq mi)
Population
(2016 est.)[1]
Population density
per km2 (per sq mi)
Capital




Argentina
2766890 !2,766,890 km2 (1,068,300 sq mi)
43,847,430
1430 !14.3/km² (37/sq mi)
Buenos Aires




Bolivia
1098580 !1,098,580 km2 (424,160 sq mi)
10,887,882
0810 !8.4/km² (21.8/sq mi)
La Paz and Sucre[40]




Brazil
8514877 !8,514,877 km2 (3,287,612 sq mi)
207,652,865
2200 !22.0/km² (57/sq mi)
Brasília




Chile[41]
0756950 !  756,950 km2 (292,260 sq mi)
17,909,754
2110 !22/km² (57/sq mi)
Santiago




Colombia
1138910 !1,141,748 km2 (440,831 sq mi)
48,653,419
3770 !40/km² (103.6/sq mi)
Bogotá




Ecuador
0283560 !  283,560 km2 (109,480 sq mi)
16,385,068
4710 !53.8/km² (139.3/sq mi)
Quito




Falkland Islands (United Kingdom)[42]
0012173 !   12,173 km2 (4,700 sq mi)
2,910
0026 !0.26/km² (0.7/sq mi)
Stanley




French Guiana (France)
0091000 !   91,000 km2 (35,000 sq mi)
275,713
0210 !2.7/km² (5.4/sq mi)
Cayenne (Préfecture)




Guyana
0214999 !  214,999 km2 (83,012 sq mi)
773,303
0360 !3.5/km² (9.1/sq mi)
Georgetown




Paraguay
0406750 !  406,750 km2 (157,050 sq mi)
6,725,308
1560 !15.6/km² (40.4/sq mi)
Asunción




Peru
1285220 !1,285,220 km2 (496,230 sq mi)
31,773,839
2170 !22/km² (57/sq mi)
Lima




South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (United Kingdom)[43]
0003093 !    3,093 km2 (1,194 sq mi)
20
0000 !0/km² (0/sq mi)
King Edward Point[44]




Suriname
0163270 !  163,270 km2 (63,040 sq mi)
558,368
0270 !3/km² (7.8/sq mi)
Paramaribo




Uruguay
0176220 !  176,220 km2 (68,040 sq mi)
3,444,006
1940 !19.4/km² (50.2/sq mi)
Montevideo




Venezuela
09116445 !  916,445 km2 (353,841 sq mi)
31,568,179
2780 !30.2/km² (72/sq mi)
Caracas


Total
7007178245130000000♠17,824,513
420,458,044
21.5/km²



Politics[edit]




Headquarters of the UNASUR in Quito, Ecuador






South American flags


Historically, the Hispanic countries were founded as Republican dictatorships led by caudillos. Brazil was the only exception, being a constitutional monarchy for its first 67 years of independence, until a coup d'ètat proclaimed a republic. In the late 19th century, the most democratic countries were Brazil,[45] Chile, Argentina and Uruguay.[46]
In the interwar period, nationalism grew stronger on the continent, influenced by countries like Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. A series of authoritarian rules broke out in South American countries with views bringing them closer to the Axis Powers,[47] like Vargas's Brazil or Perón's Argentina. In the late 20th century, during the Cold War, many countries became military dictatorships under American tutelage in attempts to avoid the influence of the Soviet Union. After the fall of the authoritarian regimes, these countries became democratic republics.
During the first decade of the 21st century, South American governments have drifted to the political left, with leftist leaders being elected in Chile, Uruguay, Brazil, Argentina, Ecuador, Bolivia, Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela. Most South American countries are making increasing use of protectionist policies, helping local development.
All South American countries are presidential republics with the exceptions of Peru, which is a semi-presidential republic, and Suriname, a parliamentary republic. French Guiana is a French overseas department, while the Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands are British colonies. It is currently the only inhabited continent in the world without monarchies; the Empire of Brazil existed during the 19th century and there was an unsuccessful attempt to establish a Kingdom of Araucanía and Patagonia in southern Argentina and Chile. Also in the twentieth century, Suriname was established as a constituent kingdom of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and Guyana retained the British monarch as head of state for 4 years after its independence.
Recently, an intergovernmental entity has been formed which aims to merge the two existing customs unions: Mercosur and the Andean Community, thus forming the third-largest trade bloc in the world.[48] This new political organization, known as Union of South American Nations, seeks to establish free movement of people, economic development, a common defense policy and the elimination of tariffs.
Demographics[edit]




Satellite view of South America at night from NASA.


South America has over 420 million[1] inhabitants and a rate of population growth of about 0.6% per year. There are several areas of sparse demographics such as tropical forests, the Atacama Desert and the icy portions of Patagonia. On the other hand, the continent presents regions of high population density, such as the great urban centers. The population is formed by descendants of Europeans (mainly Spaniards, Portuguese and Italians), Africans and indigenous peoples. There is a high percentage of mestizos that vary greatly in composition by place. There is also a minor population of Asians, especially in Brazil. The two main languages are by far Spanish and Portuguese, followed by French, English and Dutch in smaller numbers. Economically, Brazil, Argentina and Chile are the wealthiest and most developed nations in the continent.
Language[edit]




Languages in South America


Spanish and Portuguese are the most spoken languages in South America, with approximately 200 million speakers each. Spanish is the official language of most countries, along with other native languages in some countries. Portuguese is the official language of Brazil. Dutch is the official language of Suriname; English is the official language of Guyana, although there are at least twelve other languages spoken in the country, including Portuguese, Chinese, Hindustani and several native languages.[49] English is also spoken in the Falkland Islands. French is the official language of French Guiana and the second language in Amapá, Brazil.
Indigenous languages of South America include Quechua in Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, Argentina, Chile and Colombia; Wayuunaiki in northern Colombia (La Guajira) and northwestern Venezuela (Zulia); Guaraní in Paraguay and, to a much lesser extent, in Bolivia; Aymara in Bolivia, Peru, and less often in Chile; and Mapudungun is spoken in certain pockets of southern Chile and, more rarely, Argentina. At least three South American indigenous languages (Quechua, Aymara, and Guarani) are recognized along with Spanish as national languages.
Other languages found in South America include Hindustani and Javanese in Suriname; Italian in Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, Venezuela and Chile; and German in certain pockets of Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. German is also spoken in many regions of the southern states of Brazil, Riograndenser Hunsrückisch being the most widely spoken German dialect in the country; among other Germanic dialects, a Brazilian form of East Pomeranian is also well represented and is experiencing a revival. Welsh remains spoken and written in the historic towns of Trelew and Rawson in the Argentine Patagonia. There are also small clusters of Japanese-speakers in Brazil, Colombia and Peru. Arabic speakers, often of Lebanese, Syrian, or Palestinian descent, can be found in Arab communities in Argentina, Colombia, Brazil, Venezuela and in Paraguay.[50]
Religion[edit]




Las Lajas Sanctuary, Ipiales, Colombia


Main article: Religion in Latin America
See also: History of the Jews in Latin America and the Caribbean, Buddhism in Brazil, and Islam in Argentina
An estimated 90% of South Americans are Christians[51] (82% Roman Catholic, 8% other Christian denominations mainly traditional Protestants and Evangelicals but also Orthodox), accounting for ca. 19% of Christians worldwide.
Crypto-Jews or Marranos, conversos, and Anusim were an important part of colonial life in Latin America.
Both Buenos Aires, Argentina and São Paulo, Brazil figure among the largest Jewish populations by urban area.
Japanese Buddhism and Shinto-derived Japanese New Religions are common in Brazil and Peru. Korean Confucianism is especially found in Brazil while Chinese Buddhism and Chinese Confucianism have spread throughout the continent.
Kardecist Spiritism can be found in several countries.
Part of Religions in South America (2013):[52]

Religion in South America

Countries
Christians
Roman Catholics
Other Christians
No religion (atheists and agnostics)


 Argentina
88 %
77 %
11 %
11 %


 Bolivia
96 %
74 %
22 %
4 %


 Brazil
86 %
64 %
22 %
9 %


 Chile
70 %
57 %
13 %
25 %


 Colombia
92 %
80 %
12 %
7 %


 Paraguay
96 %
87 %
9 %
2 %


 Peru
94 %
81 %
13 %
3 %


 Suriname
51 %
29 %
22 %
5 %


 Uruguay
58 %
47 %
11 %
41 %


 Venezuela
88 %
71 %
17 %
8 %


Ethnic demographics[edit]
Main article: Ethnic groups in South America




Afro-Brazilian girls






Former president of Brazil Lula and members of the Italian Brazilian community during the Grape Festival at Caxias do Sul






A Japanese-Brazilian Miko during a festival in Curitiba






Peruvian woman and her son of indigenous descent






Indigenous village in Paraguay






Oca of the Kamayurá people, Xingu Indigenous Park, Brazil


Genetic admixture occurs at very high levels in South America. In Argentina, the European influence accounts for 65%–79% of the genetic background, Amerindian for 17%–31% and sub-Saharan African for 2%–4%. In Colombia, the sub-Saharan African genetic background varied from 1% to 89%, while the European genetic background varied from 20% to 79%, depending on the region. In Peru, European ancestries ranged from 1% to 31%, while the African contribution was only 1% to 3%.[53] The Genographic Project determined the average Peruvian from Lima had about 28% European ancestry, 68% Native American, 2% Asian ancestry and 2% sub-Saharan African.[54]
Descendants of indigenous peoples, such as the Quechua and Aymara, or the Urarina[55] of Amazonia make up the majority of the population in Bolivia (56%) and, per some sources, in Peru (44%).[56][57] In Ecuador, Amerindians are a large minority that comprises two-fifths of the population. The native European population is also a significant element in most other former Portuguese colonies.
People who identify as of primarily or totally European descent, or identify their phenotype as corresponding to such group, are more of a majority in Argentina,[58] and Uruguay[59] and are about half of the population of Chile (52.7%)[60] and Brazil (48.43%).[61][62][63] In Venezuela, according to the national census 42% of the population is primarily native Spanish, Italian and Portuguese descendants.[64] In Colombia, people who identify as European descendant are about 37%.[65][66] In Peru, European descendants are the third group in number (15%).[67]
Mestizos (mixed European and Amerindian) are the largest ethnic group in Paraguay, Venezuela, Colombia[65] and Ecuador and the second group in Peru.
South America is also home to one of the largest populations of Africans. This group is significantly present in Brazil, Colombia, Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana, Venezuela and Ecuador.
Brazil followed by Peru have the largest Japanese, Korean and Chinese communities in South America.[68] East Indians form the largest ethnic group in Guyana and Suriname.[69]

Ethnic distribution in South America[70][71]

Country
Amerindians
White people
Mestizos
Mulatos
Black people
Zambos
Asian people


 Argentina
1.0%
85.0%
14.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%


 Bolivia
55.0%
12.0%
30.0%
2.4%
0.1%
0.5%
0.0%


 Brazil
0.4%
47.7%
22.9%
20.1%
7.6%
0.0%
1.1%


 Chile
3.2%
52.7%
44.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%


 Colombia
1.8%
37.0%
49.0%
8.2%
2.3%
0.1%
0.0%


 Ecuador
39.0%
9.9%
41.0%
5.0%
5.0%
0.0%
0.1%


 Paraguay
3.0%
20.0%
75.0%
3.5%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%


 Peru
45.0%
15.0%
35.0%
2.0%
0.0%
0.0%
3.0%


 Uruguay
0.0%
88.0%
8.0%
4.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%


 Venezuela
2.7%
42.7%
49.7%
7.7%
2.0%
0.0%
0.8%


Indigenous people[edit]
Main articles: List of Indigenous peoples of South America and Indigenous peoples in South America
In many places indigenous people still practice a traditional lifestyle based on subsistence agriculture or as hunter-gatherers. There are still some uncontacted tribes residing in the Amazon Rainforest.[72]


Aguarunas
Alacalufe
Arawaks
Ashanincas
Atacameños
Awá
Aymara – lives in the Altiplano of Bolivia, Argentina, Chile and Peru. Their language is co-official in Peru and Bolivia. Traditional lifestyle includes llama herding.
Banawa
Cañaris
Caiapos
Chibcha
Cocama
Chayahuita
Kuna live on the Colombia-Panama border.
Enxet
Gê,
Guaraní – lives in Paraguay where the Guarani language is co-official with Spanish.
Juris
Mapuche – lives mainly in southern Chile and Argentina.
Matsés
Pehuenche – a branch of Mapuches that lived in the Andean valleys of southern (see Araucanian).
Quechuas – makes up a large part of the population of Peru, Ecuador and Bolivia. Are diverse as an ethnic group. The Incas spoke Southern Quechua.
Selknam
Shipibo
Shuar (see Jívaro).
Tupi
Urarina
Wai-Wai
Wayuu
Xucuru
Yaghan
Yagua
Yąnomamö
Zaparos


Populace[edit]


South American cities



São Paulo





Buenos Aires





Rio de Janeiro





Lima





Bogotá




The most populous country in South America is Brazil with 207.7 million persons. The second largest country is Colombia with a population of 48,653,419. Argentina is the third most populous country with 43,847,430.
While Brazil, Argentina, and Colombia maintain the largest populations, large city populations are not restricted to those nations. The largest cities in South America, by far, are São Paulo, Bogotá, and Lima. These cities are the only cities on the continent to exceed eight million, and three of five in the Americas. Next in size are Rio de Janeiro, Santiago, Caracas, Buenos Aires and Salvador.
Five of the top ten metropolitan areas are located in the Brazil. These metropolitan areas all have a population of above 4 million and include the São Paulo metropolitan area, Rio de Janeiro metropolitan area, and Belo Horizonte metropolitan area. Whilst the majority of the largest metropolitan areas are within Brazil, Argentina is host to the second largest metropolitan area by population in South America: the Buenos Aires metropolitan region is above 13 million inhabitants.
South America has also been witness to the growth of megapolitan areas. In Brazil four megaregions exist including the Expanded Metropolitan Complex of São Paulo with more than 32 million inhabitants. The others are the Greater Rio, Greater Belo Horizonte and Greater Porto Alegre. Colombia also has four megaregions which comprise 72% of its population, followed by Venezuela, Argentina and Peru which are also homes of megaregions.
The top ten largest South American metropolitan areas by population as of 2015, based on national census numbers from each country:


Metro Area
Population
Area
Country


São Paulo
21,090,792
7,947 km2 (3,068 sq mi)
 Brazil


Buenos Aires
13,693,657
3,830 km2 (1,480 sq mi)
 Argentina


Rio de Janeiro
13,131,431
6,744 km2 (2,604 sq mi)
 Brazil


Lima
9,904,727
2,819 km2 (1,088 sq mi)
 Peru


Bogotá
9,800,225
4,200 km2 (1,600 sq mi)
 Colombia


Santiago
6,683,852
15,403 km2 (5,947 sq mi)
 Chile


Belo Horizonte
5,829,923
9,467 km2 (3,655 sq mi)
 Brazil


Caracas
5,322,310
4,715 km2 (1,820 sq mi)
 Venezuela


Porto Alegre
4,258,926
10,232 km2 (3,951 sq mi)
 Brazil


Brasilia
4,201,737
56,433 km2 (21,789 sq mi)
 Brazil


‌2015 Census figures.
Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of South America






This section needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (March 2017)







Rafael Correa, Evo Morales, Néstor Kirchner, Cristina Fernández, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Nicanor Duarte, and Hugo Chávez signed the founding charter of the Bank of the South.






Trading panel of the São Paulo Stock Exchange is the second biggest in the Americas and 13th in the world.






Financial center of Santiago, Chile






Launch at the Kourou Space Center in French Guiana






Refinery of Brazilian state-owned Petrobras in Cochabamba, Bolivia






Chuquicamata is the largest open pit mine in the world, near the city of Calama in Chile.






KC-390 is the largest military transport aircraft produced in South America by the Brazilian company Embraer.






Vineyard in Luján de Cuyo, province of Mendoza, Argentina


South America relies less on the export of both manufactured goods and natural resources than the world average; merchandise exports from the continent were 16% of GDP on an exchange rate basis, compared to 25% for the world as a whole.[73] Brazil (the seventh largest economy in the world and the largest in South America) leads in terms of merchandise exports at $251 billion, followed by Venezuela at $93 billion, Chile at $86 billion, and Argentina at $84 billion.[73]
Since 1930, the continent has experienced remarkable growth and diversification in most economic sectors. Most agricultural and livestock products are destined for the domestic market and local consumption. However, the export of agricultural products is essential for the balance of trade in most countries.[74]
The main agrarian crops are export crops, such as soy and wheat. The production of staple foods such as vegetables, corn or beans is large, but focused on domestic consumption. Livestock raising for meat exports is important in Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay and Colombia. In tropical regions the most important crops are coffee, cocoa and bananas, mainly in Brazil, Colombia and Ecuador. Traditionally, the countries producing sugar for export are Peru, Guyana and Suriname, and in Brazil, sugar cane is also used to make ethanol. On the coast of Peru, northeast and south of Brazil, cotton is grown. Fifty percent of the South American surface is covered by forests, but timber industries are small and directed to domestic markets. In recent years, however, transnational companies have been settling in the Amazon to exploit noble timber destined for export. The Pacific coastal waters of South America are the most important for commercial fishing. The anchovy catch reaches thousands of tons, and tuna is also abundant (Peru is a major exporter). The capture of crustaceans is remarkable, particularly in northeastern Brazil and Chile.[74]
Only Brazil and Argentina are part of the G20 (industrial countries), while only Brazil is part of the G8+5 (the most powerful and influential nations in the world). In the tourism sector, a series of negotiations began in 2005 to promote tourism and increase air connections within the region. Punta del Este, Florianópolis and Mar del Plata are among the most important resorts in South America.[74]
The most industrialized countries in South America are Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Venezuela and Uruguay respectively. These countries alone account for more than 75 percent of the region's economy and add up to a GDP of more than US$3.0 trillion. Industries in South America began to take on the economies of the region from the 1930s when the Great Depression in the United States and other countries of the world boosted industrial production in the continent. From that period the region left the agricultural side behind and began to achieve high rates of economic growth that remained until the early 1990s when they slowed due to political instabilities, economic crises and neoliberal policies.[74]
Since the end of the economic crisis in Brazil and Argentina that occurred in the period from 1998 to 2002, which has led to economic recession, rising unemployment and falling population income, the industrial and service sectors have been recovering rapidly. Chile, Argentina and Brazil have recovered fastest, growing at an average of 5% per year. All of South America after this period has been recovering and showing good signs of economic stability, with controlled inflation and exchange rates, continuous growth, a decrease in social inequality and unemployment–factors that favor industry.[74]
The main industries are: electronics, textiles, food, automotive, metallurgy, aviation, naval, clothing, beverage, steel, tobacco, timber, chemical, among others. Exports reach almost US$400 billion annually, with Brazil accounting for half of this.[74]
The economic gap between the rich and poor in most South American nations is larger than on most other continents. The richest 10% receive over 40% of the nation's income in Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Paraguay,[75] while the poorest 20% receive 3% or less in Bolivia, Brazil, and Colombia.[76] This wide gap can be seen in many large South American cities where makeshift shacks and slums lie in the vicinity of skyscrapers and upper-class luxury apartments; nearly one in nine South Americans live on less than $2 per day (on a purchasing power parity basis).[77]


Country
GDP (nominal)
in 2017[78]
GDP (PPP)
in 2017[78]
GDP (PPP)
per capita
in 2017[78]
Merchandise
exports
($bn), 2011[73]
HDI
in 2014
(rank)[79]
Percent with
less than
$2 (PPP)
per person
per day[77]


 Argentina
7005628935000000000♠628,935
7005912816000000000♠912,816
7004207070000000000♠20,707
7001837000000000000♠83.7
6999836000000000000♠0.836
7000260000000000000♠2.6


 Bolivia
7004392670000000000♠39,267
7004836080000000000♠83,608
7003755200000000000♠7,552
7000910000000000000♠9.1
6999662000000000000♠0.662
7001249000000000000♠24.9


 Brazil
7006214094000000000♠2,140,940
7006321603100000000♠3,216,031
7004154850000000000♠15,485
7002250800000000000♠250.8
6999755000000000000♠0.755
7001108000000000000♠10.8


 Chile
7005251220000000000♠251,220
7005455941000000000♠455,941
7004247960000000000♠24,796
7001861000000000000♠86.1
6999832000000000000♠0.832
7000270000000000000♠2.7


 Colombia
7005306439000000000♠306,439
7005720151000000000♠720,151
7004146090000000000♠14,609
7001565000000000000♠56.5
6999720000000000000♠0.720
7001158000000000000♠15.8


 Ecuador
7004973620000000000♠97,362
7005184629000000000♠184,629
7004110040000000000♠11,004
7001223000000000000♠22.3
6999732000000000000♠0.732
7001106000000000000♠10.6


 Falkland Islands[80] (UK)
7002165000000000000♠165
7002165000000000000♠165
7004554000000000000♠55,400
6999100000000000000♠0.1




 French Guiana[81] (France)
7003445600000000000♠4,456
7003445600000000000♠4,456
7004197280000000000♠19,728
7000130000000000000♠1.3




 Guyana
7003359100000000000♠3,591
7003639800000000000♠6,398
7003830600000000000♠8,306
6999900000000000000♠0.9
6999636000000000000♠0.636
7001180000000000000♠18.0


 Paraguay
7004287430000000000♠28,743
7004680050000000000♠68,005
7003977900000000000♠9,779
7000980000000000000♠9.8
6999679000000000000♠0.679
7001132000000000000♠13.2


 Peru
7005285032000000000♠285,032
7005469803000000000♠469,803
7004135010000000000♠13,501
7001463000000000000♠46.3
6999734000000000000♠0.734
7001127000000000000♠12.7


 Suriname
7003364100000000000♠3,641
7003796100000000000♠7,961
7004139340000000000♠13,934
7000160000000000000♠1.6
6999714000000000000♠0.714
7001272000000000000♠27.2


 Uruguay
7004581230000000000♠58,123
7004778000000000000♠77,800
7004222710000000000♠22,271
7000800000000000000♠8.0
6999793000000000000♠0.793
7000220000000000000♠2.2


 Venezuela
7005251589000000000♠251,589
7005404109000000000♠404,109
7004128560000000000♠12,856
7001926000000000000♠92.6
6999762000000000000♠0.762
7001129000000000000♠12.9


Total
7006383656900000000♠3,836,569
7006664262300000000♠6,642,623
7004178520000000000♠17,852
7002669100000000000♠669.1
6999729000000000000♠0.729
7001113000000000000♠11.3


Economically largest cities as of 2014[edit]


Rank
City
Country
GDP in Int$ bn[82]
Population (mil)[83]
GDP per capita


1
São Paulo
 Brazil
$430
20,847,500
$20,650


2
Buenos Aires
 Argentina
$315
13,381,800
$23,606


3
Lima
 Peru
$176
10,670,200
$16,530


4
Rio de Janeiro
 Brazil
$176
12,234,100
$14,176


5
Santiago
 Chile
$171
7,164,400
$23,929


6
Bogotá
 Colombia
$160
9,800,000
$17,497


7
Brasília
 Brazil
$141
3,976,500
$35,689


8
Belo Horizonte
 Brazil
$84
5,595,800
$15,134


9
Porto Alegre
 Brazil
$62
4,120,900
$15,078


10
Campinas
 Brazil
$59
2,854,200
$20,759


Tourism[edit]
Tourism has increasingly become a significant source of income for many South American countries.[84][85] Historical relics, architectural and natural wonders, a diverse range of foods and culture, vibrant and colorful cities, and stunning landscapes attract millions of tourists every year to South America. Some of the most visited places in the region are Iguazu Falls, Recife, Olinda, Machu Picchu, Bariloche, the Amazon rainforest, Rio de Janeiro, São Luís, Salvador, Fortaleza, Maceió, Buenos Aires, Florianópolis, San Ignacio Miní, Isla Margarita, Natal, Lima, São Paulo, Angel Falls, Brasília, Nazca Lines, Cuzco, Belo Horizonte, Lake Titicaca, Salar de Uyuni, Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos, Los Roques archipelago, Gran Sabana, Patagonia, Tayrona National Natural Park, Santa Marta, Bogotá, Medellín, Cartagena, Perito Moreno Glacier and the Galápagos Islands.[86][87]
In 2016 Brazil hosted the 2016 Summer Olympics.





Iguazu Falls on the border between Argentina and Brazil, is one of the New Seven World Natural Wonders.



Culture[edit]




Tango show in Buenos Aires, typical argentine dance.



Carmen Miranda, Portuguese Brazilian actress helped popularize samba internationally.








Teatro Solis, Uruguay.



National Library, Brazil.




South Americans are culturally influenced by their indigenous peoples, the historic connection with the Iberian Peninsula and Africa, and waves of immigrants from around the globe.
South American nations have a rich variety of music. Some of the most famous genres include vallenato and cumbia from Colombia, pasillo from Colombia and Ecuador, samba, bossa nova and música sertaneja from Brazil, and tango from Argentina and Uruguay. Also well known is the non-commercial folk genre Nueva Canción movement which was founded in Argentina and Chile and quickly spread to the rest of the Latin America. People on the Peruvian coast created the fine guitar and cajon duos or trios in the most mestizo (mixed) of South American rhythms such as the Marinera (from Lima), the Tondero (from Piura), the 19th century popular Creole Valse or Peruvian Valse, the soulful Arequipan Yaravi, and the early 20th century Paraguayan Guarania. In the late 20th century, Spanish rock emerged by young hipsters influenced by British pop and American rock. Brazil has a Portuguese-language pop rock industry as well a great variety of other music genres.
The literature of South America has attracted considerable critical and popular acclaim, especially with the Latin American Boom of the 1960s and 1970s, and the rise of authors such as Mario Vargas Llosa, Gabriel García Márquez in novels and Jorge Luis Borges and Pablo Neruda in other genres. The Brazilians Machado de Assis and João Guimarães Rosa are widely regarded as the greatest Brazilian writers.
Because of South America's broad ethnic mix, South American cuisine has African, South American Indian, Asian, and European influences. Bahia, Brazil, is especially well known for its West African–influenced cuisine. Argentines, Chileans, Uruguayans, Brazilians, Bolivians, and Venezuelans regularly consume wine. People in Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, southern Chile, Bolivia and Brazil drink mate, an herb which is brewed. The Paraguayan version, terere, differs from other forms of mate in that it is served cold. Pisco is a liquor distilled from grapes in Peru and Chile. Peruvian cuisine mixes elements from Chinese, Japanese, Spanish, Italian, African, Arab, Andean, and Amazonic food.
Plastic arts[edit]




Bird (Singapore), sculpture of Fernando Botero


The artist Oswaldo Guayasamín (1919 - 1999) from Ecuador, represented with his painting style the feeling of the peoples of Latin America[88] highlighting social injustices in various parts of the world. The Colombian Fernando Botero (1932) is one of the greatest exponents of painting and sculpture that continues still active and has been able to develop a recognizable style of his own.[89] For his part, the Venezuelan Carlos Cruz-Diez has contributed significantly to contemporary art,[90] with the presence of works around the world.
Currently several emerging South American artists are recognized by international art critics: Guillermo Lorca—Chilean painter,[91][92] Teddy Cobeña—Ecuadorian sculptor and recipient of international sculpture award in France)[93][94][95] and Argentine artist Adrián Villar Rojas[96][97]—winner of the Zurich Museum Art Award among many others.
Sport[edit]
Main article: Sport in South America




Maracanã Stadium in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil






Panorama of the interior of the Maracanã stadium during the closing ceremony of the 2014 FIFA World Cup






Atucha I Nuclear Power Plant, the first South-American nuclear power plant, in Argentina


A wide range of sports are played in the continent of South America, with football (a/k/a soccer) being the most popular overall, while baseball is the most popular in Venezuela.
Other sports include basketball, cycling, polo, volleyball, futsal, motorsports, rugby (mostly in Argentina and Uruguay), handball, tennis, golf, field hockey and boxing.
South America hosted its first Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 2016 and will host the Youth Olympic Games in Buenos Aires, Argentina in 2018.
South America shares with Europe supremacy over the sport of football as all winners in FIFA World Cup history and all winning teams in the FIFA Club World Cup have come from these two continents. Brazil holds the record at the FIFA World Cup with five titles in total. Argentina and Uruguay have two titles each. So far four South American nations have hosted the tournament including the first edition in Uruguay (1930). The other three were Brazil (1950, 2014), Chile (1962), and Argentina (1978).
South America is home to the longest running international football tournament; the Copa América, which has been regularly contested since 1916. Uruguay won the Copa América a record 15 times, surpassing hosts Argentina in 2011 to reach 15 titles (they were previously equal at 14 titles each during the 2011 Copa América).
Also, in South America, a multi-sport event, the South American Games, are held every four years. The first edition was held in La Paz in 1978 and the most recent took place in Santiago in 2014.
Infrastructure[edit]
Energy[edit]
Due to the diversity of topography and pluviometric precipitation conditions, the region's water resources vary enormously in different areas. In the Andes, navigation possibilities are limited, except for the Magdalena River, Lake Titicaca and the lakes of the southern regions of Chile and Argentina. Irrigation is an important factor for agriculture from northwestern Peru to Patagonia. Less than 10% of the known electrical potential of the Andes had been used until the mid-1960s.
The Brazilian Highlands has a much higher hydroelectric potential than the Andean region and its possibilities of exploitation are greater due to the existence of several large rivers with high margins and the occurrence of great differences forming huge cataracts, such as those of Paulo Afonso, Iguaçu and others. The Amazon River system has about 13,000 km of waterways, but its possibilities for hydroelectric use are still unknown.
Most of the continent's energy is generated through hydroelectric power plants, but there is also an important share of thermoelectric and wind energy. Brazil and Argentina are the only South American countries that generate nuclear power, each with two nuclear power plants. In 1991 these countries signed a peaceful nuclear cooperation agreement.





Panoramic view of the Itaipu Dam, the largest of the world in energy production.


Transport[edit]




Stretch of the Pan-American Highway in Argentina






The Port of Callao in Peru






The La Paz cable car system in Bolivia is home to both the longest and highest urban cable car network in the world.


South American transportation systems are still deficient, with low kilometric densities. The region has about 1,700,000 km of highways and 100,000 km of railways, which are concentrated in the coastal strip, and the interior is still devoid of communication.
Only two railroads are continental: the Transandina, which connects Buenos Aires, in Argentina to Valparaíso, in Chile, and the Brazil-Bolivia Railroad, which makes it the connection between the port of Santos in Brazil and the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, in Bolivia. In addition, there is the Pan-American Highway, which crosses the Andean countries from north to south, although some stretches are unfinished.[98]
Two areas of greater density occur in the railway sector: the platinum network, which develops around the Platine region, largely belonging to Argentina, with more than 45,000 km in length; And the Southeast Brazil network, which mainly serves the state of São Paulo, state of Rio de Janeiro and Minas Gerais. Brazil and Argentina also stand out in the road sector. In addition to the modern roads that extend through northern Argentina and south-east and south of Brazil, a vast road complex aims to link Brasilia, the federal capital, to the South, Southeast, Northeast and Northern regions of Brazil.
The Port of Callao is the main port of Peru. South America has one of the largest bays of navigable inland waterways in the world, represented mainly by the Amazon basin, the Platine basin, the São Francisco and the Orinoco basins, Brazil having about 54,000 km navigable, while Argentina has 6,500 km and Venezuela, 1,200 km.
The two main merchant fleets also belong to Brazil and Argentina. The following are those of Chile, Venezuela, Peru and Colombia. The largest ports in commercial movement are those of Buenos Aires, Santos, Rio de Janeiro, Bahía Blanca, Rosario, Valparaiso, Recife, Salvador, Montevideo, Paranaguá, Rio Grande, Fortaleza, Belém and Maracaibo.
In South America, commercial aviation has a magnificent expansion field, which has one of the largest traffic density lines in the world, Rio de Janeiro-São Paulo, and large airports, such as Congonhas, São Paulo-Guarulhos International and Viracopos (São Paulo), Rio de Janeiro International and Santos Dumont (Rio de Janeiro), Ezeiza (Buenos Aires), Confins International Airport (Belo Horizonte), Curitiba International Airport (Curitiba), Brasilia, Caracas, Montevideo, Lima, Bogotá, Recife, Salvador, Salgado Filho International Airport (Porto Alegre), Fortaleza, Manaus and Belém.
The main public transport in major cities is the bus. Many cities also have a diverse system of metro and subway trains. The Santiago subway[99] is the largest network in South America, with 103 km, while the São Paulo subway is the largest in transportation, with more than 4.6 million passengers per day[100] and was voted the best in the Americas. In Rio de Janeiro was installed the first railroad of the continent, in 1854. Today the city has a vast and diversified system of metropolitan trains, integrated with buses and subway. Recently it was also inaugurated in the city a Light Rail System called VLT, a small electrical trams at low speed, while São Paulo inaugurated its monorail, the first of South America.[citation needed] In Brazil, an express bus system called Bus Rapid Transit (BRT), which operates in several cities, has also been developed.
See also[edit]
Main article: Outline of South America

Americas (terminology)
Bibliography of South America
Flags of South America



Geography portal


Notes and references[edit]
Content notes[edit]
^ Continent model: In some parts of the world South America is viewed as a subcontinent of the Americas[101] (a single continent in these areas), for example Latin America, Latin Europe, and Iran. In most of the countries with English as an official language, however, it is considered a continent; see Americas (terminology).
References[edit]


^ a b c d "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ "South America". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
^ "Map And Details Of All 7 Continents". worldatlas.com. Retrieved September 2, 2016. In some parts of the world students are taught that there are only six continents, as they combine North America and South America into one continent called the Americas. 
^ a b ""Unveiling the South American Balance" in Estudos Internacionais, 2(2): 215-232. | Luis L Schenoni". Academia.edu. 1970-01-01. Retrieved 2016-12-08. 
^ Cohen, Saul Bernard. 2003. "North and Middle America" (Ch. 5). Geopolitics of the World System, ISBN 0847699072
^ "Americas" Standard Country and Area Codes Classifications (M49), United Nations Statistics Division
^ "North America". Atlas of Canada. 2003-11-14. Archived from the original on March 3, 2008. Retrieved 2012-05-21. 
^ a b North America Atlas National Geographic
^ "Panama". Britannica.com. 1999-12-31. Retrieved 2012-05-21. 
^ "Panama". CIA – The World Factbook. Cia.gov. Retrieved 2012-05-21. 
^ "Parts of Chile's Atacama Desert haven't seen a drop of rain since recordkeeping began. Somehow, more than a million people squeeze life from this parched land". National Geographic Magazine. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
^ "Driest Place | Driest Desert Atacama Desert". Extremescience.com. 2007-01-25. Archived from the original on April 8, 2009. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
^ McKay, C. P. (May–June 2002). "Two dry for life: The Atacama Desert and Mars" (PDF). Ad Astra. 14 (3): 30. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-08-26. 
^ South America Atlas National Geographic
^ "United Nations Statistics Division- Standard Country and Area Codes Classifications (M49)". Unstats.un.org. 2011-09-20. Retrieved 2012-05-21. 
^ a b c d e f O CLIMA. In: Atlas Mundial. São Paulo: Cia. Melhoramentos de São Paulo, 1999, p. 20-21 ISBN 85-06-02889-2
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-04-11. Retrieved 2017-01-26. 
^ a b c O'Brien, Patrick. (General Editor). Oxford Atlas of World History. New York: Oxford University Press, 2005. pp. 25
^ "City of Quito – UNESCO World Heritage". Whc.unesco.org. Retrieved 2010-04-30. 
^ Anstey, Roger: The Atlantic Slave Trade and British abolition, 1760–1810. London: Macmillan, 1975, p. 5.
^ "VERGONHA AINDA MAIOR: Novas informações disponíveis em um enorme banco de dados mostram que a escravidão no Brasil foi muito pior do que se sabia antes (". Veja (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 13 March 2015. Retrieved 16 March 2015. 
^ Stephen D. Behrendt, David Richardson, and David Eltis, W. E. B. Du Bois Institute for African and African-American Research, Harvard University. Based on "records for 27,233 voyages that set out to obtain slaves for the Americas". Stephen Behrendt (1999). "Transatlantic Slave Trade". Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience. New York: Basic Civitas Books. ISBN 0-465-00071-1. 
^ "Caudillo". 
^ Day, Peter (17 December 1997). "Ragamuffin War". Brasil Escola. Archived from the original on 3 March 2007. Retrieved 27 March 2007. 
^ Souza, Rainer (20 January 2002). "Ragamuffin Revolution". RioGrande. Retrieved 2007-03-27. 
^ Scheina, Robert L. (31 January 2003). "Latin America's Wars". Potomac Books, Inc. – via Google Books. 
^ daniel@loverde.com.br, Daniel Arantes Loverde -. "A Guerra do Paraguai - História - Resumo". Historiadobrasil.net. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ [1][dead link]
^ Woodard, James P. "A Place in Politics: São Paulo, Brazil; From Seigneurial Republicanism to Regionalist Revolt" Duke University Press 2009 Chapter 3 "War and the Health of the State" especially from the end of Page 77 to p.81 visualization on Google Books
^ Conniff, Michael L. and McCann, Frank D. "Modern Brazil, Elites and Masses in Historical Perspective" University of Nebraska Press 1991 ISBN 0803263481 page 168 visualization on Google Books
^ [2] Archived 2013-09-27 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Churchill 1948, pp. 525–526.
^ a b Ibidem Maximiano, Bonalume, Ricardo N. & Bujeiro, 2011.
^ Frank D. MacCann – 'Estudios Interdisciplinarios de America Latina y el Caribe', vol. 6, No. 2, 1995.
^ Richard Hough, The Big Battleship (London: Michael Joseph, 1966), 19. OCLC 8898108.
^ Robert Scheina, Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987 (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987), 86. ISBN 0-87021-295-8. OCLC 15696006.
^ "The Cambridge History of Latin America", edited by Leslie Bethell, Cambridge University Press (1995) ISBN 0-521-39525-9
^ Leslie Bethell (1995). Bibliographical Essays. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-39525-0. 
^ Land areas and population estimates are taken from The 2008 World Factbook which currently uses July 2007 data, unless otherwise noted.
^ La Paz is the administrative capital of Bolivia; Sucre is the judicial seat.
^ Includes Easter Island in the Pacific Ocean, a Chilean territory frequently reckoned in Oceania. Santiago is the administrative capital of Chile; Valparaíso is the site of legislative meetings.
^ Claimed by Argentina.
^ Claimed by Argentina; the South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands in the South Atlantic Ocean are commonly associated with Antarctica (due to proximity) and have no permanent population, only hosting a periodic contingent of about 100 researchers and visitors.
^ "What is the capital city of South Georgia And The South Sandwich Isla…". Country-facts.findthedata.org. 28 January 2014. Archived from the original on 28 January 2014. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ Lira 1977, Vol 2, p. 9.
^ Tungodden, Bertil; Stern, Nicholas Herbert; Stern, Nicholas; Kolstad, Ivar (2004). Toward Pro-poor Policies: Aid, Institutions, and Globalization. World Bank Publications. p. 219. ISBN 9780821353882. 
^ Dennison de Oliveira, "Os soldados alemães de Vargas" Portuguese [Germans against Hitler; "The German soldiers of Vargas" ] 1st Chapter, Jurua print. 2008 ISBN 85-362-2076-7
^ "Globalpolicy.org". Globalpolicy.org. 2008-10-29. Retrieved 2010-10-24. 
^ "The Languages spoken in Guyana". Studylands. Retrieved 2016-04-12. 
^ Karam, John Tofik (2013). "On the Trail and Trial of a Palestinian Diaspora: Mapping South America in the Arab–Israeli Conflict, 1967–1972". Journal of Latin American Studies. 45 (4): 751–777. doi:10.1017/S0022216X13001156. 
^ "Christians". Pewforum.org. 18 December 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ "Las religiones en tiempos del Papa Francisco" (in Spanish). Latinobarómetro. April 2014. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2015. 
^ Salzano, FM; Sans, M (2014). "Interethnic admixture and the evolution of Latin American populations". Genet. Mol. Biol. 37 (1 Suppl): 151–70. doi:10.1590/s1415-47572014000200003. PMC 3983580 . PMID 24764751. 
^ "Your Regional Ancestry: Reference Populations". Genographic.nationalgeographic.com. Retrieved 31 December 2016. 
^ Dean, Bartholomew 2009 Urarina Society, Cosmology, and History in Peruvian Amazonia, Gainesville: University Press of Florida ISBN 978-0-8130-3378-5 [3]
^ "Peru". CIA World Factbook. CIA. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
^ "Bolivia". CIA World Factbook. CIA. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
^ "Argentina". CIA World Factbook. CIA. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
^ "Argentina y Uruguay, su población está formada casi exclusivamente por una población blanca e blanca mestiza procedente del sur de Europa, más del 90% E. García Zarza, 1992, 19". Geografia.fflch.usp.br. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
^ Cruz-Coke, R; Moreno, RS (1994). "Genetic epidemiology of single gene defects in Chile". Journal of Medical Genetics. 31 (9): 702–6. doi:10.1136/jmg.31.9.702. PMC 1050080 . PMID 7815439. 
^ "População residente por situação, sexo e grupos de idade". Sidra.ibge.gov.br. Retrieved 2012-05-21. 
^ "Latinoamerica" (PDF). Revistas.ucm.es. Retrieved 2010-10-24. 
^ "The Chilean population is rather homogeneous with 95.4 % of its population having native European ancestors". Studentsgoabroad.com. 1973-09-11. Retrieved 2010-10-24. 
^ "Calendario de Publicaciones del Censo 2011" (PDF). Ine.gov.ve. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ a b Bushnell, David & Rex A. Hudson (2010) "The Society and Its Environment"; Colombia: a country study: 87. Washingtion D.C.: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress.
^ "White Colombians" (PDF). Retrieved 28 May 2013. 
^ "LA Road Show". Fppmedia.com. Retrieved 2010-10-24. 
^ Nakamura, Akemi (January 15, 2008). "Japan, Brazil mark a century of settlement, family ties". Japan Times. Archived from the original on December 4, 2008. 
^ "East Indians of the Caribbean". FAQs.org. Retrieved 2017-04-23. 
^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency". Cia.gov. Retrieved 11 November 2017. 
^ Lizcano Fernández, Francisco (May–August 2005). "Composición Étnica de las Tres Áreas Culturales del Continente Americano al Comienzo del Siglo XXI" (PDF). Convergencia (in Spanish). Mexico: Universidad Autónoma del Estado de México, Centro de Investigación en Ciencias Sociales y Humanidades. 38: 185–232; table on p. 218. ISSN 1405-1435. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 September 2008. 
^ Indigenous peoples of South America. Astromonos.org. Retrieved on 2015-10-20.
^ a b c "Country Comparison:Exports". The World Factbook. CIA. 2011. 
^ a b c d e f O SISTEMA ECONÔMICO / AMÉRICA DO SUL. In: Atlas Mundial. São Paulo: Cia. Melhoramentos de São Paulo, 1999, p. 26-27, 88-107 ISBN 85-06-02889-2
^ "Income share held by highest 10%". The World Bank. 2011. 
^ "Income share held by lowest 20%". The World Bank. 2011. 
^ a b "Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP) (% of population)". The World Bank. 2011. 
^ a b c "World Economic Outlook Database". IMF. April 2017. Retrieved 2016-04-18. 
^ "Human Development Report 2014. Human development indices. p.23" (PDF). The United Nations. Retrieved 2011-05-24. 
^ "Falkland Islands". The World Factbook. CIA. 2011. 
^ "Guyane" (PDF). IEDOM. 2009. 
^ "Global Metro Monitor". Brookings Institution. Retrieved 19 April 2017. 
^ "Global Metro Monitor". Brookings Institution. April 2017. 
^ "Latin & South America Tourism Statistics & Visitor Numbers". Bigtravelweb.com. 2008-10-13. Retrieved 2012-05-21. 
^ Juan Luis Eugenio-Martín, Noelia Martín Morales, Riccardo Scarpa (February 2004) Tourism and Economic Growth in Latin American Countries: A Panel Data Approach. FEEM Working Paper No. 26.2004
^ "Top attractions". Gosouthamerica.about.com. 2007-12-04. Retrieved 2009-04-18. 
^ Backpackers destination. vipbackpackers.com
^ "Guayasamín, el pintor ecuatoriano que retrató los sufrimientos latinoamericanos". Andes, Agencia de Noticias. 
^ "Fenando Botero, Sala de Exposciones, Bilbao". Museo de Bellas Artes de Bilbao. 
^ "Carlo Cruz-Díez redefines colour with new york". Wall papper, Art News. 
^ "Museo de Bellas Artes de Chile" (PDF). Museo de Bellas Artes. 
^ "Life style". America Economia. Retrieved 22 April 2017. 
^ "Las esculturas de Teddy Cobeña las favoritas del público". Europa Press. 19 December 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2017. 
^ "Teddy Cobeña lleva sus esculturas a Paris". El Universo. Retrieved 22 April 2017. 
^ "Las esculturas de Teddy Cobeña las favoritas en Francia". EFE. 19 December 2016. 
^ "Adrián Villar Rojas o cómo convertir las ruinas en un éxito planetario". La Nacion. 
^ "Tiempo-ficción de Adrián Villar Rojas". El Cultural. 14 January 2016. 
^ "A Gap in the Andes : Image of the Day". Earthobservatory.nasa.gov. 2015-04-02. Retrieved 2017-01-22. 
^ "Guía del Viajero" (in Spanish). Metro de Santiago. Retrieved 2015-07-03. 
^ "Metro - Passengers" (in Portuguese). Companhia Do Metropolitano De São Paulo. 2014. Retrieved 2014-06-14. 
^ Ambassador Rubens A. Barbosa. "MERCOSUL IN THE REGIONAL CONTEXT". Archived from the original on September 30, 2006. Retrieved 2007-05-19. 


Sources[edit]

"South America". The Columbia Gazetteer of the World Online. 2005. New York: Columbia University Press.
Latin American Network Information Database

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
South America (category)






Wikivoyage has a travel guide for South America.





The Wikibook [[wikibooks:|]] has a page on the topic of: Wikijunior South America








v
t
e


Countries and dependencies of South America



Sovereign
states




Entire



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela





In part



France

French Guiana













Dependencies



Falkland Islands / South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands

UK














v
t
e


Continents of the World











   



Africa





Antarctica





Asia





Australia





Europe





North America





South America



















   



Afro-Eurasia





America





Eurasia





Oceania



















   



Former supercontinents
Gondwana
Laurasia
Pangaea
Pannotia
Rodinia
Columbia
Kenorland
Nena
Sclavia
Ur
Vaalbara






Historical continents
Amazonia
Arctica
Asiamerica
Atlantica
Avalonia
Baltica
Cimmeria
Congo craton
Euramerica
Kalaharia
Kazakhstania
Laurentia
North China
Siberia
South China
East Antarctica
India




















   



Submerged continents
Kerguelen Plateau
Zealandia






Possible future supercontinents
Pangaea Ultima
Amasia
Novopangaea






Mythical and hypothesised continents
Atlantis
Kumari Kandam
Lemuria
Meropis
Mu
Hyperborea
Terra Australis
















See also Regions of the world
Continental fragment



 Book
 Category












v
t
e


Regions of the world











v
t
e


Regions of Africa



Central Africa



Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland

Mbaise


Maputaland
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Congolese rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau





East Africa



African Great Lakes

Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Swahili coast
Virunga Mountains
Zanj


Horn of Africa

Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbara
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura


Indian Ocean islands

Comoros Islands







North Africa



Maghreb

Barbary Coast
Bashmur
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains


Nile Valley

Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Gulf of Aqaba
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt


Western Sahara





West Africa



Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Niger Basin
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta





Southern Africa



Madagascar

Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands


Rhodesia

North
South


Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Highveld
Fynbos
Cape Floristic Region
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
False Bay
Hydra Bay





Macro-regions



Aethiopia
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
East African montane forests
Eastern Desert
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Gibraltar Arc
Greater Middle East
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian Savanna
Tibesti Mountains
Tropical Africa












v
t
e


Regions of Asia



Central



Greater Middle East
Aral Sea

Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee


Transoxiana

Turan


Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Khwarezm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Eurasian Steppe

Asian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe


Mongolian-Manchurian grassland
Wild Fields

Yedisan
Muravsky Trail


Ural

Ural Mountains


Volga region
Idel-Ural
Kolyma
Transbaikal
Pryazovia
Bjarmaland
Kuban
Zalesye
Ingria
Novorossiya
Gornaya Shoriya
Tulgas
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram

Trans-Karakoram Tract


Siachen Glacier





North



Inner Asia
Northeast
Far East

Russian Far East
Okhotsk-Manchurian taiga


Extreme North
Siberia

Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Transbaikal
Khatanga Gulf
Baraba steppe


Kamchatka Peninsula
Amur Basin
Yenisei Gulf
Yenisei Basin
Beringia
Sikhote-Alin





East



Japanese archipelago

Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc


Korean Peninsula
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria

Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian-Manchurian grassland


North China Plain

Yan Mountains


Kunlun Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau

Tibet


Tarim Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Nanzhong
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop

Loess Plateau
Shaanbei


Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze River Delta
Pearl River Delta
Yenisei Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass





West



Greater Middle East

MENA
MENASA
Middle East


Red Sea
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Persian Gulf

Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs


Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula

Najd
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia

Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert




Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia

Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia


Canaan
Aram
Eber-Nari
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Kurdistan
Levant

Southern Levant
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley


Levantine Sea
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Gaza Strip
West Bank
Galilee
Gilead
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Syrian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Syria
Palestine
Iranian Plateau
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus

Caucasus Mountains

Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus


North Caucasus
South Caucasus

Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula




Anatolia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Alpide belt





South



Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Hindu Kush
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Kashmir

Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range


Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern coastal plains
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
MENASA
Lower Gangetic plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan

Baltistan
Shigar Valley


Karakoram

Saltoro Mountains


Siachen Glacier
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Mannar
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Andaman and Nicobar Islands

Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands


Maldive Islands
Alpide belt





Southeast



Mainland

Indochina
Malay Peninsula


Maritime

Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands


Indonesian Archipelago
Timor
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


Philippine Archipelago

Luzon
Visayas
Mindanao


Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt








Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of Europe



North



Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Sápmi
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands





East



Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Donbass
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula

Amber Coast


Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia

East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus


Lokhaniemi
Southeastern

Balkans
Aegean Islands
Gulf of Chania
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia

Southern Russia









Central



Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Mitteleuropa
Visegrád Group





West



Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Normandy
Brittany
Gulf of Lion
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Pyrenees
Alpide belt





South



Italian Peninsula
Insular Italy
Tuscan Archipelago
Aegadian Islands
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Mediterranean
Crimea
Alpide belt








Germanic
Celtic
Slavic countries
Uralic
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin

Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland














v
t
e


Regions of North America



Canada



Eastern Canada
Western Canada
Canadian Prairies
Central Canada
Northern Canada
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
French Canada
English Canada
Acadia

Acadian Peninsula


Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Peace River Country
Cypress Hills
Palliser's Triangle
Canadian Shield
Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Newfoundland (island)
Vancouver island
Gulf Islands
Strait of Georgia
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Labrador Peninsula
Gaspé Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula

Bay de Verde Peninsula


Brodeur Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Cook Peninsula
Gulf of Boothia
Georgian Bay
Hudson Bay
James Bay
Greenland





United States



Pacific Northwest
Inland Northwest
Northeast

New England
Mid-Atlantic
Commonwealth


West

Midwest
Upper Midwest
Mountain States
Intermountain West
Basin and Range Province


Oregon Trail
Mormon Corridor
Calumet Region
Southwest

Old Southwest


Llano Estacado
Central United States

Tallgrass prairie


South

South Central
Deep South
Upland South


Four Corners
East Coast
West Coast
Gulf Coast
Third Coast
Coastal states
Eastern United States

Appalachia


Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Lakes
Great Basin

Great Basin Desert


Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
The Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area

San Francisco Bay
North Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
East Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
Silicon Valley


Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
Great Basin
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
Beringia
Belt regions

Bible Belt
Black Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Frost Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt







Mexico



Northern Mexico
Baja California Peninsula
Gulf of California

Colorado River Delta


Gulf of Mexico
Soconusco
Tierra Caliente
La Mixteca
La Huasteca
Bajío
Valley of Mexico
Mezquital Valley
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Yucatán Peninsula
Basin and Range Province





Central



Western Caribbean Zone
Isthmus of Panama
Gulf of Panama

Pearl Islands


Azuero Peninsula
Mosquito Coast





Caribbean



West Indies
Antilles

Greater Antilles
Lesser Antilles

Leeward
Leeward Antilles
Windward




Lucayan Archipelago
Southern Caribbean








Aridoamerica
Mesoamerica
Oasisamerica
Northern
Middle
Anglo
Latin

French
Hispanic


American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Regions of Oceania



Australasia



Gulf of Carpentaria
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


New Zealand

South Island
North Island

Coromandel Peninsula




Zealandia
New Caledonia
Solomon Islands (archipelago)
Vanuatu

Kula Gulf


Australia
Capital Country
Eastern Australia
Lake Eyre basin
Murray–Darling basin
Northern Australia
Nullarbor Plain
Outback
Southern Australia

Maralinga


Sunraysia
Great Victoria Desert
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf St Vincent
Lefevre Peninsula
Fleurieu Peninsula
Yorke Peninsula
Eyre Peninsula
Mornington Peninsula
Bellarine Peninsula
Mount Henry Peninsula





Melanesia



Islands Region

Bismarck Archipelago
Solomon Islands Archipelago


Fiji
New Caledonia
Papua New Guinea
Vanuatu





Micronesia



Caroline Islands

Federated States of Micronesia
Palau


Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island





Polynesia



Easter Island
Hawaiian Islands
Cook Islands
French Polynesia

Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu


Kermadec Islands
Mangareva Islands
Samoa
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu








Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of South America



East



Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado





North



Caribbean South America
West Indies
Los Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin

Amazon rainforest


Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta





South



Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula





West



Andes

Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range


Altiplano
Atacama Desert








Latin
Hispanic
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Polar regions



Antarctic



Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands





Arctic



Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic












v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 170506329
LCCN: sh85125524
GND: 4078014-4
BNF: cb15238513g (data)
NDL: 00567659











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=South_America&oldid=816911074"					Categories: South AmericaContinentsHidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2017Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles needing additional references from October 2017All articles needing additional referencesUse American English from August 2016All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishPages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2012All articles with minor POV problemsArticles with minor POV problems from November 2012Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2017All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers