
Space Shuttle


Discovery lifts off at the start of STS-120.



Function
Crewed orbital launch and reentry


Manufacturer
United Space Alliance
Thiokol/Alliant Techsystems (SRBs)
Lockheed Martin/Martin Marietta (ET)
Boeing/Rockwell (orbiter)


Country of origin
United States


Project cost
US$ 210 billion (2010)[1][2][3]


Cost per launch
US$ 450 million (2011)[4] to 1.5 billion (2011)[2][3][5][6]


Size


Height
56.1 m (184.2 ft)


Diameter
8.7 m (28.5 ft)


Mass
2,030 t (4,470,000 lb)


Stages
2


Capacity


Payload to LEO
27,500 kg (60,600 lb)


Payload to ISS
16,050 kg (35,380 lb)


Payload to GTO
3,810 kg (8,400 lb)


Payload to Polar orbit
12,700 kg (28,000 lb)


Payload to Earth return
14,400 kg (31,700 lb)[7]





Launch history


Status
Retired


Launch sites
LC-39, Kennedy Space Center
SLC-6, Vandenberg AFB (unused)


Total launches
135


Successes
134 launches and 133 landings


Failures
2
Challenger (launch failure, 7 fatalities),
Columbia (re-entry failure, 7 fatalities)


First flight
April 12, 1981


Last flight
July 21, 2011


Notable payloads
Tracking and Data Relay Satellites
Spacelab
Hubble Space Telescope
Galileo, Magellan, Ulysses
Compton Gamma Ray Observatory
Mir Docking Module
Chandra X-ray Observatory
ISS components


Boosters - Solid Rocket Boosters


No. boosters
2[8]


Engines
2 solid


Thrust
12,500 kN (2,800,000 lbf) each, sea level liftoff


Specific impulse
269 seconds (2.64 km/s)


Burn time
124 s


Fuel
Solid (Ammonium perchlorate composite propellant)


First stage - Orbiter plus External Tank


Engines
3 SSMEs located on Orbiter


Thrust
5,250 kN (1,180,000 lbf) total, sea level liftoff [9]


Specific impulse
455 seconds (4.46 km/s)


Burn time
480 s


Fuel
LOX/LH2


The Space Shuttle was a partially reusable low Earth orbital spacecraft system operated by the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), as part of the Space Shuttle program. Its official program name was Space Transportation System (STS), taken from a 1969 plan for a system of reusable spacecraft of which it was the only item funded for development.[10] The first of four orbital test flights occurred in 1981, leading to operational flights beginning in 1982. Five complete Shuttle systems were built and used on a total of 135 missions from 1981 to 2011, launched from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Operational missions launched numerous satellites, interplanetary probes, and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST); conducted science experiments in orbit; and participated in construction and servicing of the International Space Station. The Shuttle fleet's total mission time was 1322 days, 19 hours, 21 minutes and 23 seconds.[11]
Shuttle components included the Orbiter Vehicle (OV), a pair of recoverable solid rocket boosters (SRBs), and the expendable external tank (ET) containing liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen. The Space Shuttle was launched vertically, like a conventional rocket, with the two SRBs operating in parallel with the OV's three main engines, which were fueled from the ET. The SRBs were jettisoned before the vehicle reached orbit, and the ET was jettisoned just before orbit insertion, which used the orbiter's two Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS) engines. At the conclusion of the mission, the orbiter fired its OMS to de-orbit and re-enter the atmosphere. The orbiter then glided as a spaceplane to a runway landing, usually to the Shuttle Landing Facility at Kennedy Space Center, Florida or Rogers Dry Lake in Edwards Air Force Base, California. After landing at Edwards, the orbiter was flown back to the KSC on the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a specially modified version of the Boeing 747.
The first orbiter, Enterprise, was built in 1976, used in Approach and Landing Tests and had no orbital capability. Four fully operational orbiters were initially built: Columbia, Challenger, Discovery, and Atlantis. Of these, two were lost in mission accidents: Challenger in 1986 and Columbia in 2003, with a total of fourteen astronauts killed. A fifth operational (and sixth in total) orbiter, Endeavour, was built in 1991 to replace Challenger. The Space Shuttle was retired from service upon the conclusion of Atlantis's final flight on July 21, 2011. The U.S. has since relied on the Russian Soyuz spacecraft to transport its astronauts to the International Space Station.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Early history
3 Description

3.1 Orbiter vehicle
3.2 External tank
3.3 Solid rocket boosters
3.4 Orbiter add-ons

3.4.1 Spacelab


3.5 Flight systems
3.6 Orbiter markings and insignia
3.7 Upgrades
3.8 Specifications


4 Mission profile

4.1 Launch preparation
4.2 Launch
4.3 In orbit
4.4 Re-entry and landing
4.5 Post-landing processing
4.6 Landing sites
4.7 Risk contributors


5 Fleet history

5.1 Space Shuttle major events
5.2 Shuttle disasters
5.3 Retirement
5.4 Distribution of orbiters and other hardware

5.4.1 Orbiters On Display
5.4.2 Orbiter Replicas On Display
5.4.3 Hardware On Display




6 Space Shuttle successors and legacy
7 In popular culture

7.1 US postage commemorations


8 See also

8.1 Space Shuttle related
8.2 Physics
8.3 Similar spacecraft


9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links

11.1 NASA
11.2 Non-NASA





Overview[edit]
The Space Shuttle was a partially reusable[12] human spaceflight vehicle capable of reaching low Earth orbit, commissioned and operated by the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) from 1981 to 2011. It resulted from shuttle design studies conducted by NASA and the US Air Force in the 1960s and was first proposed for development as part of an ambitious second-generation Space Transportation System (STS) of space vehicles to follow the Apollo program in a September 1969 report of a Space Task Group headed by Vice President Spiro Agnew to President Richard Nixon. Nixon's post-Apollo NASA budgeting withdrew support of all system components except the Shuttle, to which NASA applied the STS name.[10]
The vehicle consisted of a spaceplane for orbit and re-entry, fueled by expendable liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen tanks, with reusable strap-on solid booster rockets. The first of four orbital test flights occurred in 1981, leading to operational flights beginning in 1982, all launched from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The system was retired from service in 2011 after 135 missions,[13] with Atlantis making the final launch of the three-decade Shuttle program on July 8, 2011.[14] The program ended after Atlantis landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July 21, 2011. Major missions included launching numerous satellites and interplanetary probes,[15] conducting space science experiments, and servicing and construction of space stations. The first orbiter vehicle, named Enterprise, was built for the initial Approach and Landing Tests phase and lacked engines, heat shielding, and other equipment necessary for orbital flight.[16] A total of five operational orbiters were built, and of these, two were destroyed in accidents.
It was used for orbital space missions by NASA, the US Department of Defense, the European Space Agency, Japan, and Germany.[17][18] The United States funded Shuttle development and operations except for the Spacelab modules used on D1 and D2—sponsored by Germany.[17][19][20][21][22] SL-J was partially funded by Japan.[18]




STS-129 ready for launch






Shuttle approach and landing test crews, 1976






Early concept for a space shuttle refueling a space tug, 1970


At launch, it consisted of the "stack", including the dark orange external tank (ET) (for the first two launches the tank was painted white);[23][24] two white, slender solid rocket boosters (SRBs); and the Orbiter Vehicle, which contained the crew and payload. Some payloads were launched into higher orbits with either of two different upper stages developed for the STS (single-stage Payload Assist Module or two-stage Inertial Upper Stage). The Space Shuttle was stacked in the Vehicle Assembly Building, and the stack mounted on a mobile launch platform held down by four frangible nuts[25] on each SRB, which were detonated at launch.[26]
The Shuttle stack launched vertically like a conventional rocket. It lifted off under the power of its two SRBs and three main engines, which were fueled by liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen from the ET. The Space Shuttle had a two-stage ascent. The SRBs provided additional thrust during liftoff and first-stage flight. About two minutes after liftoff, frangible nuts were fired, releasing the SRBs, which then parachuted into the ocean, to be retrieved by NASA recovery ships for refurbishment and reuse. The orbiter and ET continued to ascend on an increasingly horizontal flight path under power from its main engines. Upon reaching 17,500 mph (7.8 km/s), necessary for low Earth orbit, the main engines were shut down. The ET, attached by two frangible nuts[27] was then jettisoned to burn up in the atmosphere.[28] After jettisoning the external tank, the orbital maneuvering system (OMS) engines were used to adjust the orbit. The orbiter carried astronauts and payloads such as satellites or space station parts into low Earth orbit, the Earth's upper atmosphere or thermosphere.[29] Usually, five to seven crew members rode in the orbiter. Two crew members, the commander and pilot, were sufficient for a minimal flight, as in the first four "test" flights, STS-1 through STS-4. The typical payload capacity was about 50,045 pounds (22,700 kg) but could be increased depending on the choice of launch configuration. The orbiter carried its payload in a large cargo bay with doors that opened along the length of its top, a feature which made the Space Shuttle unique among spacecraft. This feature made possible the deployment of large satellites such as the Hubble Space Telescope and also the capture and return of large payloads back to Earth.
When the orbiter's space mission was complete, it fired its OMS thrusters to drop out of orbit and re-enter the lower atmosphere.[29] During descent, the orbiter passed through different layers of the atmosphere and decelerated from hypersonic speed primarily by aerobraking. In the lower atmosphere and landing phase, it was more like a glider but with reaction control system (RCS) thrusters and fly-by-wire-controlled hydraulically actuated flight surfaces controlling its descent. It landed on a long runway as a conventional aircraft. The aerodynamic shape was a compromise between the demands of radically different speeds and air pressures during re-entry, hypersonic flight, and subsonic atmospheric flight. As a result, the orbiter had a relatively high sink rate at low altitudes, and it transitioned during re-entry from using RCS thrusters at very high altitudes to flight surfaces in the lower atmosphere.
Early history[edit]
Further information: Space Shuttle program and Space Shuttle design process




President Nixon (right) with NASA Administrator Fletcher in January 1972, three months before Congress approved funding for the Shuttle program






Vision for a Spacelab mission with various equipment in the Shuttle bay






Vision for Space Station Freedom, with an STS orbiter docked


The formal design of what became the Space Shuttle began with the "Phase A" contract design studies issued in the late 1960s. Conceptualization had begun two decades earlier, before the Apollo program of the 1960s. One of the places the concept of a spacecraft returning from space to a horizontal landing originated was within NACA, in 1954, in the form of an aeronautics research experiment later named the X-15. The NACA proposal was submitted by Walter Dornberger.
In 1958, the X-15 concept further developed into a proposal to launch an X-15 into space, and another X-series spaceplane proposal, named X-20 Dyna-Soar, as well as variety of aerospace plane concepts and studies. Neil Armstrong was selected to pilot both the X-15 and the X-20. Though the X-20 was not built, another spaceplane similar to the X-20 was built several years later and delivered to NASA in January 1966 called the HL-10 ("HL" indicated "horizontal landing").
In the mid-1960s, the US Air Force conducted classified studies on next-generation space transportation systems and concluded that semi-reusable designs were the cheapest choice. It proposed a development program with an immediate start on a "Class I" vehicle with expendable boosters, followed by slower development of a "Class II" semi-reusable design and possible "Class III" fully reusable design later. In 1967, George Mueller held a one-day symposium at NASA headquarters to study the options. Eighty people attended and presented a wide variety of designs, including earlier US Air Force designs such as the X-20 Dyna-Soar.
In 1968, NASA officially began work on what was then known as the Integrated Launch and Re-entry Vehicle (ILRV). At the same time, NASA held a separate Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME) competition. NASA offices in Houston and Huntsville jointly issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) for ILRV studies to design a spacecraft that could deliver a payload to orbit but also re-enter the atmosphere and fly back to Earth. For example, one of the responses was for a two-stage design, featuring a large booster and a small orbiter, called the DC-3, one of several Phase A Shuttle designs. After the aforementioned "Phase A" studies, B, C, and D phases progressively evaluated in-depth designs up to 1972. In the final design, the bottom stage consisted of recoverable solid rocket boosters, and the top stage used an expendable external tank.[30]
In 1969, President Richard Nixon decided to support proceeding with Space Shuttle development. A series of development programs and analysis refined the basic design, prior to full development and testing. In August 1973, the X-24B proved that an unpowered spaceplane could re-enter Earth's atmosphere for a horizontal landing.
Across the Atlantic, European ministers met in Belgium in 1973 to authorize Western Europe's manned orbital project and its main contribution to Space Shuttle—the Spacelab program.[31] Spacelab would provide a multidisciplinary orbital space laboratory and additional space equipment for the Shuttle.[31]
Description[edit]




STS-1 on the launch pad, December 1980


The Space Shuttle was the first operational orbital spacecraft designed for reuse. It carried different payloads to low Earth orbit, provided crew rotation and supplies for the International Space Station (ISS), and performed satellite servicing and repair. The orbiter could also recover satellites and other payloads from orbit and return them to Earth. Each Shuttle was designed for a projected lifespan of 100 launches or ten years of operational life, although this was later extended. The person in charge of designing the STS was Maxime Faget, who had also overseen the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft designs. The crucial factor in the size and shape of the Shuttle orbiter was the requirement that it be able to accommodate the largest planned commercial and military satellites, and have over 1,000 mile cross-range recovery range to meet the requirement for classified USAF missions for a once-around abort from a launch to a polar orbit. The militarily specified 1,085 nmi (2,009 km; 1,249 mi) cross range requirement was one of the primary reasons for the Shuttle's large wings, compared to modern commercial designs with very minimal control surfaces and glide capability. Factors involved in opting for solid rockets and an expendable fuel tank included the desire of the Pentagon to obtain a high-capacity payload vehicle for satellite deployment, and the desire of the Nixon administration to reduce the costs of space exploration by developing a spacecraft with reusable components.
Each Space Shuttle was a reusable launch system composed of three main assemblies: the reusable OV, the expendable ET, and the two reusable SRBs.[32] Only the OV entered orbit shortly after the tank and boosters are jettisoned. The vehicle was launched vertically like a conventional rocket, and the orbiter glided to a horizontal landing like an airplane, after which it was refurbished for reuse. The SRBs parachuted to splashdown in the ocean where they were towed back to shore and refurbished for later Shuttle missions.




Discovery rockets into orbit, seen here just after solid rocket booster (SRB) separation






Tail-end of an orbiter showing various nozzles during an orbital maneuver with ISS


Five operational OVs were built: Columbia (OV-102), Challenger (OV-099), Discovery (OV-103), Atlantis (OV-104), and Endeavour (OV-105). A mock-up, Inspiration, currently stands at the entrance to the Astronaut Hall of Fame. An additional craft, Enterprise (OV-101), was built for atmospheric testing gliding and landing; it was originally intended to be outfitted for orbital operations after the test program, but it was found more economical to upgrade the structural test article STA-099 into orbiter Challenger (OV-099). Challenger disintegrated 73 seconds after launch in 1986, and Endeavour was built as a replacement from structural spare components. Building Endeavour cost about US$1.7 billion. Columbia broke apart over Texas during re-entry in 2003. A Space Shuttle launch cost around $450 million.[33]
Roger A. Pielke, Jr. has estimated that the Space Shuttle program cost about US$170 billion (2008 dollars) through early 2008; the average cost per flight was about US$1.5 billion.[34] Two missions were paid for by Germany, Spacelab D1 and D2 (D for Deutschland) with a payload control center in Oberpfaffenhofen.[35][36] D1 was the first time that control of a manned STS mission payload was not in U.S. hands.[17]
At times, the orbiter itself was referred to as the Space Shuttle. This was not technically correct as the Space Shuttle was the combination of the orbiter, the external tank, and the two solid rocket boosters. These components, once assembled in the Vehicle Assembly Building originally built to assemble the Apollo Saturn V rocket, were commonly referred to as the "stack".[37]
Responsibility for the Shuttle components was spread among multiple NASA field centers. The Kennedy Space Center was responsible for launch, landing and turnaround operations for equatorial orbits (the only orbit profile actually used in the program), the US Air Force at the Vandenberg Air Force Base was responsible for launch, landing and turnaround operations for polar orbits (though this was never used), the Johnson Space Center served as the central point for all Shuttle operations, the Marshall Space Flight Center was responsible for the main engines, external tank, and solid rocket boosters, the John C. Stennis Space Center handled main engine testing, and the Goddard Space Flight Center managed the global tracking network.[38]
Orbiter vehicle[edit]
Main article: Space Shuttle orbiter





Shuttle launch profiles. From left to right: Columbia, Challenger, Discovery, Atlantis, and Endeavour.



The orbiter resembled a conventional aircraft, with double-delta wings swept 81° at the inner leading edge and 45° at the outer leading edge. Its vertical stabilizer's leading edge was swept back at a 50° angle. The four elevons, mounted at the trailing edge of the wings, and the rudder/speed brake, attached at the trailing edge of the stabilizer, with the body flap, controlled the orbiter during descent and landing.
The orbiter's 60-foot (18 m)-long payload bay, comprising most of the fuselage, could accommodate cylindrical payloads up to 15 feet (4.6 m) in diameter. Information declassified in 2011 showed that these measurements were chosen specifically to accommodate the KH-9 HEXAGON spy satellite operated by the National Reconnaissance Office.[39] Two mostly-symmetrical lengthwise payload bay doors hinged on either side of the bay comprised its entire top. Payloads were generally loaded horizontally into the bay while the orbiter was standing upright on the launch pad and unloaded vertically in the near-weightless orbital environment by the orbiter's robotic remote manipulator arm (under astronaut control), EVA astronauts, or under the payloads' own power (as for satellites attached to a rocket "upper stage" for deployment.)
Three Space Shuttle Main Engines (SSMEs) were mounted on the orbiter's aft fuselage in a triangular pattern. The engine nozzles could gimbal 10.5 degrees up and down, and 8.5 degrees from side to side during ascent to change the direction of their thrust to steer the Shuttle. The orbiter structure was made primarily from aluminum alloy, although the engine structure was made primarily from titanium alloy.
The operational orbiters built were OV-102 Columbia, OV-099 Challenger, OV-103 Discovery, OV-104 Atlantis, and OV-105 Endeavour.[40]







Space Shuttle Atlantis transported by a Boeing 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA), 1998 (NASA)









Space Shuttle Endeavour being transported by a Shuttle Carrier Aircraft









An overhead view of Atlantis as it sits atop the Mobile Launcher Platform (MLP) before STS-79. Two Tail Service Masts (TSMs) to either side of the orbiter's tail provide umbilical connections for propellant loading and electrical power.









Water is released onto the mobile launcher platform on Launch Pad 39A at the start of a sound suppression system test in 2004. During launch, 350,000 US gallons (1,300,000 L) of water are poured onto the pad in 41 seconds.[41]




External tank[edit]
Main article: Space Shuttle external tank




An external tank floats away from the orbiter.






Interior of an External Tank


The main function of the Space Shuttle external tank was to supply the liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel to the main engines. It was also the backbone of the launch vehicle, providing attachment points for the two solid rocket boosters and the orbiter. The external tank was the only part of the Shuttle system that was not reused. Although the external tanks were always discarded, it would have been possible to take them into orbit and re-use them (such as a wet workshop for incorporation into a space station).[28][42]
Solid rocket boosters[edit]
Main article: Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster
Two solid rocket boosters (SRBs) each provided 12,500 kN (2,800,000 lbf) of thrust at liftoff,[43] which was 83% of the total thrust at liftoff. The SRBs were jettisoned two minutes after launch at a height of about 46 km (150,000 ft), and then deployed parachutes and landed in the ocean to be recovered.[44] The SRB cases were made of steel about ½ inch (13 mm) thick.[45] The solid rocket boosters were re-used many times; the casing used in Ares I engine testing in 2009 consisted of motor cases that had been flown, collectively, on 48 Shuttle missions, including STS-1.[46]
Astronauts who have flown on multiple spacecraft report that Shuttle delivers a rougher ride than Apollo or Soyuz.[47][48] The additional vibration is caused by the solid rocket boosters, as solid fuel does not burn as evenly as liquid fuel. The vibration dampens down after the solid rocket boosters have been jettisoned.[49][50]







Two SRB on the crawler prior to mating with the Shuttle









SRB sections filled with solid propellant being assembled









Orbiter and the external tank, flanked by the two solid rocket boosters




Orbiter add-ons[edit]
The orbiter could be used in conjunction with a variety of add-ons depending on the mission. This included orbital laboratories (Spacelab, Spacehab), boosters for launching payloads farther into space (Inertial Upper Stage, Payload Assist Module), and other functions, such as provided by Extended Duration Orbiter, Multi-Purpose Logistics Modules, or Canadarm (RMS). An upper stage called Transfer Orbit Stage (Orbital Science Corp. TOS-21) was also used once with the orbiter.[51] Other types of systems and racks were part of the modular Spacelab system —pallets, igloo, IPS, etc., which also supported special missions such as SRTM.[52]







MPLM Leonardo









IUS deploying with Galileo









PAM-D with satellite









EDO being installed









Spacelab in orbit









RMS (Canadarm)









Spacehab




Spacelab[edit]
Main article: Spacelab




European astronauts prepare for their Spacelab mission, 1984






Interior of Spacelab LM2


A major component of the Space Shuttle Program was Spacelab, primarily contributed by a consortium of European countries, and operated in conjunction with the United States and international partners.[52] Supported by a modular system of pressurized modules, pallets, and systems, Spacelab missions executed on multidisciplinary science, orbital logistics, and international cooperation.[52] Over 29 missions flew on subjects ranging from astronomy, microgravity, radar, and life sciences, to name a few.[52] Spacelab hardware also supported missions such as Hubble (HST) servicing and space station resupply.[52] STS-2 and STS-3 provided testing, and the first full mission was Spacelab-1 (STS-9) launched on November 28, 1983.[52]
Spacelab formally began in 1973, after a meeting in Brussels, Belgium, by European heads of state.[31] Within the decade, Spacelab went into orbit and provided Europe and the United States with an orbital workshop and hardware system.[31] International cooperation, science, and exploration were realized on Spacelab.[52]
Flight systems[edit]
The Shuttle was one of the earliest craft to use a computerized fly-by-wire digital flight control system. This means no mechanical or hydraulic linkages connected the pilot's control stick to the control surfaces or reaction control system thrusters. The control algorithm, which used a classical Proportional Integral Derivative (PID) approach, was developed and maintained by Honeywell.[citation needed] The Shuttle's fly-by-wire digital flight control system was composed of 4 control systems each addressing a different mission phase: Ascent, Descent, On-Orbit and Aborts.[citation needed] Honeywell is also credited with the design and implementation of the Shuttle's Nose Wheel Steering Control Algorithm that allowed the Orbiter to safely land at Kennedy Space Center's Shuttle Runway.[citation needed]
A concern with using digital fly-by-wire systems on the Shuttle was reliability. Considerable research went into the Shuttle computer system. The Shuttle used five identical redundant IBM 32-bit general purpose computers (GPCs), model AP-101, constituting a type of embedded system. Four computers ran specialized software called the Primary Avionics Software System (PASS). A fifth backup computer ran separate software called the Backup Flight System (BFS). Collectively they were called the Data Processing System (DPS).[53][54]




Simulation of SSLV at Mach 2.46 and 66,000 ft (20,000 m). The surface of the vehicle is colored by the pressure coefficient, and the gray contours represent the density of the surrounding air, as calculated using the OVERFLOW software package.


The design goal of the Shuttle's DPS was fail-operational/fail-safe reliability. After a single failure, the Shuttle could still continue the mission. After two failures, it could still land safely.
The four general-purpose computers operated essentially in lockstep, checking each other. If one computer provided a different result than the other three (i.e. the one computer failed), the three functioning computers "voted" it out of the system. This isolated it from vehicle control. If a second computer of the three remaining failed, the two functioning computers voted it out. A very unlikely failure mode would have been where two of the computers produced result A, and two produced result B (a two-two split). In this unlikely case, one group of two was to be picked at random.
The Backup Flight System (BFS) was separately developed software running on the fifth computer, used only if the entire four-computer primary system failed. The BFS was created because although the four primary computers were hardware redundant, they all ran the same software, so a generic software problem could crash all of them. Embedded system avionic software was developed under totally different conditions from public commercial software: the number of code lines was tiny compared to a public commercial software product, changes were only made infrequently and with extensive testing, and many programming and test personnel worked on the small amount of computer code. However, in theory it could have still failed, and the BFS existed for that contingency. While the BFS could run in parallel with PASS, the BFS never engaged to take over control from PASS during any Shuttle mission.
The software for the Shuttle computers was written in a high-level language called HAL/S, somewhat similar to PL/I. It is specifically designed for a real time embedded system environment.
The IBM AP-101 computers originally had about 424 kilobytes of magnetic core memory each. The CPU could process about 400,000 instructions per second. They had no hard disk drive, and loaded software from magnetic tape cartridges.
In 1990, the original computers were replaced with an upgraded model AP-101S, which had about 2.5 times the memory capacity (about 1 megabyte) and three times the processor speed (about 1.2 million instructions per second). The memory was changed from magnetic core to semiconductor with battery backup.
Early Shuttle missions, starting in November 1983, took along the Grid Compass, arguably one of the first laptop computers. The GRiD was given the name SPOC, for Shuttle Portable Onboard Computer. Use on the Shuttle required both hardware and software modifications which were incorporated into later versions of the commercial product. It was used to monitor and display the Shuttle's ground position, path of the next two orbits, show where the Shuttle had line of sight communications with ground stations, and determine points for location-specific observations of the Earth. The Compass sold poorly, as it cost at least US$8000, but it offered unmatched performance for its weight and size.[55] NASA was one of its main customers.[56]
During its service life, the Shuttle's Control System never experienced a failure. Many of the lessons learned have been used to design today's high speed control algorithms.[57]
Orbiter markings and insignia[edit]




Payload specialist Millie Hughes-Fulford, who flew aboard Columbia in 1991, displays the modernist Blackburn & Danne NASA logotype, known as "the worm".


The prototype orbiter Enterprise originally had a flag of the United States on the upper surface of the left wing and the letters "USA" in black on the right wing. The name "Enterprise" was painted in black on the payload bay doors just above the hinge and behind the crew module; on the aft end of the payload bay doors was the NASA "worm" logotype in gray. Underneath the rear of the payload bay doors on the side of the fuselage just above the wing is the text "United States" in black with a flag of the United States ahead of it.
The first operational orbiter, Columbia, originally had the same markings as Enterprise, although the letters "USA" on the right wing were slightly larger and spaced farther apart. Columbia also had black markings which Enterprise lacked on its forward RCS module, around the cockpit windows, and on its vertical stabilizer, and had distinctive black "chines" on the forward part of its upper wing surfaces, which none of the other orbiters had.
Challenger established a modified marking scheme for the shuttle fleet that was matched by Discovery, Atlantis and Endeavour. The letters "USA" in black above an American flag were displayed on the left wing, with the NASA "worm" logotype in gray centered above the name of the orbiter in black on the right wing. The name of the orbiter was inscribed not on the payload bay doors, but on the forward fuselage just below and behind the cockpit windows. This would make the name visible when the shuttle was photographed in orbit with the doors open.
In 1983, Enterprise had its wing markings changed to match Challenger, and the NASA "worm" logotype on the aft end of the payload bay doors was changed from gray to black. Some black markings were added to the nose, cockpit windows and vertical tail to more closely resemble the flight vehicles, but the name "Enterprise" remained on the payload bay doors as there was never any need to open them. Columbia had its name moved to the forward fuselage to match the other flight vehicles after STS-61-C, during the 1986–88 hiatus when the shuttle fleet was grounded following the loss of Challenger, but retained its original wing markings until its last overhaul (after STS-93), and its unique black wing "chines" for the remainder of its operational life.
Beginning in 1998, the flight vehicles' markings were modified to incorporate the NASA "meatball" insignia. The "worm" logotype, which the agency had phased out, was removed from the payload bay doors and the "meatball" insignia was added aft of the "United States" text on the lower aft fuselage. The "meatball" insignia was also displayed on the left wing, with the American flag above the orbiter's name, left-justified rather than centered, on the right wing. The three surviving flight vehicles, Discovery, Atlantis and Endeavour, still bear these markings as museum displays. Enterprise became the property of the Smithsonian Institution in 1985 and was no longer under NASA's control when these changes were made, hence the prototype orbiter still has its 1983 markings and still has its name on the payload bay doors.
Upgrades[edit]




Atlantis was the first Shuttle to fly with a glass cockpit, on STS-101. (composite image)


The Space Shuttle was initially developed in the 1970s,[58] but received many upgrades and modifications afterward to improve performance, reliability and safety. Internally, the Shuttle remained largely similar to the original design, with the exception of the improved avionics computers. In addition to the computer upgrades, the original analog primary flight instruments were replaced with modern full-color, flat-panel display screens, called a glass cockpit, which is similar to those of contemporary airliners. To facilitate construction of ISS, the internal airlocks of each orbiter except Columbia[59] were replaced with external docking systems to allow for a greater amount of cargo to be stored on the Shuttle's mid-deck during station resupply missions.
The Space Shuttle Main Engines (SSMEs) had several improvements to enhance reliability and power. This explains phrases such as "Main engines throttling up to 104 percent." This did not mean the engines were being run over a safe limit. The 100 percent figure was the original specified power level. During the lengthy development program, Rocketdyne determined the engine was capable of safe reliable operation at 104 percent of the originally specified thrust. NASA could have rescaled the output number, saying in essence 104 percent is now 100 percent. To clarify this would have required revising much previous documentation and software, so the 104 percent number was retained. SSME upgrades were denoted as "block numbers", such as block I, block II, and block IIA. The upgrades improved engine reliability, maintainability and performance. The 109% thrust level was finally reached in flight hardware with the Block II engines in 2001. The normal maximum throttle was 104 percent, with 106 percent or 109 percent used for mission aborts.
For the first two missions, STS-1 and STS-2, the external tank was painted white to protect the insulation that covers much of the tank, but improvements and testing showed that it was not required. The weight saved by not painting the tank resulted in an increase in payload capability to orbit.[60] Additional weight was saved by removing some of the internal "stringers" in the hydrogen tank that proved unnecessary. The resulting "light-weight external tank" was first flown on STS-6 [61] and used on the majority of Shuttle missions. STS-91 saw the first flight of the "super light-weight external tank". This version of the tank was made of the 2195 aluminum-lithium alloy. It weighed 3.4 metric tons (7,500 lb) less than the last run of lightweight tanks, allowing the Shuttle to deliver heavy elements to ISS's high inclination orbit.[61] As the Shuttle was always operated with a crew, each of these improvements was first flown on operational mission flights.
The solid rocket boosters underwent improvements as well. Design engineers added a third O-ring seal to the joints between the segments after the 1986 Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.




The three nozzles of the Space Shuttle Main Engine with the two Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS) pods, and the vertical stabilizer above.


Several other SRB improvements were planned to improve performance and safety, but never came to be. These culminated in the considerably simpler, lower cost, probably safer and better-performing Advanced Solid Rocket Booster. These rockets entered production in the early to mid-1990s to support the Space Station, but were later canceled to save money after the expenditure of $2.2 billion.[62] The loss of the ASRB program resulted in the development of the Super LightWeight external Tank (SLWT), which provided some of the increased payload capability, while not providing any of the safety improvements. In addition, the US Air Force developed their own much lighter single-piece SRB design using a filament-wound system, but this too was canceled.
STS-70 was delayed in 1995, when woodpeckers bored holes in the foam insulation of Discovery's external tank. Since then, NASA has installed commercial plastic owl decoys and inflatable owl balloons which had to be removed prior to launch.[63] The delicate nature of the foam insulation had been the cause of damage to the Thermal Protection System, the tile heat shield and heat wrap of the orbiter. NASA remained confident that this damage, while it was the primary cause of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster on February 1, 2003, would not jeopardize the completion of the International Space Station (ISS) in the projected time allotted.
A cargo-only, unmanned variant of the Shuttle was variously proposed and rejected since the 1980s. It was called the Shuttle-C, and would have traded re-usability for cargo capability, with large potential savings from reusing technology developed for the Space Shuttle. Another proposal was to convert the payload bay into a passenger area, with versions ranging from 30 to 74 seats, three days in orbit, and cost US$1.5 million per seat.[64]
On the first four Shuttle missions, astronauts wore modified US Air Force high-altitude full-pressure suits, which included a full-pressure helmet during ascent and descent. From the fifth flight, STS-5, until the loss of Challenger, one-piece light blue nomex flight suits and partial-pressure helmets were worn. A less-bulky, partial-pressure version of the high-altitude pressure suits with a helmet was reinstated when Shuttle flights resumed in 1988. The Launch-Entry Suit ended its service life in late 1995, and was replaced by the full-pressure Advanced Crew Escape Suit (ACES), which resembled the Gemini space suit in design, but retained the orange color of the Launch-Entry Suit.
To extend the duration that orbiters could stay docked at the ISS, the Station-to-Shuttle Power Transfer System (SSPTS) was installed. The SSPTS allowed these orbiters to use power provided by the ISS to preserve their consumables. The SSPTS was first used successfully on STS-118.
Specifications[edit]





Space Shuttle orbiter illustration






Space Shuttle drawing






Space Shuttle wing cutaway






Space Shuttle Orbiter and Soyuz-TM (drawn to scale).






Atlantis and Endeavour on launch pads. This particular occasion is due to the final Hubble servicing mission, where the International Space Station is unreachable, which necessitates having a Shuttle on standby for a possible rescue mission.


Orbiter[65] (for Endeavour, OV-105)

Length: 122.17 ft (37.237 m)
Wingspan: 78.06 ft (23.79 m)
Height: 56.58 ft (17.25 m)
Empty weight: 172,000 lb (78,000 kg)[66]
Gross liftoff weight (Orbiter only): 240,000 lb (110,000 kg)
Maximum landing weight: 230,000 lb (100,000 kg)
Payload to Landing (Return Payload): 32,000 lb (14,400 kg)[7]
Maximum payload: 55,250 lb (25,060 kg)
Payload to LEO (204 kilometers (110 nmi) @ 28.5° inclination: 27,500 kilograms (60,600 lb)
Payload to LEO (407 kilometers (220 nmi) @ 51.6° to ISS): 16,050 kilograms (35,380 lb)[67]
Payload to GTO: 8,390 lb (3,806 kg)
Payload to Polar Orbit: 28,000 lb (12,700 kg)
Note launch payloads modified by External Tank (ET) choice (ET, LWT, or SLWT)
Payload bay dimensions: 15 by 59 ft (4.6 by 18 m) (diameter by length)
Operational altitude: 100 to 520 nmi (190 to 960 km; 120 to 600 mi)
Speed: 7,743 m/s (27,870 km/h; 17,320 mph)
Crossrange: 1,085 nmi (2,009 km; 1,249 mi)
Main Stage (SSME with external tank)

Engines: Three Rocketdyne Block II SSMEs, each with a sea level thrust of 393,800 lbf (1,752 kN) at 104% power
Thrust (at liftoff, sea level, 104% power, all 3 engines): 1,181,400 lbf (5,255 kN)
Specific impulse: 455 seconds (4.46 km/s)
Burn time: 480 s
Fuel: Liquid Hydrogen/Liquid Oxygen


Orbital Maneuvering System

Engines: 2 OMS Engines
Thrust: 53.4 kN (12,000 lbf) combined total vacuum thrust
Specific impulse: 316 seconds (3.10 km/s)
Burn time: 150–250 s typical burn; 1250 s deorbit burn
Fuel: MMH/N2O4


Crew: Varies.




The earliest Shuttle flights had the minimum crew of two; many later missions a crew of five. By program end, typically seven people would fly: (commander, pilot, several mission specialists, one of whom (MS-2) acted as the flight engineer starting with STS-9 in 1983). On two occasions, eight astronauts have flown (STS-61-A, STS-71). Eleven people could be accommodated in an emergency mission (see STS-3xx).



External tank (for SLWT)

Length: 46.9 m (153.8 ft)
Diameter: 8.4 m (27.6 ft)
Propellant volume: 2,025 m3 (534,900 U.S. gal)
Empty weight: 26,535 kg (58,500 lb)
Gross liftoff weight (for tank): 756,000 kg (1,670,000 lb)

Solid Rocket Boosters

Length: 45.46 m (149 ft)[68]
Diameter: 3.71 m (12.2 ft)[68]
Empty weight (each): 68,000 kg (150,000 lb)[68]
Gross liftoff weight (each): 571,000 kg (1,260,000 lb)[69]
Thrust (at liftoff, sea level, each): 12,500 kN (2,800,000 lbf)[43]
Specific impulse: 269 seconds (2.64 km/s)
Burn time: 124 s

System Stack

Height: 56 m (180 ft)
Gross liftoff weight: 2,000,000 kg (4,400,000 lb)
Total liftoff thrust: 30,160 kN (6,780,000 lbf)

Mission profile[edit]




STS mission profile






Shuttle launch of Atlantis at sunset in 2001. The Sun is behind the camera, and the plume's shadow intersects the Moon across the sky.


Launch preparation[edit]
See also: Space shuttle launch countdown and Space shuttle launch commit criteria
All Space Shuttle missions were launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The weather criteria used for launch included, but were not limited to: precipitation, temperatures, cloud cover, lightning forecast, wind, and humidity.[70] The Shuttle was not launched under conditions where it could have been struck by lightning. Aircraft are often struck by lightning with no adverse effects because the electricity of the strike is dissipated through its conductive structure and the aircraft is not electrically grounded. Like most jet airliners, the Shuttle was mainly constructed of conductive aluminum, which would normally shield and protect the internal systems. However, upon liftoff the Shuttle sent out a long exhaust plume as it ascended, and this plume could have triggered lightning by providing a current path to ground. The NASA Anvil Rule for a Shuttle launch stated that an anvil cloud could not appear within a distance of 10 nautical miles.[71] The Shuttle Launch Weather Officer monitored conditions until the final decision to scrub a launch was announced. In addition, the weather conditions had to be acceptable at one of the Transatlantic Abort Landing sites (one of several Space Shuttle abort modes) to launch as well as the solid rocket booster recovery area.[70][72] While the Shuttle might have safely endured a lightning strike, a similar strike caused problems on Apollo 12, so for safety NASA chose not to launch the Shuttle if lightning was possible (NPR8715.5).
Historically, the Shuttle was not launched if its flight would run from December to January (a year-end rollover or YERO). Its flight software, designed in the 1970s, was not designed for this, and would require the orbiter's computers be reset through a change of year, which could cause a glitch while in orbit. In 2007, NASA engineers devised a solution so Shuttle flights could cross the year-end boundary.[73]
Launch[edit]
After the final hold in the countdown at T-minus 9 minutes, the Shuttle went through its final preparations for launch, and the countdown was automatically controlled by the Ground Launch Sequencer (GLS), software at the Launch Control Center, which stopped the count if it sensed a critical problem with any of the Shuttle's onboard systems. The GLS handed off the count to the Shuttle's on-board computers at T minus 31 seconds, in a process called auto sequence start.
At T-minus 16 seconds, the massive sound suppression system (SPS) began to drench the Mobile Launcher Platform (MLP) and SRB trenches with 300,000 US gallons (1,100 m3) of water to protect the Orbiter from damage by acoustical energy and rocket exhaust reflected from the flame trench and MLP during lift off.[74][75]
At T-minus 10 seconds, hydrogen igniters were activated under each engine bell to quell the stagnant gas inside the cones before ignition. Failure to burn these gases could trip the onboard sensors and create the possibility of an overpressure and explosion of the vehicle during the firing phase. The main engine turbopumps also began charging the combustion chambers with liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen at this time. The computers reciprocated this action by allowing the redundant computer systems to begin the firing phase.




Space Shuttle Main Engine ignition


The three main engines (SSMEs) started at T-6.6 seconds. The main engines ignited sequentially via the Shuttle's general purpose computers (GPCs) at 120 millisecond intervals. All three SSMEs were required to reach 90% rated thrust within three seconds, otherwise the onboard computers would initiate an RSLS abort. If all three engines indicated nominal performance by T-3 seconds, they were commanded to gimbal to liftoff configuration and the command would be issued to arm the SRBs for ignition at T-0.[76] Between T-6.6 seconds and T-3 seconds, while the SSMEs were firing but the SRBs were still bolted to the pad, the offset thrust caused the entire launch stack (boosters, tank and orbiter) to pitch down 650 mm (25.5 in) measured at the tip of the external tank. The three second delay after confirmation of SSME operation was to allow the stack to return to nearly vertical. At T-0 seconds, the 8 frangible nuts holding the SRBs to the pad were detonated, the SSMEs were commanded to 100% throttle, and the SRBs were ignited. By T+0.23 seconds, the SRBs built up enough thrust for liftoff to commence, and reached maximum chamber pressure by T+0.6 seconds.[77] The Johnson Space Center's Mission Control Center assumed control of the flight once the SRBs had cleared the launch tower.
Shortly after liftoff, the Shuttle's main engines were throttled up to 104.5% and the vehicle began a combined roll, pitch and yaw maneuver that placed it onto the correct heading (azimuth) for the planned orbital inclination and in a heads down attitude with wings level. The Shuttle flew upside down during the ascent phase. This orientation allowed a trim angle of attack that was favorable for aerodynamic loads during the region of high dynamic pressure, resulting in a net positive load factor, as well as providing the flight crew with a view of the horizon as a visual reference. The vehicle climbed in a progressively flattening arc, accelerating as the mass of the SRBs and main tank decreased. To achieve low orbit requires much more horizontal than vertical acceleration. This was not visually obvious, since the vehicle rose vertically and was out of sight for most of the horizontal acceleration. The near circular orbital velocity at the 380 kilometers (236 mi) altitude of the International Space Station is 27,650 km/h (17,180 mph), roughly equivalent to Mach 23 at sea level. As the International Space Station orbits at an inclination of 51.6 degrees, missions going there must set orbital inclination to the same value in order to rendezvous with the station.
Around 30 seconds into ascent, the SSMEs were throttled down—usually to 72%, though this varied—to reduce the maximum aerodynamic forces acting on the Shuttle at a point called Max Q. Additionally, the propellant grain design of the SRBs caused their thrust to drop by about 30% by 50 seconds into ascent. Once the Orbiter's guidance verified that Max Q would be within Shuttle structural limits, the main engines were throttled back up to 104.5%; this throttling down and back up was called the "thrust bucket". To maximize performance, the throttle level and timing of the thrust bucket was shaped to bring the Shuttle as close to aerodynamic limits as possible.[78]




Solid Rocket Booster (SRB) separation during STS-1. The white external tank pictured was used on STS-1 and STS-2.


At around T+126 seconds, pyrotechnic fasteners released the SRBs and small separation rockets pushed them laterally away from the vehicle. The SRBs parachuted back to the ocean to be reused. The Shuttle then began accelerating to orbit on the main engines. Acceleration at this point would typically fall to .9 g, and the vehicle would take on a somewhat nose-up angle to the horizon – it used the main engines to gain and then maintain altitude while it accelerated horizontally towards orbit. At about five and three-quarter minutes into ascent, the orbiter's direct communication links with the ground began to fade, at which point it rolled heads up to reroute its communication links to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite system.
At about seven and a half minutes into ascent, the mass of the vehicle was low enough that the engines had to be throttled back to limit vehicle acceleration to 3 g (29.4 m/s² or 96.5 ft/s², equivalent to accelerating from zero to 105.9 km/h (65.8 mph) in a second). The Shuttle would maintain this acceleration for the next minute, and main engine cut-off (MECO) occurred at about eight and a half minutes after launch.[79] The main engines were shut down before complete depletion of propellant, as running dry would have destroyed the engines. The oxygen supply was terminated before the hydrogen supply, as the SSMEs reacted unfavorably to other shutdown modes. (Liquid oxygen has a tendency to react violently, and supports combustion when it encounters hot engine metal.) A few seconds after MECO, the external tank was released by firing pyrotechnic fasteners.
At this point the Shuttle and external tank were on a slightly suborbital trajectory, coasting up towards apogee. Once at apogee, about half an hour after MECO, the Shuttle's Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS) engines were fired to raise its perigee and achieve orbit, while the external tank fell back into the atmosphere and burned up over the Indian Ocean or the Pacific Ocean depending on launch profile.[65] The sealing action of the tank plumbing and lack of pressure relief systems on the external tank helped it break up in the lower atmosphere. After the foam burned away during re-entry, the heat caused a pressure buildup in the remaining liquid oxygen and hydrogen until the tank exploded. This ensured that any pieces that fell back to Earth were small.

Ascent tracking





Contraves-Goerz Kineto Tracking Mount used to image the space Shuttle during launch ascent






Multicolored afterglow of the STS-131 launch


The Shuttle was monitored throughout its ascent for short range tracking (10 seconds before liftoff through 57 seconds after), medium range (7 seconds before liftoff through 110 seconds after) and long range (7 seconds before liftoff through 165 seconds after). Short range cameras included 22 16mm cameras on the Mobile Launch Platform and 8 16mm on the Fixed Service Structure, 4 high speed fixed cameras located on the perimeter of the launch complex plus an additional 42 fixed cameras with 16mm motion picture film. Medium range cameras included remotely operated tracking cameras at the launch complex plus 6 sites along the immediate coast north and south of the launch pad, each with 800mm lens and high speed cameras running 100 frames per second. These cameras ran for only 4–10 seconds due to limitations in the amount of film available. Long range cameras included those mounted on the external tank, SRBs and orbiter itself which streamed live video back to the ground providing valuable information about any debris falling during ascent. Long range tracking cameras with 400-inch film and 200-inch video lenses were operated by a photographer at Playalinda Beach as well as 9 other sites from 38 miles north at the Ponce Inlet to 23 miles south to Patrick Air Force Base (PAFB) and additional mobile optical tracking camera was stationed on Merritt Island during launches. A total of 10 HD cameras were used both for ascent information for engineers and broadcast feeds to networks such as NASA TV and HDNet. The number of cameras significantly increased and numerous existing cameras were upgraded at the recommendation of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board to provide better information about the debris during launch. Debris was also tracked using a pair of Weibel Continuous Pulse Doppler X-band radars, one on board the SRB recovery ship MV Liberty Star positioned north east of the launch pad and on a ship positioned south of the launch pad. Additionally, during the first 2 flights following the loss of Columbia and her crew, a pair of NASA WB-57 reconnaissance aircraft equipped with HD Video and Infrared flew at 60,000 feet (18,000 m) to provide additional views of the launch ascent.[80] Kennedy Space Center also invested nearly $3 million in improvements to the digital video analysis systems in support of debris tracking.[81]
In orbit[edit]
Once in orbit, the Shuttle usually flew at an altitude of 320 km (170 nmi) and occasionally as high as 650 km (350 nmi).[82] In the 1980s and 1990s, many flights involved space science missions on the NASA/ESA Spacelab, or launching various types of satellites and science probes. By the 1990s and 2000s the focus shifted more to servicing the space station, with fewer satellite launches. Most missions involved staying in orbit several days to two weeks, although longer missions were possible with the Extended Duration Orbiter add-on or when attached to a space station.







Atlantis docked at Harmony module of the International Space Station








Astronaut with satellite to repair








Endeavour docked at ISS





Re-entry and landing[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Almost the entire Space Shuttle re-entry procedure, except for lowering the landing gear and deploying the air data probes, was normally performed under computer control. However, the re-entry could be flown entirely manually if an emergency arose. The approach and landing phase could be controlled by the autopilot, but was usually hand flown.




Glowing plasma trail from Space Shuttle Atlantis re-entry as seen from the Space Station


The vehicle began re-entry by firing the Orbital maneuvering system engines, while flying upside down, backside first, in the opposite direction to orbital motion for approximately three minutes, which reduced the Shuttle's velocity by about 200 mph (322 km/h). The resultant slowing of the Shuttle lowered its orbital perigee down into the upper atmosphere. The Shuttle then flipped over, by pushing its nose down (which was actually "up" relative to the Earth, because it was flying upside down). This OMS firing was done roughly halfway around the globe from the landing site.
The vehicle started encountering more significant air density in the lower thermosphere at about 400,000 ft (120 km), at around Mach 25, 8,200 m/s (30,000 km/h; 18,000 mph). The vehicle was controlled by a combination of RCS thrusters and control surfaces, to fly at a 40-degree nose-up attitude, producing high drag, not only to slow it down to landing speed, but also to reduce reentry heating. As the vehicle encountered progressively denser air, it began a gradual transition from spacecraft to aircraft. In a straight line, its 40-degree nose-up attitude would cause the descent angle to flatten-out, or even rise. The vehicle therefore performed a series of four steep S-shaped banking turns, each lasting several minutes, at up to 70 degrees of bank, while still maintaining the 40-degree angle of attack. In this way it dissipated speed sideways rather than upwards. This occurred during the 'hottest' phase of re-entry, when the heat-shield glowed red and the G-forces were at their highest. By the end of the last turn, the transition to aircraft was almost complete. The vehicle leveled its wings, lowered its nose into a shallow dive and began its approach to the landing site.







Simulation of the outside of the Shuttle as it heats up to over 1,500 °C during re-entry.









A Space Shuttle model undergoes a wind tunnel test in 1975. This test is simulating the ionized gasses that surround a Shuttle as it reenters the atmosphere.









A computer simulation of high velocity air flow around the Space Shuttle during re-entry.




The orbiter's maximum glide ratio/lift-to-drag ratio varies considerably with speed, ranging from 1:1 at hypersonic speeds, 2:1 at supersonic speeds and reaching 4.5:1 at subsonic speeds during approach and landing.[83]
In the lower atmosphere, the orbiter flies much like a conventional glider, except for a much higher descent rate, over 50 m/s (180 km/h; 110 mph) or 9,800 fpm. At approximately Mach 3, two air data probes, located on the left and right sides of the orbiter's forward lower fuselage, are deployed to sense air pressure related to the vehicle's movement in the atmosphere.

Final approach and landing phase



Play media


STS-127, Space Shuttle Endeavour landing video, 2009


When the approach and landing phase began, the orbiter was at a 3,000 m (9,800 ft) altitude, 12 km (7.5 mi) from the runway. The pilots applied aerodynamic braking to help slow down the vehicle. The orbiter's speed was reduced from 682 to 346 km/h (424 to 215 mph), approximately, at touch-down (compared to 260 km/h or 160 mph for a jet airliner). The landing gear was deployed while the Orbiter was flying at 430 km/h (270 mph). To assist the speed brakes, a 12 m (39 ft) drag chute was deployed either after main gear or nose gear touchdown (depending on selected chute deploy mode) at about 343 km/h (213 mph). The chute was jettisoned once the orbiter slowed to 110 km/h (68.4 mph).







Discovery touches down for the final time at the end of STS-133.









Endeavour brake chute deploys after touching down




 Media related to Landings of space Shuttles at Wikimedia Commons
Post-landing processing[edit]
Main article: Orbiter Processing Facility




Discovery after landing on Earth for crew disembarkment


After landing, the vehicle stayed on the runway for several hours for the orbiter to cool. Teams at the front and rear of the orbiter tested for presence of hydrogen, hydrazine, monomethylhydrazine, nitrogen tetroxide and ammonia (fuels and by-products of the reaction control system and the orbiter's three APUs). If hydrogen was detected, an emergency would be declared, the orbiter powered down and teams would evacuate the area. A convoy of 25 specially designed vehicles and 150 trained engineers and technicians approached the orbiter. Purge and vent lines were attached to remove toxic gases from fuel lines and the cargo bay about 45–60 minutes after landing. A flight surgeon boarded the orbiter for initial medical checks of the crew before disembarking. Once the crew left the orbiter, responsibility for the vehicle was handed from the Johnson Space Center back to the Kennedy Space Center.[84]
If the mission ended at Edwards Air Force Base in California, White Sands Space Harbor in New Mexico, or any of the runways the orbiter might use in an emergency, the orbiter was loaded atop the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified 747, for transport back to the Kennedy Space Center, landing at the Shuttle Landing Facility. Once at the Shuttle Landing Facility, the orbiter was then towed 2 miles (3.2 km) along a tow-way and access roads normally used by tour buses and KSC employees to the Orbiter Processing Facility where it began a months-long preparation process for the next mission.[84]
Landing sites[edit]
See also: List of space shuttle landing runways




Atlantis deploys the landing gear before landing.


NASA preferred Space Shuttle landings to be at Kennedy Space Center.[85] If weather conditions made landing there unfavorable, the Shuttle could delay its landing until conditions are favorable, touch down at Edwards Air Force Base, California, or use one of the multiple alternate landing sites around the world. A landing at any site other than Kennedy Space Center meant that after touchdown the Shuttle must be mated to the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft and returned to Cape Canaveral. Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-3) once landed at the White Sands Space Harbor, New Mexico; this was viewed as a last resort as NASA scientists believed that the sand could potentially damage the Shuttle's exterior.
There were many alternative landing sites that were never used.[86][87]
Risk contributors[edit]




Discovery at ISS in 2011 (STS-133)


An example of technical risk analysis for a STS mission is SPRA iteration 3.1 top risk contributors for STS-133:[88][89]

Micro-Meteoroid Orbital Debris (MMOD) strikes
Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME)-induced or SSME catastrophic failure
Ascent debris strikes to TPS leading to LOCV on orbit or entry
Crew error during entry
RSRM-induced RSRM catastrophic failure (RSRM are the rocket motors of the SRBs)
COPV failure (COPV are tanks inside the orbiter that hold gas at high pressure)

An internal NASA risk assessment study (conducted by the Shuttle Program Safety and Mission Assurance Office at Johnson Space Center) released in late 2010 or early 2011 concluded that the agency had seriously underestimated the level of risk involved in operating the Shuttle. The report assessed that there was a 1 in 9 chance of a catastrophic disaster during the first nine flights of the Shuttle but that safety improvements had later improved the risk ratio to 1 in 90.[90]
Fleet history[edit]
Main article: List of Space Shuttle missions
Space Shuttle major events[edit]
Below is a list of major events in the Space Shuttle orbiter fleet.




OV-101 Enterprise takes flight for the first time over Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California in 1977 as part of the Shuttle program's Approach and Landing Tests (ALT).






Atlantis lifts off from Launch Pad 39A at NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida on the STS-132 mission to the International Space Station at 2:20 pm EDT on May 14, 2010. This was one of the last scheduled flights for Atlantis before it was retired.




Date
Orbiter
Major event / remarks


September 17, 1976
Enterprise
Prototype Space Shuttle Enterprise was rolled out of its assembly facility in Southern California and displayed before a crowd of several thousand people.[91]


February 18, 1977
Enterprise
First flight; Attached to Shuttle Carrier Aircraft throughout flight.


August 12, 1977
Enterprise
First free flight; Tailcone on; lakebed landing.


October 26, 1977
Enterprise
Final Enterprise free flight; First landing on Edwards AFB concrete runway.


April 12, 1981
Columbia
First Columbia flight, first orbital test flight; STS-1


November 11, 1982
Columbia
First operational flight of the Space Shuttle, first mission to carry four astronauts; STS-5


April 4, 1983
Challenger
First Challenger flight; STS-6


August 30, 1984
Discovery
First Discovery flight; STS-41-D


October 3, 1985
Atlantis
First Atlantis flight; STS-51-J


October 30, 1985
Challenger
First and only crew of eight astronauts; STS-61-A


January 28, 1986
Challenger
Loss of vehicle 73 seconds after launch; STS-51-L; all seven crew members died.


September 29, 1988
Discovery
First post-Challenger mission; STS-26


May 4, 1989
Atlantis
The first Space Shuttle mission to launch an interplanetary probe, Magellan; STS-30


April 24, 1990
Discovery
Launch of the Hubble Space Telescope; STS-31


May 7, 1992
Endeavour
First Endeavour flight; STS-49


November 19, 1996
Columbia
Longest Shuttle mission at 17 days, 15 hours; STS-80


December 4, 1998
Endeavour
First ISS mission; STS-88


February 1, 2003
Columbia
Disintegrated during re-entry; STS-107; all seven crew members died.


July 25, 2005
Discovery
First post-Columbia mission; STS-114


February 24, 2011
Discovery
Last Discovery flight; STS-133


May 16, 2011
Endeavour
Last Endeavour mission; STS-134[92][93]


July 8, 2011
Atlantis
Last Atlantis flight and last Space Shuttle flight; STS-135


Sources: NASA launch manifest,[94] NASA Space Shuttle archive[95]
Shuttle disasters[edit]
Main articles: Space Shuttle Challenger disaster and Space Shuttle Columbia disaster
On January 28, 1986, Challenger disintegrated 73 seconds after launch due to the failure of the right SRB, killing all seven astronauts on board. The disaster was caused by low-temperature impairment of an O-ring, a mission critical seal used between segments of the SRB casing. Failure of the O-ring allowed hot combustion gases to escape from between the booster sections and burn through the adjacent external tank, causing it to explode.[96] Repeated warnings from design engineers voicing concerns about the lack of evidence of the O-rings' safety when the temperature was below 53 °F (12 °C) had been ignored by NASA managers.[97]
On February 1, 2003, Columbia disintegrated during re-entry, killing its crew of seven, because of damage to the carbon-carbon leading edge of the wing caused during launch. Ground control engineers had made three separate requests for high-resolution images taken by the Department of Defense that would have provided an understanding of the extent of the damage, while NASA's chief thermal protection system (TPS) engineer requested that astronauts on board Columbia be allowed to leave the vehicle to inspect the damage. NASA managers intervened to stop the Department of Defense's assistance and refused the request for the spacewalk,[98] and thus the feasibility of scenarios for astronaut repair or rescue by Atlantis were not considered by NASA management at the time.[99]
Retirement[edit]
Main article: Space Shuttle retirement




Atlantis orbiter's final welcome home, 2011


NASA retired the Space Shuttle in 2011, after 30 years of service. The Shuttle was originally conceived of and presented to the public as a "Space Truck", which would, among other things, be used to build a United States space station in low earth orbit in the early 1990s. When the US space station evolved into the International Space Station project, which suffered from long delays and design changes before it could be completed, the retirement of the Space Shuttle was delayed several times until 2011, serving at least 15 years longer than originally planned. Discovery was the first of NASA's three remaining operational Space Shuttles to be retired.[100]
The final Space Shuttle mission was originally scheduled for late 2010, but the program was later extended to July 2011 when Michael Suffredini of the ISS program said that one additional trip was needed in 2011 to deliver parts to the International Space Station.[101] The Shuttle's final mission consisted of just four astronauts—Christopher Ferguson (Commander), Douglas Hurley (Pilot), Sandra Magnus (Mission Specialist 1), and Rex Walheim (Mission Specialist 2);[102] they conducted the 135th and last space Shuttle mission on board Atlantis, which launched on July 8, 2011, and landed safely at the Kennedy Space Center on July 21, 2011, at 5:57 AM EDT (09:57 UTC).[103] The U.S. has since relied on the Russian Soyuz spacecraft to transport its astronauts to the International Space Station.
Distribution of orbiters and other hardware[edit]




Space Shuttle Program commemorative patch


NASA announced it would transfer orbiters to education institutions or museums at the conclusion of the Space Shuttle program. Each museum or institution is responsible for covering the US$28.8 million cost of preparing and transporting each vehicle for display. Twenty museums from across the country submitted proposals for receiving one of the retired orbiters.[104] NASA also made Space Shuttle thermal protection system tiles available to schools and universities for less than US$25 each.[105] About 7,000 tiles were available on a first-come, first-served basis, limited to one per institution.[105]
Orbiters On Display[edit]
On April 12, 2011, NASA announced selection of locations for the remaining Shuttle orbiters:[106][107]

Atlantis is on display at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex, near Cape Canaveral, Florida. It was delivered to the Visitor Complex on November 2, 2012.
Discovery was delivered to the Udvar-Hazy Center of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum in Chantilly, Virginia, near Washington, D.C. on April 19, 2012. On April 17, 2012, Discovery was flown atop a 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft escorted by a NASA T-38 Talon chase aircraft in a final farewell flight. The 747 and Discovery flew over Washington, D.C. and the metropolitan area around 10 am and arrived at Dulles around 11 am. The flyover and landing were widely covered on national news media.





Endeavour at Los Angeles International Airport



Endeavour was delivered to the California Science Center in Los Angeles, California on October 14, 2012. It arrived at Los Angeles International Airport on September 21, 2012 escorted by two NASA F/A-18 Hornet chase aircraft, concluding a two-day, cross country journey atop the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft after stops at Ellington Field in Houston, Biggs Army Airfield in El Paso and the Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, California.
Enterprise (atmospheric test orbiter) was on display at the National Air and Space Museum's Udvar-Hazy Center but was moved to New York City's Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum in mid-2012.[58]

In August 2011, the NASA Office of Inspector General (OIG) published a "Review of NASA's Selection of Display Locations for the Space Shuttle Orbiters"; the review had four main findings:[108]

"NASA's decisions regarding Orbiter placement were the result of an Agency-created process that emphasized above all other considerations locating the Orbiters in places where the most people would have the opportunity to view them";
"the Team made several errors during its evaluation process, including one that would have resulted in a numerical 'tie' among the Intrepid, the Kennedy Visitor Complex, and the National Museum of the U.S. Air Force (Air Force Museum) in Dayton, Ohio";
there is "no evidence that the Team’s recommendation or the Administrator's decision were tainted by political influence or any other improper consideration";
"some of the choices NASA made during the selection process – specifically, its decision to manage aspects of the selection as if it were a competitive procurement and to delay announcement of its placement decisions until April 2011 (more than 2 years after it first solicited information from interested entities)—may intensify challenges to the Agency and the selectees as they work to complete the process of placing the Orbiters in their new homes."

The NASA OIG had three recommendations, saying NASA should:[108]

"expeditiously review recipients' financial, logistical, and curatorial display plans to ensure they are feasible and consistent with the Agency's educational goals and processing and delivery schedules";
"ensure that recipient payments are closely coordinated with processing schedules, do not impede NASA's ability to efficiently prepare the Orbiters for museum display, and provide sufficient funds in advance of the work to be performed; and"
"work closely with the recipient organizations to minimize the possibility of delays in the delivery schedule that could increase the Agency's costs or impact other NASA missions and priorities."

In September 2011, the CEO and two board members of Seattle's Museum of Flight met with NASA Administrator Charles Bolden, pointing out "significant errors in deciding where to put its four retiring Space Shuttles"; the errors alleged include inaccurate information on Museum of Flight's attendance and international visitor statistics, as well as the readiness of the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum's exhibit site.[109]
Orbiter Replicas On Display[edit]

Independence, formerly known as Explorer, is a full-scale, high-fidelity replica of the Space Shuttle. It was built by Guard-Lee in Apopka, Florida, installed at Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex in 1993, and moved to Space Center Houston in 2012. It was built using schematics, blueprints and archival documents provided by NASA and by shuttle contractors such as Rockwell International. While many of the features on the replica are simulated, some parts, including the landing gear's Michelin tires, have been used in the Space Shuttle program.[110] The model is on display, mounted on top of the original Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (NASA 905) outside of the Visitors' Center.[111]
Pathfinder (honorary Orbiter Vehicle Designation: OV-098) is a Space Shuttle test simulator made of steel and wood. Constructed by NASA in 1977 as an unnamed test article, it was purchased in the early 1980s by the America-Japan Society, Inc. which had it refurbished, named it, and placed it on display in the Great Space Shuttle Exhibition in Tokyo. The mockup was later returned to the United States and placed on permanent display at the U.S. Space & Rocket Center in Huntsville, Alabama, in May 1988.

Hardware On Display[edit]
Flight and mid-deck training hardware will be taken from the Johnson Space Center and will go to the National Air and Space Museum and the National Museum of the U.S. Air Force. The full fuselage mockup, which includes the payload bay and aft section but no wings, is to go to the Museum of Flight in Seattle. Mission Simulation and Training Facility's fixed simulator will go to the Adler Planetarium in Chicago, and the motion simulator will go to the Texas A&M Aerospace Engineering Department in College Station, Texas. Other simulators used in Shuttle astronaut training will go to the Wings of Dreams Aviation Museum in Starke, Florida and the Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton, Virginia.[104]
Space Shuttle successors and legacy[edit]
Main article: Space Shuttle retirement




STS conducted numerous experiments in space, such as this ionization experiment






Sprint cameras, tested by the Shuttle, may be used on ISS and other missions


Until another US manned spacecraft is ready, crews will travel to and from the International Space Station (ISS) exclusively aboard the Russian Soyuz spacecraft.
A planned successor to STS was the "Shuttle II", during the 1980s and 1990s, and later the Constellation program during the 2004–2010 period. CSTS was a proposal to continue to operate STS commercially, after NASA.[112] In September 2011, NASA announced the selection of the design for the new Space Launch System that is planned to launch the Orion spacecraft and other hardware to missions beyond low earth-orbit.[113][114][115]
The Commercial Orbital Transportation Services program began in 2006 with the purpose of creating commercially operated unmanned cargo vehicles to service the ISS.[116] The Commercial Crew Development (CCDev) program was started in 2010 to create commercially operated manned spacecraft capable of delivering at least four crew members to the ISS, to stay docked for 180 days, and then return them back to Earth.[117] These spacecraft were to become operational in the 2010s.[118]
In popular culture[edit]
Space Shuttles have been features of fiction and nonfiction, from children's movies to documentaries. Early examples include the 1979 James Bond film, Moonraker, the 1982 Activision videogame Space Shuttle: A Journey into Space (1982) and G. Harry Stine's 1981 novel Shuttle Down. In the 1986 film SpaceCamp, Atlantis accidentally launches into space with a group of U.S. Space Camp participants as its crew. A space shuttle named Intrepid is featured in the 1989 film Moontrap.
The 1998 film Armageddon portrays a combined crew of offshore oil rig workers and US military staff who pilot two modified Shuttles to avert the destruction of Earth by an asteroid. Retired American test pilots visit a Russian satellite in the 2000 Clint Eastwood adventure film Space Cowboys. In the 2003 film The Core, the Endeavour's landing is disrupted by the Earth's magnetic core, and its crew is selected to pilot a vehicle designed to restart the core. The 2004 Bollywood movie Swades, where a Space Shuttle is used to launch a special rainfall monitoring satellite, was filmed at Kennedy Space Center in the year after the Columbia disaster that had taken the life of Indian-American astronaut KC Chawla.
On television, the 1996 drama The Cape portrays the lives of a group of NASA astronauts as they prepare for and fly Shuttle missions. Odyssey 5 was a short-lived sci-fi series that features the crew of a Space Shuttle as the last survivors of a disaster that destroys Earth. The 1997–2007 sci-fi series Stargate SG-1 has a shuttle rescue written into an episode.
The 2013 film Gravity features the fictional Space Shuttle Explorer during STS-157, whose crew are killed or left stranded after it is destroyed by a shower of high speed orbital debris. The 2017 Lego film The Lego Batman Movie features a hybrid between the Batmobile and a Space Shuttle, named "the Bat Space Shuttle" by Dick Grayson. It's clearly based on the Lego City set 3367 ("Space Shuttle"), but is black and weapon-equipped.




A United States Space Shuttle stamp


The Space Shuttle has also been the subject of toys and models; for example, a large Lego Space Shuttle model was constructed by visitors at Kennedy Space Center,[119] and smaller models have been sold commercially as a standard "LegoLand" set. A 1980 pinball machine Space Shuttle was produced by Zaccaria and a 1984 pinball machine Space Shuttle: Pinball Adventure was produced by Williams and features a plastic Space Shuttle model among other artwork of astronauts on the play field. The Space Shuttle also appears in a number of flight simulator and space flight simulator games such as Microsoft Space Simulator, Orbiter, FlightGear, X-Plane and Space Shuttle Mission 2007. Several Transformers toys were modeled after the Space Shuttle.
US postage commemorations[edit]
Main article: U.S. space exploration history on U.S. stamps § Space Shuttle Issues
The U.S. Postal Service has released several postage issues that depict the Space Shuttle. The first such stamps were issued in 1981, and are on display at the National Postal Museum.[120]
See also[edit]


Spaceflight portal



Space Shuttle related[edit]

Chrysler SERV
Criticism of the Space Shuttle program
Getaway Special
HL-20 Personnel Launch System
List of human spaceflights
List of Space Shuttle crews
List of spaceflight-related accidents and incidents
NASA TV, coverage of launches and missions
Orbiter Processing Facility
Shuttle Training Aircraft
Shuttle-Derived Launch Vehicle

Physics[edit]

Lifting body
Single-stage-to-orbit

Similar spacecraft[edit]

Boeing X-20 Dyna-Soar (1957–1963)
Buran, Soviet Space shuttle program (1974–1992)
Comparison of orbital launch systems
Comparison of orbital launchers families
DIRECT, a vehicle proposed as an alternative for Constellation program
Dream Chaser
Hermes (spacecraft) (1975–1992)
HOPE-X (cancelled)
Hopper (spacecraft)
HOTOL (cancelled)
Kliper (cancelled)
Orion spacecraft
Skylon
X-33 of Lockheed Martin (1995–2001)
RLV-TD, Indian space shuttle program (2016-)


References[edit]


^ John M. Logsdon (July 6, 2011). "Was the Space Shuttle a Mistake?". MIT Technology Review. p. 2. Retrieved 18 February 2015. 
^ a b The Rise and Fall of the Space Shuttle, Book Review: Final Countdown: NASA and the End of the Space Shuttle Program by Pat Duggins, American Scientist, 2008, Vol. 96, No. 5, p. 32.
^ a b CARL BIALIK (July 9, 2011). "As Shuttle Sails Through Space, Costs Are Tough to Pin Down". wsj.com. Retrieved 18 February 2015. 
^ NASA (2011). "How much does it cost to launch a Space Shuttle?". NASA. Retrieved June 28, 2011. 
^ Mike Wall (5 July 2011). "NASA's Shuttle Program Cost $209 Billion — Was it Worth It?". Space.com. Retrieved 18 February 2015. 
^ Pielke Jr., Roger; Radford Byerly (7 April 2011). "Shuttle programme lifetime cost". Nature. 472 (7341): 38. Bibcode:2011Natur.472...38P. doi:10.1038/472038d. PMID 21475182. 
^ a b Woodcock, Gordon R. (1986). Space stations and platforms. Orbit Book co. ISBN 9780894640018. Retrieved 2012-04-17. The present limit on Shuttle landing payload is 14400 kg. (32000 lb). This value applies to payloads intended for landing. 
^ "Mission Pages". Nasa.Gov. 
^ Kyle, Ed. "STS Data Sheet". spacelaunchreport.com. Retrieved July 2014.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ a b Launius, Roger D. "Space Task Group Report, 1969". 
^ Malik, Tarik (July 21, 2011). "NASA's Space Shuttle By the Numbers: 30 Years of a Spaceflight Icon". Space.com. Retrieved June 18, 2014. 
^ Bewley, Elizabeth (September 30, 2011). "SpaceX working on reusable rocket". Florida Today. Retrieved 2011-09-30. [many] rockets typically are used just once, although some partly reusable versions have been developed, such as the Space Shuttle. 
^ Jim Abrams (September 29, 2010). "NASA bill passed by Congress would allow for one additional Shuttle flight in 2011". Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 7, 2011. Retrieved September 30, 2010. 
^ Vartabedian, Ralph; Hennigan, W.J. (July 9, 2011). "Space Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off". Los Angeles Times. 
^ "7 cool things you didn't know about Atlantis". 
^ Elizabeth Howell (October 9, 2012). "Enterprise: The Test Shuttle". Retrieved October 28, 2014. 
^ a b c Interavia (1985), Volume 40, p. 1170 Google Books Quote: "This is the first time that control of a payload aboard a manned Shuttle has been in non-US hands. The D1 mission has been financed entirely by the German Ministry of Research and Technology. .."
^ a b Life into Space (1995/2000) – Volume 2, Chapter 4, Page: Spacelab-J (SL-J) Payload Archived May 27, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.. NASA Life into Space Archived January 4, 2011, at the Wayback Machine..
^ "Columbia Spacelab D2 – STS-55". Damec.dk. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved December 4, 2010. 
^ ESA – Spacelab D1 mission – 25 years ago (October 26, 2010)(Retrieved December 4, 2010)
^ Tim Furniss – A history of space exploration and its future (2003) – Page 89 (Google Books Retrieved December 4, 2010)
^ Reginald Turnill – Jane's spaceflight directory (1986) – Page 139 (Google Books Quote, "SM 22: the 1st German-funded Spacelab mission made use of the ESA Space Sled.")
^ "NASA Takes Delivery of 100th Space Shuttle External Tank" Archived March 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.. NASA, August 16, 1999. Quote: "...orange spray-on foam used to insulate...."
^ "Media Invited To See Shuttle External Fuel Tank Ship From Michoud". NASA, December 28, 2004. Quote: "The gigantic, rust-colored external tank..."
^ NASA (2008), Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster (PDF), NASA, retrieved July 15, 2012 
^ "Solid Rocket Boosters". NASA KSC. Retrieved 2011-06-30. 
^ "PSA #1977". Loren Data Corp. Retrieved July 15, 2012. 
^ a b NASA-CR-195281, "Utilization of the external tanks of the space transportation system". NASA, August 23–27, 1982.
^ a b NASA (1995). "Earth's Atmosphere". NASA. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved October 25, 2007. 
^ "INTRODUCTION TO FUTURE LAUNCH VEHICLE PLANS [1963–2001] Updated 6/15/2001, by Marcus Lindroos". Pmview.com. June 15, 2001. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ a b c d "ESA – N° 10-1998: 25 years of Spacelab – Go for Space Station". Esa.int. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ Shuttle Basics. NASA.
^ "NASA – Space Shuttle and International Space Station". Nasa.gov. Retrieved August 7, 2010. 
^ The Rise and Fall of the Space Shuttle, Book Review: Final Countdown: NASA and the End of the Space Shuttle Program by Pat Duggins, American Scientist, 2008, Vol. 96, No. 5, p. 32.
^ "Spacelab D1 mission – 25 years ago". European Space Agency. Retrieved 2015-11-28. 
^ DYE, LEE (1985-10-28). "Europe at Helm of Tests on Next Spacelab Flight". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Retrieved 2015-11-28. 
^ "NASA - NASA - JSC Exhibits". 
^ "Nasa Centers And Responsibilities". Science.ksc.nasa.gov. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ Guillemette, Roger (September 20, 2011). "Declassified US Spy Satellites Reveal Rare Look at Secret Cold War Space Program". Yahoo! News. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ "Orbiter Vehicles". NASA Kennedy Space Center. Retrieved October 11, 2009. 
^ "Sound Suppression Water System Test". NASA. Retrieved 2011-06-30. 
^ STS External Tank Station Archived April 7, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.. astronautix.com
^ a b Columbia Accident Investigation Board Report, Vol II, Appendix D.7 Archived April 11, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.. NASA, October 2003.
^ "NASA Space Shuttle Columbia Launch". Archived from the original on June 7, 2008. 
^ NASA. "Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident". NASA. Retrieved 2011-06-30. 
^ NASA Ares I First Stage Motor to be Tested August 25. NASA, July 20, 2009.
^ "Soyuz a Smoother Ride than Shuttle, Astronaut Tells Students". The ARRL Letter. 24 (9). March 4, 2005. 
^ "Jack R. Lousma Oral History". NASA Johnson Space Center Oral History Project. 15 March 2010. 
^ "Launch and the First Day in Space". John Grunsfeld Reports. December 21, 1999. 
^ Davis, Lauren (July 8, 2012). "The time an astronaut called into Car Talk from the Space Shuttle". 
^ "Gunter's Space Page – TOS-21H". Space.skyrocket.de. September 25, 1992. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ a b c d e f g "Spacelab joined diverse scientists and disciplines on 28 Shuttle missions". NASA. March 15, 1999. Retrieved February 11, 2011. 
^ Ferguson, Roscoe C.; Robert Tate; Hiram C. Thompson. "Implementing Space Shuttle Data Processing System Concepts in Programmable Logic Devices". NASA Office of Logic Design. Retrieved August 27, 2006. 
^ IBM. "IBM and the Space Shuttle". IBM. Retrieved August 27, 2006. 
^ The Computer History Museum (2006). "Pioneering the Laptop:Engineering the GRiD Compass". The Computer History Museum. Archived from the original on December 4, 2007. Retrieved October 25, 2007. 
^ NASA (1985). "Portable Compute" (PDF). NASA. Retrieved June 23, 2010. 
^ KSC, Steven Siceloff,. "NASA - Shuttle Computers Navigate Record of Reliability". www.nasa.gov. Retrieved 2017-02-03. 
^ a b Dunn, Marcia (January 15, 2010). "Recession Special: NASA Cuts Space Shuttle Price". ABC News. Archived from the original on January 18, 2010. Retrieved January 15, 2010. 
^ Ray, Justin. "Flying into the future". http://spaceflightnow.com/shuttle/features/000414overhaul/future.html. Spaceflight Now.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help); External link in |website= (help); Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Aerospaceweb.org (2006). "Space Shuttle External Tank Foam Insulation". Aerospaceweb.org. Retrieved October 25, 2007. 
^ a b Sivolella, Davide (2012). To Orbit and Back Again. New York: Springer. p. 165. ISBN 978-1-4614-0982-3. 
^ Encyclopedia Astronautica. "Shuttle". Encyclopedia Astronautica. Archived from the original on January 18, 2010. 
^ Jim Dumoulin. "Woodpeckers damage STS-70 External Tank". NASA. Retrieved August 27, 2006. 
^ Peter Wainwright (spacefuture.com). "L David, R Citron, T Rogers & C D Walker, April 25–28, 1985, "The Space Tourist", AAS 85-771 to −774. Proceedings of the Fourth Annual L5 Space Development Conference held April 25–28, 1985, in Washington, D.C". Spacefuture.com. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ a b Jenkins, Dennis R. (2006). Space Shuttle: The History of the National Space Transportation System. Voyageur Press. ISBN 0-9633974-5-1. 
^ "John F. Kennedy Space Center – Space Shuttle Endeavour". Pao.ksc.nasa.gov. Archived from the original on May 21, 2011. Retrieved June 17, 2009. 
^ Encyclopedia Astronautica,"Shuttle ISS"
^ a b c Jenkins, Dennis R. (2002). Space Shuttle: The History of the National Space Transportation System (Third ed.). Voyageur Press. ISBN 0-9633974-5-1. 
^ Space Shuttle Propulsion Systems, p. 153. NASA, June 26, 1990.
^ a b "SPACE SHUTTLE WEATHER LAUNCH COMMIT CRITERIA AND KSC END OF MISSION WEATHER LANDING CRITERIA". KSC Release No. 39-99. NASA Kennedy Space Center. Archived from the original on June 26, 2009. Retrieved July 6, 2009. 
^ Weather at About.com. What is the Anvil Rule for Thunderstorms?. Retrieved June 10, 2008.
^ NASA Launch Blog. [1]. Retrieved June 10, 2008.
^ Bergin, Chris (February 19, 2007). "NASA solves YERO problem for Shuttle". Archived from the original on April 18, 2008. Retrieved December 22, 2007. 
^ "NASA - Sound Suppression System". 
^ National Aeronautics and Space Administration. "Sound Suppression Water System" Archived March 13, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Revised August 28, 2000. Retrieved July 9, 2006.
^ National Aeronautics and Space Administration. "NASA – Countdown 101". Retrieved July 10, 2008.
^ "Shuttle Crew Operations Manual" (PDF). nasa.gov. Retrieved February 2015.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ "Aerodynamics and Flight Dynamics" (PDF). www.nasa.gov. Retrieved February 2015.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ "Ascent Timeline and Abort Boundaries - STS-135". SpaceflightNow. Retrieved February 2015.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ "Shuttle launch imagery from land, air and water" (PDF). 
^ "New Eyes for Shuttle Launches". Nasa.gov. November 22, 2007. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ Anthony R. Curtis, editor@spacetoday.org. "Space Today Online – Answers To Your Questions". Spacetoday.org. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ http://klabs.org/DEI/Processor/shuttle/shuttle_tech_conf/1985008580.pdf
^ a b "From Landing to Launch Orbiter Processing" (PDF). NASA Public Affairs Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 21, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2011. 
^ "NASA – Roster of Runways Ready to Bring a Shuttle Home". Nasa.gov. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ Global Security. "Space Shuttle Emergency Landing Sites". GlobalSecurity.org. Retrieved August 3, 2007. 
^ US Northern Command. "DOD Support to manned space operations for STS-119". Archived from the original on January 13, 2010. Retrieved June 30, 2011. 
^ Chris Gebhardt. "NASA Reviews COPV Reliability Concerns for Final Program Flights". NASASpaceflight.com. Retrieved December 14, 2010. 
^ Hamlin, et al. 2009 Space Shuttle Probabilistic Risk Assessment Overview (.pdf). NASA.
^ Florida Today, "Report says NASA underestimated Shuttle dangers", Military Times, February 13, 2011. Retrieved February 15, 2011.
^ Wall, Mike (September 17, 2011). "35 Years Ago: NASA Unveils First Space Shuttle, 'Enterprise'". Yahoo! News. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ "NASA – NASA's Shuttle and Rocket Launch Schedule". Nasa.gov. July 27, 2010. Retrieved August 7, 2010. 
^ "NASA Updates Shuttle Target Launch Dates For Final Two Flights". NASA. Retrieved July 3, 2010. 
^ "Consolidated Launch Manifest". NASA. Retrieved May 28, 2009. 
^ "Space Shuttle Mission Archives". NASA. Retrieved May 28, 2009. 
^ "Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Chapter III: The Accident". History.nasa.gov. June 6, 1986. Retrieved July 4, 2012. 
^ "Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Chapter VI: An Accident Rooted in History, Chapter VI: An Accident Rooted in History". History.nasa.gov. June 6, 1986. Retrieved July 17, 2009. 
^ "the Columbia Accident". century-of-flight.net
^ "D13 – In-Flight Options" (PDF). Retrieved July 17, 2009. 
^ "NASA – NASA's Shuttle and Rocket Launch Schedule". Nasa.gov. Retrieved July 17, 2009. 
^ John Pike (May 13, 2010). "Space Shuttle may continue through next year – Roscosmos". Globalsecurity.org. Retrieved August 7, 2010. 
^ "Rare Four-Member Crew to Fly Final Shuttle". FoxNews.com, July 3, 2011. Retrieved July 4, 2011
^ "Launch and Landing". NASA. Retrieved July 23, 2011. 
^ a b "Photo Gallery: How to display a retired space shuttle". Collect Space. November 1, 2010. Retrieved July 11, 2011. 
^ a b "NASA offers space shuttle tiles to school and universities". Channel 13 News. December 1, 2010. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved July 11, 2011. 
^ Jason Townsend (April 12, 2011). "NASA Announces New Homes for Space Shuttle Orbiters After Retirement". NASA. Retrieved April 12, 2011. 
^ McGeehan, Patrick (April 12, 2011). "Space Shuttle to Land in Manhattan". The New York Times. Retrieved July 11, 2011. 
^ a b Review of NASA's Selection of Display Locations for the Space Shuttle Orbiters (PDF) (Special Report). NASA Office of Inspector General. August 25, 2011. p. 26. Retrieved 2011-10-05. 
^ Broom, Jack (October 4, 2011). "Seattle still dreams of landing a shuttle". The Seattle Times. Retrieved 2011-10-05. 
^ "Space shuttle replica sets sail for Houston". CollectSpace.com. May 24, 2012. Retrieved May 25, 2012. 
^ Moeller, Nathan (August 15, 2014). "Independence rises into history atop SCA at Space Center Houston". Spaceflight Insider. Retrieved August 16, 2014. 
^ Coppinger, Rob (February 3, 2011). "NASA weighs plan to keep Space Shuttle until 2017". MSNBC. Retrieved 2012-04-17. 
^ Release:11-301, NASA (September 14, 2011). "NASA Announces Design For New Deep Space Exploration System". NASA. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2011. 
^ "Press Conference on the Future of NASA Space Program". C-Span VideoLibrary. September 14, 2011. Archived from the original on February 8, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2011. 
^ "NASA Unveils New Rocket Design". The New York Times. September 14, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2011. 
^ "NASA Selects Crew and Cargo Transportation to Orbit Partners" (Press release). NASA. August 18, 2006. Retrieved 2006-11-21. 
^ Berger, Brian (February 1, 2011). "Biggest CCDev Award Goes to Sierra Nevada". Imaginova Corp. Retrieved December 13, 2011. 
^ "NASA's Plan for Private Space Taxis Takes Step Forward". Space.com. June 30, 2011. Retrieved December 13, 2011. 
^ Cherie D. Abbey, Kevin Hillstrom – "Biography Today Annual Cumulation 2004: Profiles Of People Of ...: Volume 13; Volume 2004" (2004), Page 55, Quote:"she went to the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where she helped visitors build the world's largest Lego Space Shuttle"
^ "Arago: Space Achievement Issue". 


Further reading[edit]

Gore, Rick (March 1981). "When the Space Shuttle Finally Flies". National Geographic. Vol. 159 no. 3. pp. 316–347. ISSN 0027-9358. OCLC 643483454. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Space Shuttle.






Space Shuttle program insignia



NSTS 1988 Reference manual
How The Space Shuttle Works
NASA Space Shuttle News Reference – 1981 (PDF document)
Orbiter Vehicles

NASA[edit]

The Space Shuttle Era: 1981–2011; interactive multimedia on the space shuttle orbiters
NASA Human Spaceflight – Shuttle: Current status of shuttle missions
Official NASA Human Space Flight Orbital Tracking system
NASA Shuttle Gallery: Newer images, audio, and video of the space shuttle program
NASA History Series Publications (many of which are on-line)

Non-NASA[edit]

Atlantis photo essay From Boston.com. (May 14, 2010)
Video of current and historical missions (STS-1 thru Current)
List of all Shuttle Landing Sites and a Map of Landing Sites
Different details and perspectives from the orbiter (Gallery drafts.de) (ger.)
"Space Shuttle collected news and commentary". The Guardian. 
Space Shuttle collected news and commentary at The New York Times
Works by or about the Space Shuttle Program (U.S.) in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
Swaby, Rachel. "The Space Shuttle’s Impact on Pop Culture", Wired, June 28, 2011
The short film "Space Shuttle: A Remarkable Flying Machine (1981)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive
"Space Shuttle" a 1975 Flight article by Bill Gunston
High resolution spherical panoramas over, under, around and through Discovery, Atlantis and Endeavour







v
t
e


Space Shuttle orbiters and Buran-class shuttles














United States Space Shuttle program (list)
Soviet/Russian Buran programme





Pathfinder (OV-098, ground tests)
Challenger (OV-099, destroyed in 1986)
Enterprise (OV-101, atmospheric tests, retired in 1979)
Columbia (OV-102, destroyed in 2003)
Discovery (OV-103, retired in 2011)
Atlantis (OV-104, retired in 2011)
Endeavour (OV-105, retired in 2011)






OK-GLI (Buran Analog BST-02, aerotester)
Buran (Shuttle 1.01, destroyed in 2002)
Ptichka (Shuttle 1.02, 95–97% completed)
Baikal (Shuttle 2.01, incomplete)
2.02 (partially dismantled)
2.03 (dismantled)
















v
t
e


NASA Space Shuttle (STS)






Space Shuttle
Programs
Missions
Crews





Parts



Orbiter Vehicle (OV)
Solid Rocket Booster (SRB)
External Tank (ET)
Main Engine (SSME)
Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS)
Reaction control system (RCS)
Thermal protection system
Booster separation motor










Orbiters



Enterprise
Columbia
Challenger
Discovery
Atlantis
Endeavour





Add-ons



Spacelab (ESA)
RMS (CSA)
Extended Duration Orbiter
Remote Controlled Orbiter
Spacehab
MPLM





Sites



Kennedy Space Center LC-39
Vandenberg SLC-6
Landing sites (Abort Landing Sites)





Operations



Missions (canceled)
Crews
Mission timeline
Rollbacks
Abort modes
Rendezvous pitch maneuver





Testing



Pathfinder (simulator)
MPTA
MPTA-ET
Approach and Landing Tests





Disasters



Challenger disaster (report)
Columbia disaster (report)





Support



Crawler-transporter
Mate-Demate Device
Mobile Launcher Platform
NASA recovery ship
Orbiter Processing Facility
Shuttle Avionics Integration Laboratory (SAIL)
Shuttle Carrier Aircraft
Shuttle Training Aircraft





Special



Deutschland-1
Getaway Special
Teacher in Space Project
Shuttle-Mir
Hitchhiker





Derivatives



Saturn-Shuttle (canceled)
Shuttle-Derived Launch Vehicle (SDLV)
Shuttle-Derived Heavy Lift Launch Vehicle (HLLV)
Jupiter
Shuttle-C
Ares
Space Launch System (SLS)





Replicas



Inspiration
Independence
America





Related



Space Shuttle design process
Inertial Upper Stage
Payload Assist Module
ISS
Space Shuttle retirement
Conroy Virtus
Criticism of the Space Shuttle program
Rendezvous: A Space Shuttle Simulation
Space Shuttle Project
Shuttle
Space Shuttle: A Journey into Space
Orbiter
Space Shuttle Mission 2007










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Components of the International Space Station



Overview



Assembly
US Orbital Segment
Russian Orbital Segment
Expeditions
Spacewalks
Unmanned visits
Program
Scientific research
Major incidents









Orbiting




Major
components



Zarya (Functional Cargo Block)
Zvezda (Service Module)
Destiny (laboratory)
Columbus (laboratory)
Kibō (PM, ELM-PS, EF)
Unity (Node 1)
Harmony (Node 2)
Tranquility (Node 3)
Quest Joint Airlock
Pirs (docking module, airlock)
Rassvet (MRM 1)
Poisk (MRM 2)
Leonardo (PMM)
Cupola
Integrated Truss Structure (ITS)
Bigelow Expandable Activity Module (BEAM)





Subsystems



Mobile Servicing System (MSS) Canadarm2
Dextre (SPDM)
Boom Assembly
Strela cranes
Kibō Remote Manipulator System
External Stowage Platforms (ESPs)
ExPRESS Logistics Carriers (ELCs) 1-4
Pressurized Mating Adapters (PMAs)
International Docking Adapters (IDAs)
Electrical System
Life Support System





Experimental
devices



AMS-02
CALET
CATS
HDEV
MAXI
NICER
PK-3 Plus
SAGE III








Future




Via Proton



Nauka (Multipurpose Laboratory Module) (with European Robotic Arm (ERA))
Science Power Module





Via Soyuz

Prichal (Uzlovoy Module)



Via CRS

NanoRacks Airlock Module



Proposed



Node 4
XBASE
Ixion
Axiom








Spare
hardware



Multi-Purpose Logistics Modules (MPLMs)
Kibō (ELM-ES)
ExPRESS Logistics Carrier (ELC) 5
Interim Control Module (ICM)





Cancelled



Propulsion Module
Centrifuge Accommodations Module (CAM)
Habitation Module
Crew Return Vehicle (CRV/ACRV)
Science Power Platform (SPP)
Universal Docking Module (UDM)
Russian Research Module (RM)





Support
vehicles




Current



Cygnus
Dragon
H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV)
Progress
Soyuz





Future



CST-100 Starliner
Dragon 2
Dream Chaser Cargo System (DCCS)
Federation (PPTS)





Former



Space Shuttle
Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV)





Cancelled



NASDA HOPE-X
ESA Hermes








Mission
control



MCC-H (NASA)
TsUP (RKA)
Col-CC (ESA)
ATV-CC (ESA)
JEM-CC (JAXA)
HTV-CC (JAXA)
MSS-CC (CSA)





Administrative
and legal

Multilateral Coordination Board






 Book
 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


United States orbital launch systems



Active



Antares
Atlas V
Delta

II
IV
Heavy


Falcon 9

v1.2 "Full Thrust"


Minotaur

I
IV
V
C


Pegasus
SPARK





In development



BFR
Falcon 9 Block 5
Falcon Heavy
New Glenn
SLS
Vulcan





Retired



Ares

I
V


Athena

I
II


Atlas

B
D
E/F
G
H
I
II
III
LV-3B
SLV-3
Able
Agena
Centaur


Conestoga
Delta

A
B
C
D
E
G
J
L
M
N
0100
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
III


Falcon 1
Falcon 9

v1.0
v1.1


H-I*
Juno I
Juno II
N-I*
N-II*
Pilot
Saturn

I
IB
V
INT-21


Scout
Shuttle
Sparta
Thor

Able
Ablestar
Agena
Burner
Delta
DSV-2U


Thorad-Agena
Titan

II GLV
IIIA
IIIB
IIIC
IIID
IIIE
34D
23G
CT-3
IV


Vanguard








* - Japanese projects using US rockets or stages












v
t
e


NASA



Policy and history




History



NACA (1915)
National Aeronautics and Space Act (1958)
Space Task Group (1958)
Paine (1986)
Rogers (1986)
Ride (1987)
Space Exploration Initiative (1989)
Augustine (1990)
U.S. National Space Policy (1996)
CFUSAI (2002)
CAIB (2003)
Vision for Space Exploration (2004)
Aldridge (2004)
Augustine (2009)





General



Space Race
Administrator and Deputy Administrator
Chief Scientist
Astronaut Corps
Budget
Spin-off technologies
NASA TV
NASA Social
Launch Services Program
Kennedy Space Center

Vehicle Assembly Building
Launch Complex 39
Launch Control Center


Johnson Space Center

Mission Control
Lunar Sample Laboratory













Robotic programs




Past



Hitchhiker
Mariner
Mariner Mark II
MESUR
Mars Surveyor '98
New Millennium
Lunar Orbiter
Pioneer
Planetary Observer
Ranger
Surveyor
Viking
Project Prometheus
Mars Scout





Current



Living With a Star
Lunar Precursor Robotic Program
Earth Observing System
Great Observatories program
Explorer
Small explorer
Voyager
Discovery
New Frontiers
Mars Exploration Rover








Human spaceflight
programs




Past



X-15 (suborbital)
Mercury
Gemini
Apollo
Apollo–Soyuz Test Project (with the Soviet space program)
Skylab
Space Shuttle
Shuttle–Mir (with Roscosmos State Corporation)
Constellation





Current



International Space Station
Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS)
Commercial Crew Development (CCDev)
Orion








Individual featured
missions
(human and robotic)




Past



COBE
Apollo 11
Mercury 3
Mercury-Atlas 6
Magellan
Pioneer 10
Pioneer 11
Galileo
GALEX
GRAIL
WMAP
Space Shuttle
Sojourner rover
Spirit rover
LADEE
MESSENGER
Aquarius
Cassini





Currently
operating



MRO
2001 Mars Odyssey
Dawn
New Horizons
Kepler
International Space Station
Hubble Space Telescope
Spitzer
RHESSI
SWIFT
THEMIS
Mars Exploration Rover
Curiosity rover

timeline


Opportunity rover

observed


GOES 14
Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter
GOES 15
Van Allen Probes
SDO
Juno
Mars Science Laboratory

timeline


NuSTAR
Voyager 1/2
WISE
MAVEN
MMS
OSIRIS-REx





Future



JPSS
James Webb Space Telescope
WFIRST
InSight
Mars 2020
NISAR
Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite
Europa Clipper








Communications
and navigation



Canberra
Deep Space Atomic Clock
Deep Space Network (Goldstone
Madrid
Near Earth Network
Space Flight Operations Facility)
Space Network





NASA lists



Astronauts

by name
by year
Apollo astronauts


List of NASA aircraft
List of NASA missions

unmanned missions


List of NASA contractors
List of United States rockets
List of NASA cancellations
List of Space Shuttle missions

crews







NASA images
and artwork



Earthrise
The Blue Marble
Family Portrait

Pale Blue Dot


Pillars of Creation
Mystic Mountain
Solar System Family Portrait
The Day the Earth Smiled
Fallen Astronaut
Lunar plaques
Pioneer plaques
Voyager Golden Record
NASA insignia
Gemini and Apollo medallions
Mission patches








 Category
 Commons
 Portal












v
t
e


Orbital launch systems



Current




Spaceflight portal



Angara

A5


Antares 230
Ariane 5
Atlas V
Delta

II
IV


Electron
Epsilon
Falcon 9

v1.2 "Full Thrust"


GSLV

Mk II
Mk III


H-IIA
H-IIB
Kuaizhou
Long March

2C
2D
2F
3A
3B/E
3C
4B
4C
5
6
7
11


Minotaur

I
IV
V
C


Pegasus
Proton-M
PSLV
Rokot
Safir
Shavit
Simorgh
Soyuz-FG
Soyuz-2

2.1a / STA
2.1b / STB
2-1v


SPARK
SS-520
Strela
Unha
Vega
Zenit

3SL
3SLB
3F







In development



Angara

1.2
A5P


Antares 300
Ariane 6
BFR
Cyclone-4M
Eris
Falcon 9 Block 5
Falcon Heavy
H3
Haas 2CA
KZ-11
KZ-21
Long March

8
9


LauncherOne
Mayak
Naga-L
Naro-2
New Glenn
NGL
Oril (uk)
Proton

Light
Medium


RPS
SLS
Soyuz-5
Soyuz-7
Tronador II
ULV
Vector-R
VLM
Vulcan





Retired



Antares 110/120/130
Ariane

1
2
3
4


ASLV
Athena

I
II


Atlas

B
D
E/F
G
H
I
II
III
LV-3B
SLV-3
Able
Agena
Centaur


Black Arrow
Conestoga
Delta

A
B
C
D
E
G
J
L
M
N
0100
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
III


Diamant
Dnepr
Energia
Europa
Falcon 1
Falcon 9

v1.0
v1.1


Feng Bao 1
GSLV

Mk I


H-I
H-II
Juno I
Juno II
Kaituozhe-1
Kosmos

1
2I
3
3M


Lambda 4S
Long March

1
2A
2E
3
3B
4A


Mu

4S 3C 3H 3S 3SII
V


N1
N-I
N-II
Naro-1
Paektusan
Pilot
Proton

UR-500
K


R-7

Luna
Molniya

M
L


Polyot
Soyuz

original
L
M
U
U2


Soyuz/Vostok
Sputnik
Voskhod
Vostok

L
K
2
2M




R-29

Shtil'
Volna


Saturn

I
IB
V
INT-21


Scout
SLV
Space Shuttle
Sparta
Start-1
Thor

Able
Ablestar
Agena
Burner
Delta
DSV-2U


Thorad-Agena
Titan

II GLV
IIIA
IIIB
IIIC
IIID
IIIE
34D
23G
CT-3
IV


Tsyklon

2
3
4


Vanguard
VLS-1
Zenit

2
2M










List of orbital launch systems
Comparison of orbital launch systems












v
t
e


Reusable launch systems








Partially reusable







Active



Falcon 9 Full Thrust (first stage)





In development



Adeline engine pack for Ariane 6
Baikal booster for Angara
Falcon Heavy (core stages)
New Glenn (first stage)
Next Generation Launcher (boosters)
RLV-TD
Vulcan (engines)





Retired



Buran
Space Shuttle





Cancelled



Ares I
Ares V
Falcon 1e
Falcon 5
Hopper / Phoenix
Liquid Fly-back Booster
MAKS
Reusable Booster System
Saturn-Shuttle
















Completely reusable







Active



New Shepard
SpaceShipTwo





In development



BFR
Skylon





Retired



SpaceShipOne
X-15





Cancelled



Avatar
Energia II (Uragan)
Goodyear Meteor Junior
HOTOL
ITS
K-1
Lynx
Roton
Sea Dragon
SOAR
SpaceShipThree
VentureStar
X-30 NASP
X-33
MUSTARD














Italics indicates suborbital launch systems
‡ - Reusability currently in development












v
t
e


Spaceflight



General



Astrodynamics
History

Timeline
Space Race
Asian Space Race
Records
Accidents and incidents


Space policy

China
European Union
India
Japan
Russia
Soviet Union
United States


Space law

Outer Space Treaty
Rescue Agreement
Space Liability Convention
Registration Convention
Moon Treaty


Private spaceflight








Applications



Astronomy
Earth observation

Archaeology
Imagery and mapping
Reconnaissance
Weather and environment monitoring


Satellite communications

Internet
Radio
Telephone
Television


Satellite navigation
Commercial use of space
Space launch market competition
Militarisation of space
Space architecture
Space exploration
Space research
Space technology
Space weather





Human spaceflight




General



Astronaut
Life support system

Animals in space
Bioastronautics
Space suit


Extravehicular activity
Weightlessness
Space toilet
Space tourism
Space colonization





Programs



Vostok
Mercury
Voskhod
Gemini
Soyuz
Apollo

Skylab
Apollo–Soyuz


Space Shuttle
Mir

Shuttle–Mir


International Space Station
Shenzhou
Tiangong





Health issues



Effect of spaceflight on the human body

Space adaptation syndrome


Health threat from cosmic rays
Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight
Space and survival
Space medicine
Space nursing








Spacecraft



Launch vehicle
Rocket
Spaceplane
Robotic spacecraft

Satellite
Space probe
Lander
Rover
Self-replicating spacecraft


Spacecraft propulsion

Rocket engine
Electric propulsion
Solar sail
Gravity assist







Destinations



Sub-orbital
Orbital

Geocentric
Geosynchronous


Interplanetary
Interstellar
Intergalactic





Space launch



Direct ascent
Escape velocity
Expendable and reusable launch systems
Launch pad
Non-rocket spacelaunch
Spaceport





Ground segment



Flight controller
Ground station (Pass)
Mission control center





Space agencies



 CoNAE
 AEB
 CSA
 CNSA
 ESA
 CNES
 DLR
 ISRO
 LAPAN
 ISA
 ISA
 ASI
 JAXA
 NADA
 KARI
 SUPARCO
 Roscosmos
 SNSB
 SSAU
 UKSA
 NASA








  Category
  Portal
  WikiProject












v
t
e


Crewed spacecraft



Current



Russia

Soyuz


China

Shenzhou







In development



US

Orion
Crew Dragon
CST-100 Starliner
Dream Chaser


Russia

Federation


India

ISRO Orbital Vehicle


Iran

Iranian manned spaceship project







Former



USSR

Vostok
Voskhod
TKS
Buran


USA

Mercury
Gemini
Apollo
Space Shuttle
















Authority control



LCCN: sh85125956
GND: 4420719-0
SUDOC: 027587002
BNF: cb11959506h (data)
NDL: 01072797











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_Shuttle&oldid=817529042"					Categories: Vehicles introduced in 1981Manned spacecraftPartially reusable space launch vehiclesSpace Shuttle programNASA space launch vehiclesAmerican inventionsHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 errors: external linksPages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLRocketry articles with outdated infoboxesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2013Articles needing additional references from June 2007All articles needing additional referencesGuardian topic ID same as WikidataInterlanguage link template link numberUse mdy dates from October 2012Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles containing video clips