

Spanish–American War


Part of the Philippine Revolution and the Cuban War of Independence



(clockwise from top left)


Signal Corps extending telegraph lines from trenches
USS Iowa
Filipino soldiers wearing Spanish uniforms outside Manila
The defeated side signing the Treaty of Paris
Roosevelt and his Rough Riders at the captured San Juan Hill
Replacing of the Spanish flag at Fort Malate








Date
April 21, 1898[b] – August 13, 1898
(3 months, 3 weeks and 2 days)


Location
Cuba and Puerto Rico (Caribbean Sea)
Philippines and Guam (Asia-Pacific)


Result

American victory

Treaty of Paris of 1898




Territorial
changes
Spain relinquishes sovereignty over Cuba, cedes Puerto Rico, Guam and the Philippine Islands to the United States for $20 million





Belligerents



 United States

 Cuban revolutionaries[a]
 Filipino revolutionaries[a]

 Spain

 Cuba
 Philippines
 Guam
 Puerto Rico




Commanders and leaders


 William McKinley
 Nelson A. Miles
 Theodore Roosevelt
 William R. Shafter
 George Dewey
 William Sampson
 Wesley Merritt
 Joseph Wheeler
 Charles D. Sigsbee
 Máximo Gómez
 Demetrio Castillo Duany
 Emilio Aguinaldo
 Apolinario Mabini
 Antonio Luna
 Maria Christina
 Práxedes Mateo Sagasta
 Patricio Montojo
 Pascual Cervera
 Arsenio Linares
 Manuel Macías
 Ramón Blanco
 Antero Rubín
 Valeriano Weyler
 Basilio Augustín
 Fermín Jáudenes
 José Toral y Velázquez
 Diego de los Ríos


Strength


 72,339 troops (total)[1]
 53,000 rebels[c]
 40,000 rebels[3]
 206,000 troops[d] (Caribbean)
Unknown (Philippines)


Casualties and losses



American:

281 killed and 1,577 wounded (Army)[5]
16 killed and 68 wounded (Navy)[5]
2,061 dead from disease[6][7]
11 prisoners[8]
1 cargo ship sunk[9]
1 cruiser damaged[6]



Spanish:

200 killed and 400 wounded (Army)[5]
500–600 killed and 300–400 wounded (Navy)[5]
15,000 dead from disease[10]
40,000+ prisoners[6][11]
6 small ships sunk[6]
11 cruisers sunk[6]
2 destroyers sunk[6]





The higher naval losses may be attributed to the disastrous naval defeats inflicted on the Spanish at Manila Bay and Santiago de Cuba.[12]










v
t
e


Spanish–American War






Atlantic Ocean Theater


Cuba
Puerto Rico


Pacific Ocean Theater


The Philippines
Guam












v
t
e


Banana Wars






Cuba


First US Occupation (1898–1902)
Second US Occupation (1906–1909)
Negro Rebellion (1912)
Sugar Intervention (1917–1922)


Puerto Rico


Puerto Rican Campaign (1898)


Honduras (1903–1925)


Nicaragua (1912–1933)


Granada
Masaya
Coyotepe Hill
1926–1927 civil war
La Paz Centro
Ocotal
San Fernando
Santa Clara
Telpaneca
Sapotillal
1st Las Cruces
2nd Las Cruces
Quilali
El Bramadero
La Flor
Achuapa
Agua Carta
El Sauce


Mexico (1914)


Veracruz


Haiti (1915–1934)


Fort Dipitie
Fort Rivière
1st Port-au-Prince
2nd Port-au-Prince


Dominican Republic (1916–1924)


Santo Domingo
Guayacanas
San Francisco de Macoris









Part of a series on the



History of Cuba





Governorate of Cuba (1511–1519)





Viceroyalty of New Spain (1535–1821)





Captaincy General of Cuba (1607–1898)




Cuban War of Independence
Spanish–American War
Treaty of Paris




US Military Government (1898–1902)





Republic of Cuba (1902–1959)




Cuban Pacification (1906–1909)
Negro Rebellion (1912)
Sugar Intervention (1917–1922)
Cuban Revolution (1953–1959)




Republic of Cuba (1959–)




Bay of Pigs Invasion
Cuban Missile Crisis
Intervention in Angola
Special Period
Cuban Thaw




Timeline





Topical




Military history




 Cuba portal





v
t
e





The Spanish–American War (Spanish: Guerra hispano-americana or Guerra hispano-estadounidense; Filipino: Digmaang Espanyol-Amerikano) was fought between the United States and Spain in 1898. Hostilities began in the aftermath of the internal explosion of the USS Maine in Havana Harbor in Cuba leading to United States intervention in the Cuban War of Independence. American acquisition of Spain's Pacific possessions led to its involvement in the Philippine Revolution and ultimately in the Philippine–American War.[13]
The main issue was Cuban independence. Revolts had been occurring for some years in Cuba against Spanish rule. The U.S. later backed these revolts upon entering the Spanish–American War. There had been war scares before, as in the Virginius Affair in 1873, but in the late 1890s, U.S. public opinion was agitated by anti-Spanish propaganda led by newspaper publishers such as Joseph Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst which used yellow journalism to call for war.[14][15] The business community across the United States had just recovered from a deep depression and feared that a war would reverse the gains. It lobbied vigorously against going to war.
The United States Navy armoured cruiser Maine had mysteriously sunk in Havana Harbor; political pressures from the Democratic Party pushed the administration of Republican President William McKinley into a war that he had wished to avoid.
President McKinley signed a joint Congressional resolution demanding Spanish withdrawal and authorizing the President to use military force to help Cuba gain independence on April 20, 1898.[16] In response, Spain severed diplomatic relations with the United States on April 21. On the same day, the U.S. Navy began a blockade of Cuba.[17] On April 23, Spain stated that it would declare war if the US forces invaded its territory. On April 25, the U.S. Congress declared that a state of war between the U.S. and Spain had de facto existed since April 21, the day the blockade of Cuba had begun.[18] The United States sent an ultimatum to Spain demanding that it surrender control of Cuba, but due to Spain not replying soon enough, the United States had assumed Spain had ignored the ultimatum and continued to occupy Cuba.[19][not in citation given]
The ten-week war was fought in both the Caribbean and the Pacific. As the American agitators for war well knew,[20] U.S. naval power proved decisive, allowing expeditionary forces to disembark in Cuba against a Spanish garrison already facing nationwide Cuban insurgent attacks and further wasted by yellow fever.[21] American, Cuban, and Philippine forces obtained the surrender of Santiago de Cuba and Manila despite the good performance of some Spanish infantry units and fierce fighting for positions such as San Juan Hill.[22] Madrid sued for peace after two obsolete Spanish squadrons sunk in Santiago de Cuba and Manila Bay and a third, more modern fleet was recalled home to protect the Spanish coasts.[23]
The result was the 1898 Treaty of Paris, negotiated on terms favourable to the U.S. which allowed it temporary control of Cuba and ceded ownership of Puerto Rico, Guam and the Philippine islands. The cession of the Philippines involved payment of $20 million ($588,320,000 today) to Spain by the U.S. to cover infrastructure owned by Spain.[24]
The defeat and loss of the last remnants of the Spanish Empire was a profound shock to Spain's national psyche and provoked a thorough philosophical and artistic revaluation of Spanish society known as the Generation of '98.[23] The United States gained several island possessions spanning the globe and a rancorous new debate over the wisdom of expansionism.[25] It was one of only five US wars (against a total of eleven sovereign states) to have been formally declared by the U.S. Congress.[26]



Contents


1 Historical background

1.1 Spain's attitude towards its colonies
1.2 American interest in the Caribbean


2 Path to war

2.1 Cuban struggle for independence
2.2 Spanish attitude
2.3 U.S. response
2.4 USS Maine dispatch to Havana and loss
2.5 Declaring war
2.6 Alternative historical interpretations


3 Pacific theater

3.1 Philippines
3.2 Guam


4 Caribbean theater

4.1 Cuba

4.1.1 Cuban sentiment
4.1.2 Land campaign
4.1.3 Naval operations
4.1.4 U.S. withdrawal


4.2 Puerto Rico


5 Making peace
6 Aftermath

6.1 Postwar American investment in Puerto Rico


7 In film and television
8 Military decorations

8.1 United States
8.2 Other countries


9 See also
10 Notes

10.1 Footnotes
10.2 Source citations


11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links

13.1 Media
13.2 Reference materials
13.3 Newspapers





Historical background[edit]
Spain's attitude towards its colonies[edit]
The combined problems arising from the Peninsular War (1807–1814), the loss of most of its colonies in the Americas in the early 19th-century Spanish American wars of independence, and three Carlist Wars (1832–1876) marked the low point of Spanish colonialism.[27] Liberal Spanish elites like Antonio Cánovas del Castillo and Emilio Castelar offered new interpretations of the concept of "empire" to dovetail with Spain's emerging nationalism. Cánovas made clear in an address to the University of Madrid in 1882[28][29] his view of the Spanish nation as based on shared cultural and linguistic elements – on both sides of the Atlantic – that tied Spain's territories together.
Cánovas saw Spanish imperialism as markedly different in its methods and purposes of colonization from those of rival empires like the British or French. Spaniards regarded the spreading of civilization and Christianity as Spain's major objective and contribution to the New World.[30] The concept of cultural unity bestowed special significance on Cuba, which had been Spanish for almost four hundred years, and was viewed as an integral part of the Spanish nation. The focus on preserving the empire would have negative consequences for Spain's national pride in the aftermath of the Spanish–American War.
American interest in the Caribbean[edit]
In 1823, American fifth President James Monroe (1758-1831, served 1817-1825) enunciated the Monroe Doctrine, which stated that the United States would not tolerate further efforts by European governments to retake, expand their colonial holdings in the Americas or to interfere with the newly independent states in the hemisphere; at the same time, the doctrine stated that the U.S. would respect the status of the existing European colonies. Before the American Civil War (1861-1865), Southern interests attempted to have the United States purchase Cuba and convert it into a new slave territory. The Ostend Manifesto proposal of 1854 failed, and national attention shifted to the growing sectional conflict and threat of civil war.
After the American Civil War and Cuba's Ten Years' War, U.S. businessmen began monopolizing the devalued sugar markets in Cuba. In 1894, 90% of Cuba's total exports went to the United States, which also provided 40% of Cuba's imports.[31] Cuba's total exports to the U.S. were almost twelve times larger than the export to her mother country, Spain.[32] U.S. business interests indicated that while Spain still held political authority over Cuba, economic authority in Cuba, acting-authority, was shifting to the U.S.A.
The U.S. became interested in a trans-isthmus canal across Central America, either in Nicaragua, or in Panama, where the Panama Canal would later be built (1903-1914), and realized the need for naval protection. Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan was an especially influential theorist; his ideas were much admired by future 26th President Theodore Roosevelt, as the U.S. rapidly built a powerful naval fleet of steel warships in the 1880s and 1890s. Roosevelt served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy in 1897–1898 and was an aggressive supporter of a war with Spain over Cuba.
Meanwhile, the "Cuba Libre" movement, led by Cuban intellectual José Martí, had established offices in Florida[33] and New York to buy and smuggle weapons. It mounted a large propaganda campaign to generate sympathy that would lead to official pressure on Spain. Protestant churches and Democratic farmers were supportive, but business interests called on Washington to ignore them.[34]
Although Cuba attracted American attention, little note was made of the Philippines, Guam, or Puerto Rico.[35] Historians note that there was little popular demand in the United States for an overseas colonial empire, though at this time the longtime colonial empires of the United Kingdom (Great Britain) with its British Empire "on which the sun never set" and France's French Empire maintained theirs with some added growths and additions, now joined by the German Empire, Italian Empire and the Empire of Japan. These new and growing empires were dramatically expanding their overseas holdings during the late 19th century in unclaimed areas among native and indigenous peoples in the less developed continents of Africa, Asia and the Pacific.[36]
Path to war[edit]
Cuban struggle for independence[edit]
Main article: Cuban War of Independence
The first serious bid for Cuban independence, the Ten Years' War, erupted in 1868 and was subdued by the authorities a decade later. Neither the fighting nor the reforms in the Pact of Zanjón (February 1878) quelled the desire of some revolutionaries for wider autonomy and ultimately independence. One such revolutionary, José Martí, continued to promote Cuban financial and political autonomy in exile. In early 1895, after years of organizing, Martí launched a three-pronged invasion of the island.[37]
The plan called for one group from Santo Domingo led by Máximo Gómez, one group from Costa Rica led by Antonio Maceo Grajales, and another from the United States (preemptively thwarted by U.S. officials in Florida) to land in different places on the island and provoke an uprising. While their call for revolution, the grito de Baíre, was successful, the result was not the grand show of force Martí had expected. With a quick victory effectively lost, the revolutionaries settled in to fight a protracted guerrilla campaign.[37]
Antonio Cánovas del Castillo, the architect of Spain's Restoration constitution and the prime minister at the time, ordered General Arsenio Martínez-Campos, a distinguished veteran of the war against the previous uprising in Cuba, to quell the revolt. Campos's reluctance to accept his new assignment and his method of containing the revolt to the province of Oriente earned him criticism in the Spanish press.[38]
The mounting pressure forced Cánovas to replace General Campos with General Valeriano Weyler, a soldier who had experience in quelling rebellions in overseas provinces and the Spanish metropole. Weyler deprived the insurgency of weaponry, supplies, and assistance by ordering the residents of some Cuban districts to move to reconcentration areas near the military headquarters.[38] This strategy was effective in slowing the spread of rebellion. In the United States, this fueled the fire of anti-Spanish propaganda.[39] In a political speech President William McKinley used this to ram Spanish actions against armed rebels. He even said this "was not civilized warfare" but "extermination".[40][41]
Spanish attitude[edit]




A Spanish satirical drawing published in La Campana de Gràcia (1896) criticizing U.S. behavior regarding Cuba by Manuel Moliné. Upper text reads (in old Catalan): "Uncle Sam's craving", and below: "To keep the island so it won't get lost."






An American cartoon published in Judge, Feb. 6, 1897: Columbia (representing the American people) reaches out to the oppressed Cuba (the caption under the chained child reads "Spain's 16th Century methods") while Uncle Sam (representing the US government) sits blindfolded, refusing to see the atrocities or use his guns to intervene (cartoon by Grant E. Hamilton).


The Spanish Government regarded Cuba as a province of Spain rather than a colony, and depended on it for prestige and trade, and as a training ground for the army. Spanish Prime Minister Antonio Cánovas del Castillo announced that "the Spanish nation is disposed to sacrifice to the last peseta of its treasure and to the last drop of blood of the last Spaniard before consenting that anyone snatch from it even one piece of its territory."[42] He had long dominated and stabilized Spanish politics. He was assassinated in 1897 by Italian anarchist Michele Angiolillo,[43] leaving a Spanish political system that was not stable and could not risk a blow to its prestige.[44]
U.S. response[edit]
Further information: Presidency of William McKinley
The eruption of the Cuban revolt, Weyler's measures, and the popular fury these events whipped up proved to be a boon to the newspaper industry in New York City, where Joseph Pulitzer of the New York World and William Randolph Hearst of the New York Journal recognized the potential for great headlines and stories that would sell copies. Both papers denounced Spain, but had little influence outside New York. American opinion generally saw Spain as a hopelessly backward power that was unable to deal fairly with Cuba. American Catholics were divided before the war began, but supported it enthusiastically once it started.[45][46]
The U.S. had important economic interests that were being harmed by the prolonged conflict and deepening uncertainty about the future of Cuba. Shipping firms that had relied heavily on trade with Cuba now suffered losses as the conflict continued unresolved.[47] These firms pressed Congress and McKinley to seek an end to the revolt. Other American business concerns, specifically those who had invested in Cuban sugar, looked to the Spanish to restore order.[48] Stability, not war, was the goal of both interests. How stability would be achieved would depend largely on the ability of Spain and the U.S. to work out their issues diplomatically.
While tension increased among the Cubans and Spanish Government, popular support of intervention began to spring up in the United States, due to the emergence of the "Cuba Libre" movement and the fact that many Americans had drawn parallels between the American Revolution and the Cuban revolt, seeing the Spanish Government as the tyrannical colonial oppressor. Historian Louis Pérez notes that "The proposition of war in behalf of Cuban independence took hold immediately and held on thereafter. Such was the sense of the public mood." At the time many poems and songs were written in the United States to express support of the "Cuba Libre" movement.[49] At the same time, many African Americans, facing growing racial discrimination and increasing retardation of their civil rights, wanted to take part in the war because they saw it as a way to advance the cause of equality, service to country hopefully helping to gain political and public respect amongst the wider population.[50]
President McKinley, well aware of the political complexity surrounding the conflict, wanted to end the revolt peacefully. In accordance with this policy, McKinley began to negotiate with the Spanish government, hoping that the negotiations would be able to end the yellow journalism in the United States, and therefore, end the loudest calls to go to war with Spain. An attempt was made to negotiate a peace before McKinley took office, however, the Spanish refused to take part in the negotiations. In 1897 McKinley appointed Stewart L. Woodford as the new minister to Spain, who again offered to negotiate a peace. In October 1897, the Spanish government still refused the United States offer to negotiate between the Spanish and the Cubans, but promised the U.S. it would give the Cubans more autonomy.[51] However, with the election of a more liberal Spanish government in November, Spain began to change their policies in Cuba. First, the new Spanish government told the United States that it was willing to offer a change in the Reconcentration policies (the main set of policies that was feeding yellow journalism in the United States) if the Cuban rebels agreed to a cessation of hostilities. This time the rebels refused the terms in hopes that continued conflict would lead to U.S. intervention and the creation of an independent Cuba.[51] The liberal Spanish government also recalled the Spanish Governor General Valeriano Weyler from Cuba. This action alarmed many Cubans loyal to Spain.[52]
The Cubans loyal to Weyler began planning large demonstrations to take place when the next Governor General, Ramon Blanco, arrived in Cuba. U.S. consul Fitzhugh Lee learned of these plans and sent a request to the U.S. State Department to send a U.S. warship to Cuba.[52] This request lead to the U.S.S. Maine being sent to Cuba. While the Maine was docked in Havana, an explosion sank the ship. The sinking of the Maine was blamed on the Spanish and made the possibility of a negotiated peace very slim.[53] Throughout the negotiation process, the major European powers, especially Britain, France, and Russia, generally supported the American position and urged Spain to give in.[54] Spain repeatedly promised specific reforms that would pacify Cuba but failed to deliver; American patience ran out.[55]
USS Maine dispatch to Havana and loss[edit]
Main article: USS Maine (ACR-1)




The sunken USS Maine in Havana harbor


McKinley sent the USS Maine to Havana to ensure the safety of American citizens and interests, and to underscore the urgent need for reform. Naval forces were moved in position to attack simultaneously on several fronts if the war was not avoided. As Maine left Florida, a large part of the North Atlantic Squadron was moved to Key West and the Gulf of Mexico. Others were also moved just off the shore of Lisbon, and still others were moved to Hong Kong.[56]
At 9:40 on the evening of February 15, 1898, Maine sank in Havana Harbor after suffering a massive explosion. While McKinley urged patience and did not declare that Spain had caused the explosion, the deaths of 250 out of 355 [57] sailors on board focused American attention. McKinley asked Congress to appropriate $50 million for defense, and Congress unanimously obliged. Most American leaders took the position that the cause of the explosion was unknown, but public attention was now riveted on the situation and Spain could not find a diplomatic solution to avoid war. Spain appealed to the European powers, most of whom advised it to accept U.S. conditions for Cuba in order to avoid war.[58] Germany urged a united European stand against the United States but took no action.[59]
The U.S. Navy's investigation, made public on March 28, concluded that the ship's powder magazines were ignited when an external explosion was set off under the ship's hull. This report poured fuel on popular indignation in the U.S., making the war inevitable.[60] Spain's investigation came to the opposite conclusion: the explosion originated within the ship. Other investigations in later years came to various contradictory conclusions, but had no bearing on the coming of the war. In 1974, Admiral Hyman George Rickover had his staff look at the documents and decided there was an internal explosion. A study commissioned by National Geographic magazine in 1999, using AME computer modelling, stated that the explosion could have been caused by a mine, but no definitive evidence was found.[61]
Declaring war[edit]
Main article: Propaganda of the Spanish–American War




United States Army Colonel Charles A. Wikoff was the most senior U.S. military officer killed in the Spanish–American War.


After the Maine was destroyed, New York City newspaper publishers Hearst and Pulitzer decided that the Spanish were to blame, and they publicized this theory as fact in their papers.[62] They both used sensationalistic and astonishing accounts of "atrocities" committed by the Spanish in Cuba by using headlines in their newspapers, such as "Spanish Murderers" and "Remember The Maine". Their press exaggerated what was happening and how the Spanish were treating the Cuban prisoners.[63] The stories were based on factual accounts, but most of the time, the articles that were published were embellished and written with incendiary language causing emotional and often heated responses among readers. A common myth falsely states that when illustrator Frederic Remington said there was no war brewing in Cuba, Hearst responded: "You furnish the pictures and I'll furnish the war."[64]
This new "yellow journalism" was, however, uncommon outside New York City, and historians no longer consider it the major force shaping the national mood.[65] Public opinion nationwide did demand immediate action, overwhelming the efforts of President McKinley, Speaker of the House Thomas Brackett Reed, and the business community to find a negotiated solution. Wall Street, big business, high finance and Main Street businesses across the country were vocally opposed to war and demanded peace. After years of severe depression, the economic outlook for the domestic economy was suddenly bright again in 1897. However, the uncertainties of warfare posed a serious threat to full economic recovery. "War would impede the march of prosperity and put the country back many years," warned the New Jersey Trade Review. The leading railroad magazine editorialized, "From a commercial and mercenary standpoint it seems peculiarly bitter that this war should come when the country had already suffered so much and so needed rest and peace." McKinley paid close attention to the strong anti-war consensus of the business community, and strengthened his resolve to use diplomacy and negotiation rather than brute force to end the Spanish tyranny in Cuba.[66]
A speech delivered by Republican Senator Redfield Proctor of Vermont on March 17, 1898, thoroughly analyzed the situation and greatly strengthened the pro-war cause. Proctor concluded that war was the only answer.[67]:210 Many in the business and religious communities which had until then opposed war, switched sides, leaving McKinley and Speaker Reed almost alone in their resistance to a war.[68][69][70] On April 11, McKinley ended his resistance and asked Congress for authority to send American troops to Cuba to end the civil war there, knowing that Congress would force a war.




The American transport ship Seneca, a chartered vessel that carried troops to Puerto Rico and Cuba


On April 19, while Congress was considering joint resolutions supporting Cuban independence, Republican Senator Henry M. Teller of Colorado proposed the Teller Amendment to ensure that the U.S. would not establish permanent control over Cuba after the war. The amendment, disclaiming any intention to annex Cuba, passed the Senate 42 to 35; the House concurred the same day, 311 to 6. The amended resolution demanded Spanish withdrawal and authorized the President to use as much military force as he thought necessary to help Cuba gain independence from Spain. President McKinley signed the joint resolution on April 20, 1898, and the ultimatum was sent to Spain.[16] In response, Spain severed diplomatic relations with the United States on April 21. On the same day, the U.S. Navy began a blockade of Cuba.[17] Spain stated, it would declare war if the US forces invaded its territory, on April 23. On April 25, the U.S. Congress declared that a state of war between the U.S. and Spain had de facto existed since April 21, the day the blockade of Cuba had begun.[17]




Spanish Vessels captured up to evening of May 1, 1898


The Navy was ready, but the Army was not well-prepared for the war and made radical changes in plans and quickly purchased supplies. In the spring of 1898, the strength of the Regular U.S. Army was just 25,000 men. The Army wanted 50,000 new men but received over 220,000 through volunteers and the mobilization of state National Guard units,[71] even gaining nearly 100,000 men on the first night after the explosion of the USS Maine.[72]
Alternative historical interpretations[edit]
The Department of State of the United States of America summarizes the aftermath of the war for the Filipino people:[73]

After its defeat in the Spanish-American War of 1898, Spain ceded its longstanding colony of the Philippines to the United States in the Treaty of Paris. On February 4, 1899, just two days before the U.S. Senate ratified the treaty, fighting broke out between American forces and Filipino nationalists led by Emilio Aguinaldo, who sought independence rather than a change in colonial rulers. The ensuing Philippine-American War lasted three years and resulted in the death of over 4,200 American and over 20,000 Filipino combatants. As many as 200,000 Filipino civilians died from violence, famine, and disease.





The last stand of the Spanish Garrison in Cuba by Murat Halstead, 1898


In 1901, novelist Mark Twain wrote about the aftermath of the war for the Philippines:[74]

We have robbed a trusting friend of his land and his liberty; we have invited clean young men to shoulder a discredited musket and do bandit's work under a flag which bandits have been accustomed to fear, not to follow; we have debauched America's honor and blackened her face before the world.

In his War and Empire,[20] Prof. Paul Atwood of the University of Massachusetts (Boston) writes:

The Spanish-American War was fomented on outright lies and trumped up accusations against the intended enemy. ... War fever in the general population never reached a critical temperature until the accidental sinking of the USS Maine was deliberately, and falsely, attributed to Spanish villainy. ... In a cryptic message ... Senator lodge wrote that ‘There may be an explosion any day in Cuba which would settle a great many things. We have got a battleship in the harbor of Havana, and our fleet, which overmatches anything the Spanish have, is masked at the Dry Tortugas.’

In his autobiography,[75] Theodore Roosevelt gave his views of the origins of the war:

Our own direct interests were great, because of the Cuban tobacco and sugar, and especially because of Cuba's relation to the projected Isthmian [Panama] Canal. But even greater were our interests from the standpoint of humanity. ... It was our duty, even more from the standpoint of National honor than from the standpoint of National interest, to stop the devastation and destruction. Because of these considerations I favored war.

Pacific theater[edit]
Philippines[edit]




The Pacific theatre of the Spanish–American War


In the 333 years of Spanish rule, the Philippines developed from a small overseas colony governed from the Viceroyalty of New Spain to a land with modern elements in the cities. The Spanish-speaking middle classes of the 19th century were mostly educated in the liberal ideas coming from Europe. Among these Ilustrados was the Filipino national hero José Rizal, who demanded larger reforms from the Spanish authorities. This movement eventually led to the Philippine Revolution against Spanish colonial rule. The revolution had been in a state of truce since the signing of the Pact of Biak-na-Bato in 1897, with revolutionary leaders having accepted exile outside of the country.
On April 23, 1898, a document appeared in the Manila Gazette newspaper warning of the impeding war and calling for Filipinos to participate on the side of Spain.[e]




The Battle of Manila Bay


The first battle between American and Spanish forces was at Manila Bay where, on May 1, Commodore George Dewey, commanding the U.S. Navy's Asiatic Squadron aboard USS Olympia, in a matter of hours defeated a Spanish squadron under Admiral Patricio Montojo.[f] Dewey managed this with only nine wounded.[82][83] With the German seizure of Tsingtao in 1897, Dewey's squadron had become the only naval force in the Far East without a local base of its own, and was beset with coal and ammunition problems.[84] Despite these problems, the Asiatic Squadron not only destroyed the Spanish fleet but also captured the harbor of Manila.[84]
Following Dewey's victory, Manila Bay was filled with the warships of Britain, Germany, France, and Japan.[84] The German fleet of eight ships, ostensibly in Philippine waters to protect German interests, acted provocatively – cutting in front of American ships, refusing to salute the United States flag (according to customs of naval courtesy), taking soundings of the harbor, and landing supplies for the besieged Spanish.[86]
The Germans, with interests of their own, were eager to take advantage of whatever opportunities the conflict in the islands might afford.[87] There was a fear at the time that the islands would become a German possession.[88] The Americans called the bluff of the Germans, threatening conflict if the aggression continued, and the Germans backed down.[87][89] At the time, the Germans expected the confrontation in the Philippines to end in an American defeat, with the revolutionaries capturing Manila and leaving the Philippines ripe for German picking.[90]
Commodore Dewey transported Emilio Aguinaldo, a Filipino leader who had led rebellion against Spanish rule in the Philippines in 1896, from exile in Hong Kong to the Philippines to rally more Filipinos against the Spanish colonial government.[91] By June 9, Aguinaldo's forces controlled the provinces of Bulacan, Cavite, Laguna, Batangas, Bataan, Zambales, Pampanga, Pangasinan, and Mindoro, and had laid siege to Manila.[92] On June 12, Aguinaldo proclaimed the independence of the Philippines.[93][94]
On August 5, on instructions from Spain, Governor General Basilo Augistin turned over command of the Philippines to his deputy, Fermin Jaudenes.[95] On August 13, with American commanders unaware that a cease-fire had been signed between Spain and the U.S. on the previous day in Washington D.C., American forces captured the city of Manila from the Spanish in the Battle of Manila.[91][96] This battle marked the end of Filipino–American collaboration, as the American action of preventing Filipino forces from entering the captured city of Manila was deeply resented by the Filipinos. This later led to the Philippine–American War,[97] which would prove to be more deadly and costly than the Spanish–American War.
The U.S. had sent a force of some 11,000 ground troops to the Philippines. Armed conflict broke out between U.S. forces and the Filipinos when U.S. troops began to take the place of the Spanish in control of the country after the end of the war, resulting in the Philippine–American War. On August 14, 1899, Spanish Captain-General Jaudenes formally capitulated and U.S. Generally Merritt formally accepted the surrender and declared the establishment of a U.S. military government in occupation.[98] That same day, the Schurman Commission recommended that the U.S. retain control of the Philippines, possibly granting independence in the future.[99]
Guam[edit]
Main article: Capture of Guam
On June 20, a U.S. fleet commanded by Captain Henry Glass, consisting of the protected cruiser USS Charleston and three transports carrying troops to the Philippines, entered Guam's Apra Harbor, Captain Glass having opened sealed orders instructing him to proceed to Guam and capture it. Charleston fired a few cannon rounds at Fort Santa Cruz without receiving return fire. Two local officials, not knowing that war had been declared and believing the firing had been a salute, came out to Charleston to apologize for their inability to return the salute as they were out of gunpowder. Glass informed them that the U.S. and Spain were at war.[100]
The following day, Glass sent Lt. William Braunersruehter to meet the Spanish Governor to arrange the surrender of the island and the Spanish garrison there. Some 54 Spanish infantry were captured and transported to the Philippines as prisoners of war. No U.S. forces were left on Guam, but the only U.S. citizen on the island, Frank Portusach, told Captain Glass that he would look after things until U.S. forces returned.[100]
Caribbean theater[edit]
Cuba[edit]
See also: San Juan Hill order of battle and El Caney order of battle




The Spanish armored cruiser Cristóbal Colón, which was destroyed during the Battle of Santiago on July 3, 1898






Detail from Charge of the 24th and 25th Colored Infantry and Rescue of Rough Riders at San Juan Hill, July 2, 1898 depicting the Battle of San Juan Hill


Theodore Roosevelt advocated intervention in Cuba, both for the Cuban people and to promote the Monroe Doctrine. While Assistant Secretary of the Navy, he placed the Navy on a war-time footing and prepared Dewey's Asiatic Squadron for battle. He also worked with Leonard Wood in convincing the Army to raise an all-volunteer regiment, the 1st U.S. Volunteer Cavalry. Wood was given command of the regiment that quickly became known as the "Rough Riders".[101]
The Americans planned to capture the city of Santiago de Cuba to destroy Linares' army and Cervera's fleet. To reach Santiago they had to pass through concentrated Spanish defenses in the San Juan Hills and a small town in El Caney. The American forces were aided in Cuba by the pro-independence rebels led by General Calixto García.
Cuban sentiment[edit]
For quite some time the Cuban public believed the United States government to possibly hold the key to its independence, and even annexation was considered for a time, which historian Louis Pérez explored in his book Cuba and the United States: Ties of Singular Intimacy. The Cubans harbored a great deal of discontent towards the Spanish Government, due to years of manipulation on the part of the Spanish. The prospect of getting the United States involved in the fight was considered by many Cubans as a step in the right direction. While the Cubans were wary of the United States' intentions, the overwhelming support from the American public provided the Cubans with some peace of mind, because they believed that the United States was committed to helping them achieve their independence. However, with the imposition of the Platt Amendment of 1903 after the war, as well as economic and military manipulation on the part of the United States, Cuban sentiment towards the United States became polarized, with many Cubans disappointed with continuing American interference.[102]
Land campaign[edit]
From June 22 to 24, the Fifth Army Corps under General William R. Shafter landed at Daiquirí and Siboney, east of Santiago, and established an American base of operations. A contingent of Spanish troops, having fought a skirmish with the Americans near Siboney on June 23, had retired to their lightly entrenched positions at Las Guasimas. An advance guard of U.S. forces under former Confederate General Joseph Wheeler ignored Cuban scouting parties and orders to proceed with caution. They caught up with and engaged the Spanish rearguard of about 2,000 soldiers led by General Antero Rubín[103] who effectively ambushed them, in the Battle of Las Guasimas on June 24. The battle ended indecisively in favor of Spain and the Spanish left Las Guasimas on their planned retreat to Santiago.
The U.S. Army employed Civil War-era skirmishers at the head of the advancing columns. Three of four of the U.S. soldiers who had volunteered to act as skirmishers walking point at the head of the American column were killed, including Hamilton Fish II (grandson of Hamilton Fish, the Secretary of State under Ulysses S. Grant), and Captain Allyn K. Capron, Jr., whom Theodore Roosevelt would describe as one of the finest natural leaders and soldiers he ever met. Only Oklahoma Territory Pawnee Indian, Tom Isbell, wounded seven times, survived.[104]
The Battle of Las Guasimas showed the U.S. that quick-thinking American soldiers would not stick to the linear tactics which did not work effectively against Spanish troops who had learned the art of cover and concealment from their own struggle with Cuban insurgents, and never made the error of revealing their positions while on the defense. Americans advanced by rushes and stayed in the weeds so that they, too, were largely invisible to the Spaniards who used un-targeted volley fire to try to mass fires against the advancing Americans. While some troops were hit, this technique was mostly a waste of bullets as the Americans learned to duck as soon as they heard the Spanish word Fire, "Fuego" yelled by the Spanish officers. Spanish troops were equipped with smokeless powder arms that also helped them to hide their positions while firing.




Receiving the news of the surrender of Santiago


Regular Spanish troops were mostly armed with modern charger-loaded 1893 7mm Spanish Mauser rifles and using smokeless powder. The high-speed 7×57mm Mauser round was termed the "Spanish Hornet" by the Americans because of the supersonic crack as it passed overhead. Other irregular troops were armed with Remington Rolling Block rifles in .43 Spanish using smokeless powder and brass-jacketed bullets. US regular infantry were armed with the .30–40 Krag–Jørgensen, a bolt-action rifle with a complex rotating magazine. Both the US regular cavalry and the volunteer cavalry used smokeless ammunition. In later battles, state volunteers used the .45–70 Springfield a single-shot black powder rifle.[104]
On July 1, a combined force of about 15,000 American troops in regular infantry and cavalry regiments, including all four of the army's "Colored" regiments, and volunteer regiments, among them Roosevelt and his "Rough Riders", the 71st New York, the 2nd Massachusetts Infantry, and 1st North Carolina, and rebel Cuban forces attacked 1,270 entrenched Spaniards in dangerous Civil War-style frontal assaults at the Battle of El Caney and Battle of San Juan Hill outside of Santiago.[105] More than 200 U.S. soldiers were killed and close to 1,200 wounded in the fighting, thanks to the high rate of fire the Spanish put down range at the Americans.[106] Supporting fire by Gatling guns was critical to the success of the assault.[107][108] Cervera decided to escape Santiago two days later. First Lieutenant John J. Pershing, nicknamed "Black Jack", oversaw the 10th Cavalry Unit during the war. Pershing and his unit fought in the Battle of San Juan Hill. Pershing was cited for his gallantry during the battle.
The Spanish forces at Guantánamo were so isolated by Marines and Cuban forces that they did not know that Santiago was under siege, and their forces in the northern part of the province could not break through Cuban lines. This was not true of the Escario relief column from Manzanillo,[109] which fought its way past determined Cuban resistance but arrived too late to participate in the siege.
After the battles of San Juan Hill and El Caney, the American advance halted. Spanish troops successfully defended Fort Canosa, allowing them to stabilize their line and bar the entry to Santiago. The Americans and Cubans forcibly began a bloody, strangling siege of the city.[110] During the nights, Cuban troops dug successive series of "trenches" (raised parapets), toward the Spanish positions. Once completed, these parapets were occupied by U.S. soldiers and a new set of excavations went forward. American troops, while suffering daily losses from Spanish fire, suffered far more casualties from heat exhaustion and mosquito-borne disease.[111] At the western approaches to the city, Cuban general Calixto Garcia began to encroach on the city, causing much panic and fear of reprisals among the Spanish forces.
Naval operations[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The Santiago Campaign (1898)






Crewmen pose under the gun turrets of Iowa in 1898


The major port of Santiago de Cuba was the main target of naval operations during the war. The U.S. fleet attacking Santiago needed shelter from the summer hurricane season; Guantánamo Bay, with its excellent harbor, was chosen. The 1898 invasion of Guantánamo Bay happened between June 6 and 10, with the first U.S. naval attack and subsequent successful landing of U.S. Marines with naval support.
On April 23, a council of senior admirals of the Spanish Navy had decided to order Admiral Pascual Cervera y Topete's squadron of four armored cruisers and three torpedo boat destroyers to proceed from their present location in Cape Verde (having left from Cadiz, Spain) to the West Indies.[112]
The Battle of Santiago de Cuba on July 3, was the largest naval engagement of the Spanish–American War and resulted in the destruction of the Spanish Caribbean Squadron (also known as the Flota de Ultramar). In May, the fleet of Spanish Admiral Pascual Cervera y Topete had been spotted by American forces in Santiago harbor, where they had taken shelter for protection from sea attack. A two-month stand-off between Spanish and American naval forces followed.
When the Spanish squadron finally attempted to leave the harbor on July 3, the American forces destroyed or grounded five of the six ships. Only one Spanish vessel, the new armored cruiser Cristóbal Colón, survived, but her captain hauled down her flag and scuttled her when the Americans finally caught up with her. The 1,612 Spanish sailors who were captured, including Admiral Cervera, were sent to Seavey's Island at the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery, Maine, where they were confined at Camp Long as prisoners of war from July 11 until mid-September.
During the stand-off, U.S. Assistant Naval Constructor, Lieutenant Richmond Pearson Hobson had been ordered by Rear Admiral William T. Sampson to sink the collier USS Merrimac in the harbor to bottle up the Spanish fleet. The mission was a failure, and Hobson and his crew were captured. They were exchanged on July 6, and Hobson became a national hero; he received the Medal of Honor in 1933, retired as a Rear Admiral and became a Congressman.
U.S. withdrawal[edit]
Yellow fever had quickly spread amongst the American occupation force, crippling it. A group of concerned officers of the American army chose Theodore Roosevelt to draft a request to Washington that it withdraw the Army, a request that paralleled a similar one from General Shafter, who described his force as an "army of convalescents". By the time of his letter, 75% of the force in Cuba was unfit for service.[113]
On August 7, the American invasion force started to leave Cuba. The evacuation was not total. The U.S. Army kept the black Ninth US Cavalry Regiment in Cuba to support the occupation. The logic was that their race and the fact that many black volunteers came from southern states would protect them from disease; this logic led to these soldiers being nicknamed "Immunes". Still, when the Ninth left, 73 of its 984 soldiers had contracted the disease.[113]
Puerto Rico[edit]
Main article: Puerto Rican Campaign




Spanish troops before they departed to engage the American forces at Hormigueros, Porto Rico


In May 1898, Lt. Henry H. Whitney of the United States Fourth Artillery was sent to Puerto Rico on a reconnaissance mission, sponsored by the Army's Bureau of Military Intelligence. He provided maps and information on the Spanish military forces to the U.S. government before the invasion.
The American offensive began on May 12, 1898, when a squadron of 12 U.S. ships commanded by Rear Adm. William T. Sampson of the United States Navy attacked the archipelago's capital, San Juan. Though the damage inflicted on the city was minimal, the Americans established a blockade in the city's harbor, San Juan Bay. On June 22, the cruiser Isabel II and the destroyer Terror delivered a Spanish counterattack, but were unable to break the blockade and the Terror was damaged.
The land offensive began on July 25, when 1,300 infantry soldiers led by Nelson A. Miles disembarked off the coast of Guánica. The first organized armed opposition occurred in Yauco in what became known as the Battle of Yauco.[114]
This encounter was followed by the Battle of Fajardo. The United States seized control of Fajardo on August 1, but were forced to withdraw on August 5 after a group of 200 Puerto Rican-Spanish soldiers led by Pedro del Pino gained control of the city, while most civilian inhabitants fled to a nearby lighthouse. The Americans encountered larger opposition during the Battle of Guayama and as they advanced towards the main island's interior. They engaged in crossfire at Guamaní River Bridge, Coamo and Silva Heights and finally at the Battle of Asomante.[114][115] The battles were inconclusive as the allied soldiers retreated.
A battle in San Germán concluded in a similar fashion with the Spanish retreating to Lares. On August 9, 1898, American troops that were pursuing units retreating from Coamo encountered heavy resistance in Aibonito in a mountain known as Cerro Gervasio del Asomante and retreated after six of their soldiers were injured. They returned three days later, reinforced with artillery units and attempted a surprise attack. In the subsequent crossfire, confused soldiers reported seeing Spanish reinforcements nearby and five American officers were gravely injured, which prompted a retreat order. All military actions in Puerto Rico were suspended on August 13, after U.S. President William McKinley and French Ambassador Jules Cambon, acting on behalf of the Spanish Government, signed an armistice whereby Spain relinquished its sovereignty over Puerto Rico.[115]
Making peace[edit]




Jules Cambon, the French Ambassador in the U.S., signing the memorandum of ratification on behalf of Spain


With defeats in Cuba and the Philippines, and both of its fleets destroyed, Spain sued for peace and negotiations were opened between the two parties. After the sickness and death of British consul Edward Henry Rawson-Walker, American admiral George Dewey requested the Belgian consul to Manila, Édouard André, to take Rawson-Walker's place as intermediary with the Spanish Government.[116][117][118]
Hostilities were halted on August 12, 1898, with the signing in Washington of a Protocol of Peace between the United States and Spain.[119] After over two months of difficult negotiations, the formal peace treaty, the Treaty of Paris, was signed in Paris on December 10, 1898,[120] and was ratified by the United States Senate on February 6, 1899.
The United States gained all of Spain's colonies outside of Africa in the treaty, including the Philippines, Guam and Puerto Rico with the exception of Cuba, which became a U.S. protectorate.[120] The treaty came into force in Cuba April 11, 1899, with Cubans participating only as observers. Having been occupied since July 17, 1898, and thus under the jurisdiction of the United States Military Government (USMG), Cuba formed its own civil government and gained independence on May 20, 1902, with the announced end of USMG jurisdiction over the island. However, the U.S. imposed various restrictions on the new government, including prohibiting alliances with other countries, and reserved the right to intervene. The U.S. also established a perpetual lease of Guantánamo Bay.
Aftermath[edit]




With the end of the war, Colonel Theodore Roosevelt musters out of the U.S. Army after the required 30-day quarantine period at Montauk, Long Island, in 1898.


The war lasted ten weeks.[121] John Hay (the United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom), writing from London to his friend Theodore Roosevelt, declared that it had been "a splendid little war".[122][123] The press showed Northerners and Southerners, blacks and whites fighting against a common foe, helping to ease the scars left from the American Civil War.[124] Exemplary of this was the fact that four former Confederate States Army generals had served in the war, now in the US Army and all of them again carrying similar ranks. These officers included Matthew Butler, Fitzhugh Lee, Thomas L. Rosser and Joseph Wheeler, though only the latter had seen action. Still, in an exciting moment during the Battle of Las Guasimas, Wheeler apparently forgot for a moment which war he was fighting, having supposedly called out "Let's go, boys! We've got the damn Yankees on the run again!" [125]
The war marked American entry into world affairs. Since then, the U.S. has had a significant hand in various conflicts around the world, and entered many treaties and agreements. The Panic of 1893 was over by this point, and the U.S. entered a long and prosperous period of economic and population growth, and technological innovation that lasted through the 1920s.[126]
The war redefined national identity, served as a solution of sorts to the social divisions plaguing the American mind, and provided a model for all future news reporting.[127]
The idea of American imperialism changed in the public's mind after the short and successful Spanish–American War. Due to the United States' powerful influence diplomatically and militarily, Cuba's status after the war relied heavily upon American actions. Two major developments emerged from the Spanish–American War: one, it greatly enforced the United States' vision of itself as a "defender of democracy" and as a major world power, and two, it had severe implications for Cuban–American relations in the future. As historian Louis Pérez argued in his book Cuba in the American Imagination: Metaphor and the Imperial Ethos, the Spanish–American War of 1898 "fixed permanently how Americans came to think of themselves: a righteous people given to the service of righteous purpose".[128]
The war greatly reduced the Spanish Empire. Spain had been declining as an imperial power since the early 19th century as a result of Napoleon's invasion. The loss of Cuba caused a national trauma because of the affinity of peninsular Spaniards with Cuba, which was seen as another province of Spain rather than as a colony. Spain retained only a handful of overseas holdings: Spanish West Africa (Spanish Sahara), Spanish Guinea, Spanish Morocco, and the Canary Islands.
The Spanish soldier Julio Cervera Baviera, who served in the Puerto Rican Campaign, published a pamphlet in which he blamed the natives of that colony for its occupation by the Americans, saying, "I have never seen such a servile, ungrateful country [i.e., Puerto Rico].... In twenty-four hours, the people of Puerto Rico went from being fervently Spanish to enthusiastically American.... They humiliated themselves, giving in to the invader as the slave bows to the powerful lord."[129] He was challenged to a duel by a group of young Puerto Ricans for writing this pamphlet.[130]




A cartoon of Uncle Sam seated in restaurant looking at the bill of fare containing "Cuba steak", "Porto Rico pig", the "Philippine Islands" and the "Sandwich Islands" (Hawaii).


Culturally, a new wave called the Generation of '98 originated as a response to this trauma, marking a renaissance in Spanish culture. Economically, the war benefited Spain, because after the war large sums of capital held by Spaniards in Cuba and the United States were returned to the peninsula and invested in Spain. This massive flow of capital (equivalent to 25% of the gross domestic product of one year) helped to develop the large modern firms in Spain in the steel, chemical, financial, mechanical, textile, shipyard, and electrical power industries.[131] However, the political consequences were serious. The defeat in the war began the weakening of the fragile political stability that had been established earlier by the rule of Alfonso XII.
The Teller Amendment, which was enacted on April 20, 1898, was a promise from the United States to the Cuban people that it was not declaring war to annex Cuba, but to help it gain its independence from Spain. The Platt Amendment was a move by the United States' government to shape Cuban affairs without violating the Teller Amendment.[132]




The cover of Puck from April 6, 1901. Caricatures an Easter bonnet made out of a warship that alludes to the gains of the Spanish–American War.


The U.S. Congress had passed the Teller Amendment before the war, promising Cuban independence. However, the Senate passed the Platt Amendment as a rider to an Army appropriations bill, forcing a peace treaty on Cuba which prohibited it from signing treaties with other nations or contracting a public debt. The Platt Amendment was pushed by imperialists who wanted to project U.S. power abroad (in contrast to the Teller Amendment which was pushed by anti-imperialists who called for a restraint on U.S. rule). The amendment granted the United States the right to stabilize Cuba militarily as needed. In addition, the Platt Amendment permitted the United States to deploy Marines to Cuba if its freedom and independence was ever threatened or jeopardized by an external or internal force. The Platt Amendment also provided for a permanent American naval base in Cuba. Guantánamo Bay was established after the signing of the Cuban–American Treaty of Relations in 1903. Thus, despite that Cuba technically gained its independence after the war ended, the United States government ensured that it had some form of power and control over Cuban affairs.
The U.S. annexed the former Spanish colonies of Puerto Rico, the Philippines and Guam. The notion of the United States as an imperial power, with colonies, was hotly debated domestically with President McKinley and the Pro-Imperialists winning their way over vocal opposition led by Democrat William Jennings Bryan, who had supported the war. The American public largely supported the possession of colonies, but there were many outspoken critics such as Mark Twain, who wrote The War Prayer in protest.
Roosevelt returned to the United States a war hero, and he was soon elected governor of New York and then became the vice president. At the age of 42 he became the youngest man to become President after the assassination of President William McKinley.




1900 Campaign poster


The war served to further repair relations between the American North and South. The war gave both sides a common enemy for the first time since the end of the Civil War in 1865, and many friendships were formed between soldiers of northern and southern states during their tours of duty. This was an important development, since many soldiers in this war were the children of Civil War veterans on both sides.[133]




Segregation in the U.S. military, 1898


The African-American community strongly supported the rebels in Cuba, supported entry into the war, and gained prestige from their wartime performance in the Army. Spokesmen noted that 33 African-American seamen had died in the Maine explosion. The most influential Black leader, Booker T. Washington, argued that his race was ready to fight. War offered them a chance "to render service to our country that no other race can", because, unlike Whites, they were "accustomed" to the "peculiar and dangerous climate" of Cuba. One of the Black units that served in the war was the 9th Cavalry Regiment. In March 1898, Washington promised the Secretary of the Navy that war would be answered by "at least ten thousand loyal, brave, strong black men in the south who crave an opportunity to show their loyalty to our land, and would gladly take this method of showing their gratitude for the lives laid down, and the sacrifices made, that Blacks might have their freedom and rights."[134]
In 1904, the United Spanish War Veterans was created from smaller groups of the veterans of the Spanish American War. Today, that organization is defunct, but it left an heir in the Sons of Spanish–American War Veterans, created in 1937 at the 39th National Encampment of the United Spanish War Veterans. According to data from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, the last surviving U.S. veteran of the conflict, Nathan E. Cook, died on September 10, 1992, at age 106. (If the data is to be believed, Cook, born October 10, 1885, would have been only 12 years old when he served in the war.)
The Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States (VFW) was formed in 1914 from the merger of two veterans organizations which both arose in 1899: the American Veterans of Foreign Service and the National Society of the Army of the Philippines.[135] The former was formed for veterans of the Spanish–American War, while the latter was formed for veterans of the Philippine–American War. Both organizations were formed in response to the general neglect veterans returning from the war experienced at the hands of the government.
To pay the costs of the war, Congress passed an excise tax on long-distance phone service.[136] At the time, it affected only wealthy Americans who owned telephones. However, the Congress neglected to repeal the tax after the war ended four months later, and the tax remained in place for over 100 years until, on August 1, 2006, it was announced that the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the IRS would no longer collect the tax.[137]
Postwar American investment in Puerto Rico[edit]
The change in sovereignty of Puerto Rico, like the occupation of Cuba, brought about major changes in both the insular and U.S. economies. Before 1898 the sugar industry in Puerto Rico was in decline for nearly half a century. In the second half of the nineteenth century, technological advances increased the capital requirements to remain competitive in the sugar industry. Agriculture began to shift toward coffee production, which required less capital and land accumulation. However, these trends were reversed with U.S. hegemony. Early U.S. monetary and legal policies made it both harder for local farmers to continue operations and easier for American businesses to accumulate land.[138] This, along with the large capital reserves of American businesses, led to a resurgence in the Puerto Rican sugar industry in the form of large American owned agro-industrial complexes.
At the same time, the inclusion of Puerto Rico into the U.S. tariff system as a customs area, effectively treating Puerto Rico as a state with respect to internal or external trade, increased the codependence of the insular and mainland economies and benefitted sugar exports with tariff protection. In 1897 the United States purchased 19.6 percent of Puerto Rico's exports while supplying 18.5 percent of its imports. By 1905 these figures jumped to 84 percent and 85 percent, respectively.[139] However, coffee was not protected, as it was not a product of the mainland. At the same time, Cuba and Spain, traditionally the largest importers of Puerto Rican coffee, now subjected Puerto Rico to previously nonexistent import tariffs. These two effects led to a decline in the coffee industry. From 1897 to 1901 coffee went from 65.8 percent of exports to 19.6 percent while sugar went from 21.6 percent to 55 percent.[140] The tariff system also provided a protected market place for Puerto Rican tobacco exports. The tobacco industry went from nearly nonexistent in Puerto Rico to a major part of the country's agricultural sector.
In film and television[edit]
The Spanish–American War was the first U.S. war in which the motion picture camera played a role.[141] The Library of Congress archives contain many films and film clips from the war.[142] In addition, a few feature films have been made about the war. These include

The Rough Riders, a 1927 silent film
A Message to Garcia, 1936
Rough Riders, a 1997 television miniseries directed by John Milius, and featuring Tom Berenger (Theodore Roosevelt), Gary Busey (Joseph Wheeler), Sam Elliott (Buckey O'Neill), Dale Dye (Leonard Wood), Brian Keith (William McKinley), George Hamilton (William Randolph Hearst), and R. Lee Ermey (John Hay)
The Spanish–American War: First Intervention, a 2007 docudrama from The History Channel
Baler, a 2008 film about the Siege of Baler
Los últimos de Filipinas ("The Last Ones of the Philippines"), a 1945 Spanish biographical film directed by Antonio Román
Amigo, 2010
1898, Our Last Men in the Philippines, a well-acclaimed 2016 film about the Siege of Baler

Military decorations[edit]




U.S. Army "War with Spain" campaign streamer


United States[edit]
The United States awards and decorations of the Spanish–American War were as follows:

Wartime service and honors


Medal of Honor
Specially Meritorious Service Medal
Spanish Campaign Medal – upgradeable to include the Silver Citation Star to recognize those U.S. Army members who had performed individual acts of heroism.
West Indies Campaign Medal
Sampson Medal, West Indies service under Admiral William T. Sampson
Dewey Medal, service during the Battle of Manila Bay under Admiral George Dewey
Spanish War Service Medal, U.S. Army homeland service


Postwar occupation service


Army of Puerto Rican Occupation Medal
Army of Cuban Occupation Medal

Other countries[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (September 2017)



The governments of Spain and Cuba also issued a wide variety of military awards to honor Spanish, Cuban, and Philippine soldiers who had served in the conflict.
See also[edit]


Spain portal
United States portal
War portal



Battles of the Spanish–American War
Bolton Hall (activist), opposed the war
Commonwealth of the Philippines
Ostend Manifesto
Panama Canal Zone
Spain–United States relations
Timeline of the Spanish–American War
Imperial German plans for the invasion of the United States
List of weapons of the Spanish–American War
1st Separate Brigade (Philippine Expedition)

Notes[edit]
Footnotes[edit]



^ a b Unrecognized as participants by the primary belligerents.
^ The U.S. declared war on Spain on April 25, 1898, but dated the beginning of the war retroactively to April 21
^ Number is the total for all Cuban rebels active from 1895 to 1898.[2]
^ 196,000 in Cuba and 10,000 in Puerto Rico.[4]
^

Text of the document which appeared in the Manila Gazette on April 23, 1898 

Further Notes:

1. This is the English language text of the document as published by the supporting source cited, possibly as translated from the original Spanish or Tagalog. In 1898, Spanish, Tagalog, and English were official languages in the Spanish colonial Philippines.[76]
2. In the Spanish colonial Philippiines, the term Filipino was reserved for full-blooded Spaniards born in the Philippines (insulares). Full-blooded Spaniards born in the Spanish peninsula wer termed peninsulares. The Filipinos that we know today were then termed indios.[77][78]

The text of the document as published in the cited source was as follows:

OFFICE OF THE GOVERNMENT AND OF THE CAPTAIN-GENERAL OF THE PHILIPPINES

Fellow Spaniards,
Hostilities between Spain and the United States have broken out.
The moment has come for us to show the world that we are more than courageous to triumph over those, who, feigning to be loyal friends, took advantage of our misfortunes and capatalized on our nobility by making use of the means civilized nations consider as condemmable and contemptable.
The Americans, gratified with their social progress, have drained off our patience and have instigated the war through wicked tactics, treacherous acts, and violations of human rights and internal agreements.
Fighting will be short and decisive. God of victories will render this victory glorious and complete as demanded by reason and justice to our cause.
Spain, counting on the sympathies of all nations, will come out in triumph from this new test, by shattering and silencing the adventurers of those countries which, without cohesiveneas and post, offer to humanity shameful traditions and the ungrateful spectacle of some embassies within which jointly dwell intrigues and defamation, cowardice and cynicism.
A US squadron, manned by strangers, by ignorant undisciplined men, is coming into the Archipelago for the purpose of grabbing from us what we consider to be our life, honor freedom. It tries to inspire (motivate) American sailors by saying that we are weak, they are encouraged to keep on with an undertaking that can be accomplished; namely of substituting the Catholic religion with Protestantism, they consider you as a people who impedes growth; they will sieze your wealth as if you do not know your rights to property; they will snatch away from you those they consider as useful to man their ships, to be exploited as workers in their fields and factories.
Useless plans! Rediculous boastings!
Your indominitable courage suffices to hold off those who dare to bring it to reality. We know you will not allow them to mock the faith you are professing, their feet to step on the temple of the true God, incredulity to demolish the sacred images you honor; you will not allow the invaders to desecrate the tombs of your forefathers; to satisfy their immodest passions at the expense of your wives and daughters' honor; you will not allow them to seize all the properties you have put up through honest work in order to assure your future; you will not allow them to commit any of those crimes inspired by their wickedness and greed, because your bravery and patriotism suffice in scaring them away and knocking down the people who, calling themselves civilized and cultured, resort to the extermination of the natives of North America instead of trying to attract them to live a civilized life and of progress.
Filipinos! Prepare yourself for the battle and united together under the glorious Spanish flag, always covered with laurels, let us fight, convinced that victory will crown our efforts and let us reply the intimations of our enemies with a decision befitting a Christian and patriot, with a cry of "Long live Spain!"
Manila, April 23, 1898
Your general
BASILO AUGISTIN[79]


^ The American squadron consisted of nine ships: Olympia (flagship), Boston Baltimore, Raleigh, Concord, Petrel. McCulloch, Zapphire, and Nashan. The Spanish squadron consisted of seven ships: the Reina Cristina (flagship), Castilla, Don Juan de Austria, Don Antonio de Ulloa, Isla de Luzon, Isla de Cuba, and Marques del Duero. The Spanish ships were of inferior quality to the American ships; the Castilla was unpowered and had to be towed into position by the transport ship Manila.[80][81]



Source citations[edit]


^ Clodfelter 2017, p. 256.
^ Clodfelter 2017, p. 308.
^ Karnow 1990, p. 115
^ Clodfelter 2017, pp. 254-255.
^ a b c d Keenan 2001, p. 70.
^ a b c d e f Clodfelter 2017, p. 255.
^ "America's Wars: Factsheet." U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs. Office of Public Affairs. Washington DC. Published April 2017.
^ Marsh, Alan. "POWs in American History: A Synoposis." National Park Service. 1998.
^ See: USS Merrimac (1894).
^ Tucker 2009, p. 105.
^ Clodfelter describes the Americans capturing 30,000 prisoners (plus 100 cannons, 19 machine guns, 25,114 rifles, and various other equipment) in the Oriente province and around Santiago. He also states that the 10,000-strong Puerto Rican garrison capitulated to the Americans after only minor fighting.
^ Keenan, Jerry (2001). Encyclopedia of the Spanish-American & Philippine-American Wars. ABC-CLIO. p. 70. ISBN 978-1-57607-093-2. 
^ Some recent historians prefer a broader title to encompass the fighting in Cuba and the Philippine Islands.



examples:

Louis A. Pérez (1998), The war of 1898: the United States and Cuba in history and historiography, UNC Press Books, ISBN 978-0-8078-4742-8 
Benjamin R. Beede (1994), The War of 1898, and U.S. interventions, 1898–1934: an encyclopedia, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-8240-5624-7 
Thomas David Schoonover; Walter LaFeber (2005), Uncle Sam's War of 1898 and the Origins of Globalization, University Press of Kentucky, ISBN 978-0-8131-9122-5 
Virginia Marie Bouvier (2001), Whose America?: the war of 1898 and the battles to define the nation, Praeger, ISBN 978-0-275-96794-9 






^ Mark Barnes (2010). The Spanish–American War and Philippine Insurrection, 1898–1902. Routledge. p. 67. 
^ W. Joseph Campbell, Yellow journalism: Puncturing the myths, defining the legacies (2001).
^ a b Resolution 24, 33 Stat. 738
^ a b c Trask 1996, p. 57
^ Beede 1994, p. 148.
^ Beede 1994, p. 120.
^ a b Atwood, Paul (2010). War and Empire. New York: Pluto Press. pp. 98–102. ISBN 978 0 7453 2764 8. 
^ Pérez 1998, p. 89 states: "In the larger view, the Cuban insurrection had already brought the Spanish army to the brink of defeat. During three years of relentless war, the Cubans had destroyed railroad lines, bridges, and roads and paralyzed telegraph communications, making it all but impossible for the Spanish army to move across the island and between provinces. [The] Cubans had, moreover, inflicted countless thousands of casualties on Spanish soldiers and effectively driven Spanish units into beleaguered defensive concentrations in the cities, there to suffer the further debilitating effects of illness and hunger."
^ "Military Book Reviews". StrategyPage.com. Retrieved March 22, 2014. 
^ a b Dyal, Carpenter & Thomas 1996, pp. 108–109.
^ Benjamin R. Beede (2013). The War of 1898 and U.S. Interventions, 1898T1934: An Encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. p. 289. 
^ George C. Herring, From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign relations since 1777 (2008) ch. 8
^ "U.S. Senate: Official Declarations of War by Congress". senate.gov. June 29, 2015. 
^ Poddar, Prem (2008). Historical Companion to Postcolonial Literatures - Continental Europe and its Empires. Edinburgh University Press. p. 601. ISBN 978-0-7486-3027-1. 
^ Baycroft & Hewitson 2006, pp. 225–226
^ Antonio Cánovas del Castillo (November 1882). "Discurso sobre la nación" (in Spanish). cervantesvirtual.com. Baycroft & Hewitson 2006, pp. 225–226
^ Schmidt-Nowara, Christopher (2008). The Conquest of History: Spanish Colonialism and National Histories in the Nineteenth Century. Pitt Latin American series. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. pp. 34–42. ISBN 9780822971092. Retrieved February 12, 2014. 
^ Perez, Jose, Jr, Cuba: Between Reform and Revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. p149
^ Perez, Jose, Jr, Cuba: Between Reform and Revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. p138
^ Gary R. Mormino, "Cuba Libre, Florida, and the Spanish American War," Theodore Roosevelt Association Journal (2010) Vol. 31 Issue 1/2, pp. 43–54
^ G. Wayne King, "Conservative Attitudes in the United States toward Cuba (1895–1898)," Proceedings of the South Carolina Historical Association, (1973) pp. 94–104
^ George C. Herring, From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776 (2008)
^ Edward P. Crapol, "Coming to Terms with Empire: The Historiography of Late-Nineteenth-Century. American Foreign Relations," Diplomatic History 16 (Fall 1992): 573–97; Hugh DeSantis, "The Imperialist Impulse and American Innocence, 1865–1900," in Gerald K. Haines and J. Samuel Walker, eds., American Foreign Relations: A Historiographical Review (1981), pp. 65–90; James A. Field, Jr., "American Imperialism: The Worst Chapter in Almost Any Book," American Historical Review 83 (June 1978): 644–68
^ a b Trask 1996, pp. 2–3
^ a b Jonathan Krohn, "Review of Tone, John Lawrence, War and Genocide in Cuba 1895–1898. "H-War, H-Net Reviews." May 2008. online
^ Trask 1996, pp. 8–10; Carr 1982, pp. 379–388.
^ "William McKinley : First Annual Message". The American Presidency Project. December 6, 1897. 
^ James Ford Rhodes (2007), The McKinley and Roosevelt Administrations 1897–1909, READ BOOKS, pp. 44, ISBN 978-1-4067-3464-5 , citing an annual message delivered December 6, 1897, from French Ensor Chadwick (1968), The relations of the United States and Spain: diplomacy, Russell & Russell 
^ Quoted in Trask 1996, p. 6
^ Angiolillo Died Bravely, August 22, 1897, The New York Times.
^ Octavio Ruiz, "Spain on the Threshold of a New Century: Society and Politics before and after the Disaster of 1898," Mediterranean Historical Review (June 1998), Vol. 13 Issue 1/2, pp 7–27
^ Scott Wright, "The Northwestern Chronicle and the Spanish–American War: American Catholic Attitudes Regarding the 'Splendid Little War,'" American Catholic Studies 116#4 (2005): 55–68.
^ However, three Catholic newspapers were critical of the war after it began. Benjamin Wetzel, "A Church Divided: Roman Catholicism, Americanization, and the Spanish–American War." Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era 14#3 (2015): 348–366.
^ Trade with Cuba had dropped by more than two thirds from a high of US$100 million. Offner 2004, p. 51.
^ David M. Pletcher, The Diplomacy of Trade and Investment: American Economic Expansion in the Hemisphere, 1865–1900 (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1998).
^ Louis A. Pérez Jr. (2000). The War of 1898: The United States and Cuba in History and Historiography. p. 24. 
^ Russell, Timothy Dale (2013). African Americans and the Spanish-American War and Philliipine Insurrection. Military Participation, Recognition and Memory 1898-1904 (First. Published dissertation ed.). California, U.S.A: University of California, Riverside. p. 8. Retrieved 3 September 2017. 
^ a b Faulkner, Harold (1963). Politics, reform, and expansion, 1890–1900. New York: Harper. p. 231. 
^ a b Tone, John (2006). War and Genocide in Cuba, 1895–1898. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 239. 
^ Pérez, Louis (1998). The war of 1898. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 58. 
^ Offner 1992, pp. 54–69
^ Offner 1992, pp. 86–110
^ Offner 2004, p. 56.
^ Thomas, Evan (2010). The War Lovers: Roosevelt, Lodge, Hearst, and the Rush to Empire, 1898. Little, Brown and Co. p. 48. 
^ Keenan, Jerry (2001). Encyclopedia of the Spanish–American & Philippine–American Wars. ABC-CLIO. p. "european+powers" 372. ISBN 978-1-57607-093-2. 
^ Tucker 2009, p. 614.
^ Offner 2004, p. 57. For a minority view that downplays the role of public opinion and asserts that McKinley feared the Cubans would win their insurgency before the U.S. could intervene, see Louis A. Pérez, "The Meaning of the Maine: Causation and the Historiography of the Spanish–American War," The Pacific Historical Review, Vol. 58, No. 3 (Aug. 1989), pp. 293–322.
^ For a summary of all the studies see Louis Fisher, "Destruction of the Maine (1898)" (2009)
^ Evan Thomas, The war lovers: Roosevelt, Lodge, Hearst, and the rush to empire, 1898 (Little, Brown, 2010) pp 4–5, 209.
^ Ruiz, Vicki L. 2006. "Nuestra América: Latino History as United States History." Journal of American History P.655
^ Campbell, W. Joseph (August 2000). "Not likely sent: the Remington-Hearst "telegrams"". Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly. Retrieved September 6, 2008. 
^ Smythe 2003, p. 192.
^ Pratt 1934, pp. 163–201. quotes on page 168. Page 173 states: "an overwhelming preponderance of the local business interests of the country strongly desired peace."
^ DyalCarpenter & Thomas 1996
^ Pratt 1934, pp. 173–174.
^ Offner 1992, pp. 131–35; Michelle Bray Davis and Rollin W. Quimby, "Senator Proctor's Cuban Speech: Speculations on a Cause of the Spanish–American War," Quarterly Journal of Speech 1969 55(2): 131–141.
^ Paul T. McCartney, "Religion, the Spanish–American War, and the Idea of American Mission", Journal of Church and State 54 (Spring 2012), 257–78.
^ Graham A. Cosmas, An Army for Empire: The United States Army and the Spanish–American War (1971) ch. 3–4
^ Thomas, Evan (2016). "Evan Thomas: War Lovers and American Power". Military History, September 2010, 14 World History Collection – via JSTOR. 
^ Department of State, United States of America, Office of the Historian. "The Philippine-American War, 1899–1902". CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Twain, Mark (Samuel Clemens) (1901). "To the Person Sitting in Darkness". The World of 1898: The Spanish-American War. Library of Congress. 
^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1913). "Theodore Roosevelt: An Autobiography". Project Gutenberg. 
^ Penny, Ralph John (2002). A History of the Spanish Language. Cambridge University Press. p. "official+language" 30. ISBN 978-0-521-01184-6. 
^ Duka, Cecilio D. (2008). Struggle for Freedom' 2008 Ed. Rex Bookstore, Inc. p. 72. ISBN 978-971-23-5045-0. 
^ Simpson, Andrew (2007). Language and National Identity in Asia. OUP Oxford. p. 363. ISBN 978-0-19-153308-2. 
^ Saravia & Garcia 2003, pp. 5-7
^ Saravia & Garcia 2003, pp. 11-13, 27, 29
^ Patrick McSherry. "The Battle of Manila Bay"". spanamwar.com. Retrieved December 31, 2017. 
^ Battle of Manila Bay, May 1, 1898, Department of the Navy – Naval Historical Center. Retrieved on October 10, 2007
^ The Battle of Manila Bay by Admiral George Dewey, The War Times Journal. Retrieved on October 10, 2007
^ a b c James A. Field, Jr. (June 1978), "American Imperialism: the Worst Chapter in Almost Any Book", The American Historical Review, American Historical Association, 83 (3): 659, doi:10.2307/1861842, JSTOR 1861842 
^ Wionzek 2000, p. x.
^ Dewey characterized the German interests as a single import firm; Admiral Otto von Diederichs responded with a list of eleven.[85]
^ a b Seekins, Donald M. (1991), "Historical Setting—Outbreak of War, 1898", in Dolan, Ronald E., Philippines: A Country Study, Washington: Library of Congress, retrieved April 28, 2013  (LOC call Number DS655.P598 1993)
^ Susan K. Harris (June 1, 2011). God's Arbiters: Americans and the Philippines, 1898–1902. Oxford University Press, US. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-19-978107-2. 
Benjamin R. Beede; Vernon L. Williams; Wolfgang Drechsler (1994). The War of 1898, and U.S. Interventions, 1898–1934: An Encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. pp. 201–202. ISBN 978-0-8240-5624-7. 
David F. Trask (1981). The War with Spain in 1898. U of Nebraska Press. p. 284. ISBN 0-8032-9429-8. 
^ Augusto V. de Viana (September 21, 2006), What ifs in Philippine history, Manila Times, archived from the original on October 30, 2007, retrieved October 19, 2007 
^ What ifs in Philippine history, Conclusion, Manila Times, September 22, 2006, archived from the original on October 30, 2007, retrieved October 19, 2007 
^ Wionzek 2000, p. xvi, citing Hubatsch, Walther, Auslandsflotte und Reichspolitik, Mărwissenschaftliche Rundschau (August 1944), pp. 130–153.
^ a b The World of 1898: the Spanish–American War, U.S. Library of Congress, retrieved October 10, 2007 
^ Saravia & Garcia 2003, p. 62
^ Guevara, Sulpicio, ed. (2005), "Philippine Declaration of Independence", The laws of the first Philippine Republic (the laws of Malolos) 1898–1899, Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Library (published 1972), retrieved January 2, 2013 
^ "Philippine History". DLSU-Manila. Archived from the original on August 22, 2006. Retrieved August 21, 2006. 
^ Saravia & Garcia 2003, p. 109
^ "Our flag is now waving over Manila", San Francisco Chronicle, retrieved December 20, 2008 
^ Lacsamana 2006, p. 126.
^ Saravia & Garcia 2003, pp. 129-137
^ Brune & Burns 2003, p. 290
^ a b Beede 1994, pp. 208–209; Rogers 1995, pp. 110–112
^ Roosevelt 1899
^ Mary Beth Norton; et al. (2014). A People and a Nation, Volume II: Since 1865. Cengage Learning. p. 582. 
^ The Spanish–American War in Cuba : Battle of Las Guasimas.
^ a b Roosevelt, Theodore, The Rough Riders, Scribner's Magazine, Vol. 25 (January–June), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, p. 572
^ The Battles at El Caney and San Juan Hills at HomeOfHeroes.com.
^ The Crowded Hour: The Charge at El Caney & San Juan Hills at HomeOfHeroes.com.
^ Parker 2003
^ History of the Gatling Gun Detachment, John Henry Parker at Project Gutenberg.
^ Escario's Column, Francisco Jose Diaz Diaz.
^ Daley 2000, pp. 161–71
^ McCook 1899
^ Information from abroad: War notes, Issues 1-8 (1899), Office of Naval Intelligence, pp. 60–64
^ a b Vincent J. Cirillo. 2004. Bullets and Bacilli: The Spanish–American War and Military Medicine. (Rutgers University Press).
^ a b The American Army Moves on Puerto-Rico, Retrieved August 2, 2008
^ a b Edgardo Pratts (2006), De Coamo a la Trinchera del Asomante (in Spanish) (First ed.), Puerto Rico: Fundación Educativa Idelfonso Pratts, ISBN 0-9762185-6-9 
^ Wolff 1961, p. 175, "When the British consul died, intermediation was taken over by the Belgian consul, M. Edouard Andre; and, as US troops poured in, everything began to fall into place. Jaudenes promised that he would not use his artillery if the ..."
^ Cooling 2007, p. 99, "Fearful of what the Filipinos might do, the American and Spanish authorities anxiously negotiated a way out of the thorny issue of Manila City. Aided by Belgian consul Edouard Andre, Dewey, Merritt, and Augustin"
^ DyalCarpenter & Thomas 1996, p. 175, "After Rawson-Walker's sickness and death, Belgian consul Edouard André carried on the diplomatic exchanges between Dewey, General Wesley Merritt,* and Jaudenes. Through these diplomatic exchanges, early in August Jaudenes began to ..."
^ Protocol of Peace Embodying the Terms of a Basis for the Establishment of Peace Between the Two Countries, Washington, D.C., U.S.A., August 12, 1898, retrieved October 17, 2007 
^ a b "Treaty of Paris, 1898". Retrieved December 31, 2009. 
^ Brands Breen Williams Gross, American Stories "A History of the United States", Pearson, p. 536, ISBN 9780205243617 
^ Bethell, John (November–December 1998), "A Splendid Little War"; Harvard and the commencement of a new world order, Harvard magazine, retrieved December 11, 2007 
^ Millis 1979, p. 340
This source provides a more complete quote:

It has been a splendid little war; begun with the highest motives, carried on with magnificent intelligence and spirit, favored by the fortune which loves the brave. It is now to be concluded, I hope, with that firm good nature which is after all the distinguishing trait of our American character.


^ Montoya 2011, p. 78.
^ Dupuy, Johnson & Bongard 1992, p. 794.
^ Bailey 1961, p. 657
^ Kaplan, Richard L. 2003. "American Journalism Goes to War, 1898–2001: a manifesto on media and empire", p. 211
^ Pérez 2008, p. 11.
^ Negrón-Muntaner 2004, p. 11, citing Julio Cervera Baviera (1898), La defensa militar de Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico, pp. 79–80 
^ Protagonistas de la Guerra Hispano Americana en Puerto Rico Parte II – Comandante Julio Cervera Baviera, 1898 La Guerra Hispano Americana en Puerto Rico, retrieved February 6, 2008  (an excerpt from Carreras & Tafunell 2004)
^ Albert Carreras & Xavier Tafunell: Historia Económica de la España contemporánea, p. 200–208, ISBN 84-8432-502-4.
^ "MILESTONES: 1899–1913 : The United States, Cuba, and the Platt Amendment, 1901". Milestones. Office of the Historian, U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on April 23, 2015.  External link in |work= (help)
^ Confederate & Federal Veterans of '98: Civil War Veterans who served in the Spanish–American War, Philippine Insurrection, and China Relief Expedition by Micah J. Jenkins. Retrieved on October 13, 2007[dead link]
^ Gatewood 1975, pp. 23–29; there were some opponents, ibid. p. 30–32.
^ "VFW at a Glance" (PDF). VFW. September 2, 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 2, 2006. Retrieved November 4, 2006. 
^ Reardon, Marguerite (June 30, 2005). "Senators want to nix 1898 telecom tax". CNET Networks. Retrieved February 15, 2008. 
^ Reardon, Marguerite (August 1, 2006). "Telecom tax imposed in 1898 finally ends". CNET Networks. Retrieved February 15, 2008. 
^ Bergad 1978, pp. 74–75.
^ Bergad 1978, p. 76.
^ Bergad 1978, p. 74.
^ The Spanish American War in Motion Picture, U.S. Library of Congress.
^ Early Motion Pictures, 1897–1920, U.S. Library of Congress


References[edit]


American Peace Society (1898), The Advocate of Peace, American Peace Society, retrieved January 22, 2008 .
Bailey, Thomas Andrew (1961), The American Pageant: A History of the Republic, Heath .
Baycroft, Timothy; Hewitson, Mark (2006), What is a nation?: Europe 1789–1914, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-929575-3 .
Beede, Benjamin R., ed. (1994), The War of 1898 and U.S. Interventions, 1898–1934, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-8240-5624-7 . An encyclopedia.
Bergad, Laird W. (1978). "Agrarian History of Puerto Rico, 1870–1930". Latin American Research Review. 13 (3): 63–94. .
Botero, Rodrigo (2001), "Ambivalent embrace: America's troubled relations with Spain from the Revolutionary War to the Cold War", Contributions to the study of world history, Greenwood Publishing Group, 78, ISBN 978-0-313-31570-1 .
Brune, Lester H.; Burns, Richard Dean (2003), "Chronological History of U.S. Foreign Relations: 1607–1932", Volume 1 of Chronological History of U.S. Foreign Relations, Richard Dean Burns, ISBN 978-0-415-93914-0 (2 ed.), Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-93915-7 .
Campbell, W. Joseph (2001), Yellow Journalism: Puncturing the Myths, Defining the Legacies, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 0-275-96686-0 .
Carr, Raymond (1982), Spain, 1808–1975, Clarendon Press, ISBN 0-19-822128-2 .
Carreras, Albert; Tafunell, Xavier (2004), Historia económica de la España Contemporánea, Crítica, ISBN 978-84-8432-502-4 .
Clodfelter, M. (2017). Warfare and Armed Conflicts: A Statistical Encyclopedia of Casualty and Other Figures, 1492-2015 (4th ed.). McFarland. ISBN 978-0786474707. 
Cooling, Benjamin Franklin (2007), USS Olympia: Herald of Empire, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 978-1-59114-126-6 .
Dupuy, Trevor Nevitt; Johnson, Curt; Bongard, David L. (1992), The Harper encyclopedia of military biography 
Dyal, Donald H; Carpenter, Brian B.; Thomas, Mark A. (1996), Historical Dictionary of the Spanish American War, Greenwood Press, ISBN 0-313-28852-6 .
Gatewood, Willard B. (1975), Black Americans and the White Man's Burden, 1898–1903, University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-00475-2 
Gaudreault, André (2009), American cinema, 1890–1909: themes and variations, Rutgers University Press, ISBN 978-0-8135-4443-4 .
Hendrickson, Kenneth E., Jr. (2003), The Spanish–American War, Greenwood, ISBN 978-0-313-31662-3 . short summary
Karnow, Stanley (1990), In Our Image, Century, ISBN 978-0-7126-3732-9 
Keenan, Jerry (2001). Encyclopedia of the Spanish-American & Philippine-American Wars. ABC-CLIO. 
Lacsamana, Leodivico Cruz (2006), Philippine history and government, Phoenix Pub. House, ISBN 978-971-06-1894-1 .
Levy, Jack S.; Thompson, William R. (2010), Causes of War, John Wiley and Sons, ISBN 978-1-4051-7559-3 
Millis, Walter (1979), The martial spirit, Ayer Publishing, ISBN 978-0-405-11866-1 
Montoya, Arthur (2011), America's Original Sin: Absolution & Penance, Xlibris Corporation, ISBN 978-1-4628-4434-0 [self-published source]
Negrón-Muntaner, Frances (2004), Boricua Pop: Puerto Ricans and the Latinization of American Culture, NYU Press, ISBN 978-0-8147-5818-2 .
Offner, John L. (1992), An Unwanted War: the Diplomacy of the United States and Spain over Cuba, 1895–1898 .
Offner, John L. (2004), "McKinley and the Spanish–American War", Presidential Studies Quarterly, 34 (1): 50–61, doi:10.1111/j.1741-5705.2004.00034.x, ISSN 0360-4918 .
Parker, John H. (2003), The Gatlings at Santiago, Indypublish.com, ISBN 978-1-4043-8137-7 
Pérez, Louis A. Cuba and the United States: Ties of Singular Intimacy. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2003. Print.
Pérez, Louis A. (2008), Cuba in the American Imagination: Metaphor and the Imperial Ethos, UNC Press Books .
Pérez, Louis A. (1998), The war of 1898: the United States and Cuba in history and historiography, UNC Press Books, ISBN 978-0-8078-4742-8 
Rogers, Robert F. (1995), Destiny's Landfall: A History of Guam (illustrated ed.), University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0-8248-1678-0 .
Roosevelt, Theodore (1899), "I. RAISING THE REGIMENT", The Rough Riders, New York: Charles Scribner's Sons .
Smithsonian Institution (2005), The Price of Freedom: Americans at War – Spanish American War, National Museum of American History (U.S.), ISBN 978-0-9744202-3-3 .
Santamarina, Juan C. "The Cuba Company and the Expansion of American Business in Cuba, 1898–1915". The Business History Review 74.01 (Spring 2000): 41–83. Print
Saravia, José Roca de Togores y; Garcia, Remigio (2003), Blockade and Siege of Manila in 1898, National Historical Institute, ISBN 978-971-538-167-3 
Smith, Mark. "The Political Economy of Sugar Production and the Environment of Eastern Cuba, 1898–1923". Environmental History Review 19.04 (Winter 1995): 31–48. Print
Smythe, Ted Curtis (2003), The Gilded Age press, 1865–1900, Praeger, ISBN 978-0-313-30080-6 .
Tone, John Lawrence. War and Genocide in Cuba 1895–1898 (2006) online review
Trask, David F. (1996), The war with Spain in 1898, U of Nebraska Press, ISBN 978-0-8032-9429-5 .
Tucker, Spencer (2009), The Encyclopedia of the Spanish-American and Philippine-American Wars: A Political, Social, and Military History, ABC-CLIO, ISBN 978-1-85109-951-1 
Wionzek, Karl-Heinz (2000), Germany, the Philippines, and the Spanish–American War: four accounts by officers of the Imperial German Navy, National Historical Institute .
Wolff, Leon (1961), Little Brown Brother: How the United States Purchased and Pacified the Philippine Islands at the Century's Turn, Wolff Productions, ISBN 978-1-58288-209-3 .


Further reading[edit]


Library resources about
Spanish–American War





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries






Barnes, Mar. The Spanish–American War and Philippine Insurrection, 1898–1902: An Annotated Bibliography (Routledge Research Guides to American Military Studies) (2010)
Berner, Brad K. The Spanish-American War: A Historical Dictionary (Scarecrow Press, 1998).
Berner, Brad K., ed. The Spanish-American War: A Documentary History with Commentaries (2016), 289pp; includes primary sources
Bradford, James C. ed., Crucible of Empire: The Spanish–American War and Its Aftermath (1993), essays on diplomacy, naval and military operations, and historiography.
Cirillo, Vincent J. Bullets and Bacilli: The Spanish–American War and Military Medicine (2004)
Corbitt, Duvon C. "Cuban Revisionist Interpretations of Cuba's Struggle for Independence," Hispanic American Historical Review 32 (August 1963): 395–404. in JSTOR
Cosmas, Graham A. An Army for Empire: The United States Army and the Spanish–American War (1971), organizational issues
Crapol, Edward P. "Coming to Terms with Empire: The Historiography of Late-Nineteenth-Century American Foreign Relations," Diplomatic History 16 (Fall 1992): 573–97;
Cull, N. J., Culbert, D., Welch, D. Propaganda and Mass Persuasion: A Historical Encyclopedia, 1500 to the Present. "Spanish–American War". (2003). 378–379.
Daley, L. (2000), "Canosa in the Cuba of 1898", in Aguirre, B. E.; Espina, E., Los últimos días del comienzo: Ensayos sobre la guerra, Santiago de Chile: RiL Editores, ISBN 956-284-115-4 
DeSantis, Hugh. "The Imperialist Impulse and American Innocence, 1865–1900," in Gerald K. Haines and J. Samuel Walker, eds., American Foreign Relations: A Historiographical Review (1981), pp. 65–90
Dirks, Tim. "War and Anti-War Films". The Greatest Films. Retrieved November 9, 2005. 
Dobson, John M. Reticent Expansionism: The Foreign Policy of William McKinley. (1988).
Feuer, A. B. The Spanish–American War at Sea: Naval Action in the Atlantic (1995) online edition
Field, Jr., James A. "American Imperialism: The Worst Chapter in Almost Any Book," American Historical Review 83 (June 1978): 644–68, past of the "AHR Forum," with responses in JSTOR
Freidel, Frank. The Splendid Little War (1958), well illustrated narrative by scholar ISBN 0-7394-2342-8
Fry, Joseph A. "From Open Door to World Systems: Economic Interpretations of Late-Nineteenth-Century American Foreign Relations," Pacific Historical Review 65 (May 1996): 277–303
Fry, Joseph A. "William McKinley and the Coming of the Spanish–American War: A Study of the Besmirching and Redemption of an Historical Image," Diplomatic History 3 (Winter 1979): 77–97
Funston, Frederick. Memoirs of Two Wars, Cuba and Philippine Experiences. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1911 online edition
Gould, Lewis. The Spanish–American War and President McKinley (1980) excerpt and text search
Foner, Philip, The Spanish–Cuban–American War and the Birth of American Imperialism, 1895–1902 (1972)
Hamilton, Richard. President McKinley, War, and Empire (2006).
Harrington, Peter, and Frederic A. Sharf. "A Splendid Little War." The Spanish–American War, 1898. The Artists' Perspective. London: Greenhill, 1998.
Harrington, Fred H. "The Anti-Imperialist Movement in the United States, 1898–1900," Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. 22, No. 2 (Sep. 1935), pp. 211–230 in JSTOR
Herring, George C. From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776 (2008), the latest survey
Hoganson, Kristin. Fighting For American Manhood: How Gender Politics Provoked the Spanish–American and Philippine–American Wars (1998)
Holbo, Paul S. (1967), "Presidential Leadership in Foreign Affairs: William McKinley and the Turpie-Foraker Amendment", The American Historical Review, 72 (4): 1321–1335, doi:10.2307/1847795, JSTOR 1847795. 
Keller, Allan. The Spanish–American War: A Compact History (1969)
Killblane, Richard E., "Assault on San Juan Hill," Military History, June 1998, Vol. 15, Issue 2.
LaFeber, Walter, The New Empire: An Interpretation of American Expansion, 1865–1898 (1963)
Leeke, Jim. Manila and Santiago: The New Steel Navy in the Spanish–American War (2009)
Linderman, Gerald F. The Mirror of War: American Society and the Spanish–American War (1974), domestic aspects
Maass, Matthias. "When Communication Fails: Spanish–American Crisis Diplomacy 1898," Amerikastudien, 2007, Vol. 52 Issue 4, pp 481–493
May, Ernest. Imperial Democracy: The Emergence of America as a Great Power (1961)
McCartney, Paul T. American National Identity, the War of 1898, and the Rise of American Imperialism (2006)
McCook, Henry Christopher (1899), The Martial Graves of Our Fallen Heroes in Santiago de Cuba, G. W. Jacobs & Co. 
Mellander, Gustavo A.(1971) The United States in Panamanian Politics: The Intriguing Formative Years. Daville, Ill.: Interstate Publishers. OCLC 138568.
Mellander, Gustavo A.; Nelly Maldonado Mellander (1999). Charles Edward Magoon: The Panama Years. Río Piedras, Puerto Rico: Editorial Plaza Mayor. ISBN 1-56328-155-4. OCLC 42970390.
Miles, Nelson Appleton (2012). Harper's Pictorial History of the War with Spain;. HardPress. ISBN 978-1-290-02902-5. 
Miller, Richard H. ed., American Imperialism in 1898: The Quest for National Fulfillment (1970)
Millis, Walter. The Martial Spirit: A Study of Our War with Spain (1931)
Morgan, H. Wayne., America's Road to Empire: The War with Spain and Overseas Expansion (1965)
Muller y Tejeiro, Jose. Combates y Capitulacion de Santiago de Cuba. Marques, Madrid:1898. 208 p. English translation by U.S. Navy Dept.
O'Toole, G. J. A. The Spanish War: An American Epic—1898 (1984)
Paterson, Thomas G. "United States Intervention in Cuba, 1898: Interpretations of the Spanish–American–Cuban–Filipino War," The History Teacher, Vol. 29, No. 3 (May 1996), pp. 341–361 in JSTOR
Pérez, Jr. Louis A. (1989), "The Meaning of the Maine: Causation and the Historiography of the Spanish–American War", The Pacific Historical Review, 58 (3): 293–322, doi:10.2307/3640268, JSTOR 3640268. 
Pérez Jr. Louis A. The War of 1898: The United States and Cuba in History and Historiography University of North Carolina Press, 1998
Smith, Ephraim K. "William McKinley's Enduring Legacy: The Historiographical Debate on the Taking of the Philippine Islands," in James C. Bradford, ed., Crucible of Empire: The Spanish–American War and Its Aftermath (1993), pp. 205–49
Pratt, Julius W. (May 1934). "American Business and the Spanish-American War". The Hispanic American Historical Review. Duke University Press. 14 (2): 163. doi:10.2307/2506353. 
Pratt, Julius W. The Expansionists of 1898 (1936)
Schoonover, Thomas. Uncle Sam's War of 1898 and the Origins of Globalization. (2003)
Smith, Joseph. The Spanish–American War: Conflict in the Caribbean and the Pacific (1994)
Stewart, Richard W. "Emergence to World Power 1898–1902" Ch. 15, in "American Military History, Volume I: The United States Army and the Forging of a Nation, 1775–1917", Center of Military History, United States Army. (2004), official U.S. Army textbook
Tone, John Lawrence. War and Genocide in Cuba, 1895–1898 (2006)
U.S. War Dept. Military Notes on Cuba. 2 vols. Washington, DC: GPO, 1898. online edition
US Army Center for Military History, Adjutant General's Office Statistical Exhibit of Strength of Volunteer Forces Called Into Service During the War With Spain; with Losses From All Causes. US Army Center for Military History, Washington: Government Printing Office, 1899.
Wheeler, Joseph. The Santiago Campaign, 1898. (1898). online edition
Zakaria, Fareed, From Wealth to Power: The Unusual Origins of America's World Role (1998)


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spanish-American War.



The Spanish American War lesson from EDSITEment
America's Black Patriots – Spanish American War[permanent dead link]
Spanish–American War Centennial
Points of Confusion over the Cuba Question and Cuba Sovereignty
Individual state's contributions to the Spanish–American War: Illinois, Pennsylvania
Sons of Spanish American War Veterans
From 'Dagoes' to 'Nervy Spaniards,' American Soldiers' Views of their Opponents, 1898 by Albert Nofi
Excerpts from The National Museum of American history.
Reenactment of Spanish–American War (video) on YouTube
Spanish–American War reenactment groups
The American Peril – An Examination of the Spanish American War and the Philippine Insurrection by Dan Carlin

Media[edit]

William Glackens prints at the Library of Congress
Images of Florida and the War for Cuban Independence, 1898 at the Wayback Machine (archived May 1, 2010) from the state archives of Florida (archived from the original on 2010-05-01)
Pictures of the Army Nurse Corps in the war
Art and images from the War with Spain at the United States Army Center of Military History
Spanish–American War photographic collections, via Calisphere, California Digital Library
The Spanish–American War in Motion Pictures—U.S. Library of Congress
Wehman Collection of Spanish–American War Photographs at the University of South Florida
Ensminger Brothers Spanish–American War Photographs at the University of South Florida

Reference materials[edit]

United States Department of State, Papers relating to the foreign relations of the United States, with the annual message of the president transmitted to Congress December 5, 1898 especially pp. 558–1085.
Joint Resolution Resolution of Congress April 19, 1898, point 4 is the Teller amendment
Operations of the U.S. Signal Corps Cutting and Diverting Undersea Telegraph Cables from Cuba
Library of Congress Guide to the Spanish–American War
Emergence to World Power, 1898–1902 (an extract from Matloff's American Military History a publication of the United States Army Center of Military History)
Buffalo Soldiers at San Juan Hill
Impact on the Spanish Army by Charles Hendricks
Black Jack in Cuba – General John J. Pershing's service in the Spanish–American War, by Kevin Hymel
The World of 1898: The Spanish–American War – Library of Congress Hispanic Division
Centennial of the Spanish–American War 1898–1998 by Lincoln Cushing
History of Negro soldiers in the Spanish–American War, and other items of interest[permanent dead link], by Edward Augustus Johnston, published 1899, hosted by the Portal to Texas History.
The War of 98 (The Spanish–American War) The Spanish–American War from a Spanish perspective (in English).
Name Index to New York in the Spanish–American War 1898
1898: El Ocaso de un Imperio Article in Spanish about naval operations during the Spanish–American war.
Spanish–American War Service Summary Cards from the Georgia Archives.
Spanish–American War Veterans Surveys A finding aid listing photographs, diaries, personal papers held at the US Army Heritage and Education Center, Carlisle, Pennsylvania

Newspapers[edit]

Spain to Use Privateers; An Official Decree Declares that She is Determined to Reserve This Right (Headline, NY Times, April 24, 1898)





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Armed conflicts involving the United States Armed Forces




listed chronologically



Domestic



Shays' Rebellion
Whiskey Rebellion
Fries's Rebellion
Mormon War
Dorr Rebellion
Bleeding Kansas
Utah War
Civil War
Indian Wars
Brooks–Baxter War
Range War
Lincoln County War
Johnson County War
Coal Creek War
Homestead Strike
Battle of Blair Mountain
Bonus Army
Battle of Athens





Foreign



Revolutionary War
Quasi-War
First Barbary War
War of 1812
Second Barbary War
First Sumatran expedition
Second Sumatran expedition
Ivory Coast Expedition
Mexican–American War
First Fiji Expedition
Second Opium War
Second Fiji Expedition
Formosa Expedition
Korean Expedition
Spanish–American War
Philippine–American War
Boxer Rebellion
Banana Wars
Border War
World War I
Russian Civil War
World War II
Korean War
Vietnam War
Invasion of the Dominican Republic
Invasion of Grenada
Lebanese Civil War
Invasion of Panama
Gulf War
Somali Civil War
Bosnian War
Kosovo War
Afghanistan War
Iraq War
War in North-West Pakistan
Libyan Civil War
Intervention against ISIL

Iraq
Syria
Cameroon
Libya







Related articles



List of conflicts in the U.S.
List of wars involving the U.S.
Timeline of U.S. military operations
Length of U.S. participation in major wars
Overseas expansion
Military history
Covert regime-change actions
Casualties of war
Peace movement
List of anti-war organizations
Conscientious objector
War on Terror












v
t
e


Spanish Empire








Timeline






Catholic Monarchs
Habsburgs
Golden Age
Encomiendas
New Laws in favour of the indigenous
Expulsion of the Moriscos
Eighty Years' War
Portuguese Restoration War
Bourbons
Napoleonic invasion
Independence of Spanish continental Americas
Liberal constitution
Carlist Wars
Spanish–American War
German–Spanish Treaty (1899)
Spanish Civil War
Independence of Morocco (Western Sahara conflict)













Territories






Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily and Sardinia
Milan
Union with Holy Roman Empire
Netherlands
Franche-Comté
Portugal
Philippines
East Pacific (Guam, Mariana, Caroline, Palau, Marshall, Micronesia, Moluccas)
Northern Taiwan
Tidore
Florida
New Spain (Western United States, Mexico, Central America, Spanish Caribbean)
Spanish Louisiana
Coastal Alaska
Haiti
Belize
Jamaica
Trinidad and Tobago
Venezuela, Northern and Western Guyana
New Granada (Panama, Colombia, Ecuador, a northernmost portion of Brazilian Amazon)
Peru (Peru, Acre)
Río de la Plata (Argentina, Paraguay, Charcas (Bolivia), Banda Oriental (Uruguay), Falkland Islands)
Chile
Equatorial Guinea
Spanish North Africa (Ifni, Cape Juby, Spanish Morocco and Western Sahara)













Administration






Archivo de Indias
Council of the Indies
Cabildo
Trial of residence
Laws of the Indies
Royal Decree of Graces
Exequatur
Papal bull
School of Salamanca













Administrative subdivisions







Viceroyalties



New Spain
New Granada
Perú
Río de la Plata





Audiencias



Bogotá
Buenos Aires
Caracas
Charcas
Concepción
Cusco
Guadalajara
Guatemala
Lima
Manila
Mexico
Panamá
Quito
Santiago
Santo Domingo





Captaincies General



Chile
Cuba
Guatemala
Philippines
Puerto Rico
Santo Domingo
Venezuela
Yucatán
Provincias Internas





Governorates



Castilla de Oro
Cuba
New Andalusia (1501–1513)
New Andalusia
New Castile
New Toledo
Paraguay
Río de la Plata
















Economy







Currencies



Dollar
Real
Maravedí
Escudo
Columnario





Trade



Manila galleon
Spanish treasure fleet
Casa de Contratación
Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas
Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
















Military







Armies



Tercio
Army of Flanders
Spanish Armada
Indian auxiliaries
Legión





Warriors



Duke of Alba
Antonio de Leyva
Martín de Goiti
Alfonso d'Avalos
García de Toledo Osorio
Duke of Savoy
Álvaro de Bazán the Elder
John of Austria
Charles Bonaventure de Longueval
Pedro de Zubiaur
Ambrosio Spinola
Bernardo de Gálvez





Sailors



Christopher Columbus
Pinzón brothers
Ferdinand Magellan
Juan Sebastián Elcano
Juan de la Cosa
Juan Ponce de León
Miguel López de Legazpi
Pedro Menéndez de Avilés
Sebastián de Ocampo
Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca
Alonso de Ojeda
Vasco Núñez de Balboa
Alonso de Salazar
Andrés de Urdaneta
Antonio de Ulloa
Ruy López de Villalobos
Diego Columbus
Alonso de Ercilla
Nicolás de Ovando
Juan de Ayala
Sebastián Vizcaíno
Juan Fernández
Felipe González de Ahedo





Conquistadors



Hernán Cortés
Francisco Pizarro
Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada
Hernán Pérez de Quesada
Francisco Vázquez de Coronado
Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar
Pedro de Valdivia
Pedro de Alvarado
Martín de Ursúa
Diego de Almagro
Pánfilo de Narváez
Diego de Mazariegos
Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera





Battles




Old World




Won



Bicocca
Landriano
Pavia
Tunis
Mühlberg
St. Quentin
Gravelines
Malta
Lepanto
Antwerp
Azores
Siege of Mons
Gembloux
Siege of Ostend
English Armada
Cape Celidonia
White Mountain
Siege of Breda
Nördlingen
Valenciennes
Siege of Ceuta
Bitonto
Bailén
Vitoria
Tetouan
Alhucemas





Lost



Capo d'Orso
Preveza
Siege of Castelnuovo
Algiers
Ceresole
Djerba
Tunis
Spanish Armada
Leiden
Rocroi
Downs
Passaro
Trafalgar
Somosierra
Annual








New World




Won



Siege of Tenochtitlan
Cajamarca
Cuzco
Bogotá savanna
Reynogüelén
Penco
Guadalupe Island
San Juan
Cartagena de Indias
Cuerno Verde
Pensacola





Lost



La Noche Triste
Tucapel
Chacabuco
Carabobo
Ayacucho
Guam
Santiago de Cuba
Manila Bay
Asomante






















Spanish colonizations






Canary Islands
Aztec
Maya

Chiapas
Yucatán
Guatemala
Petén


El Salvador
Honduras
Nicaragua
Chibchan Nations
Colombia
Peru
Chile













Other civil topics






Spanish missions in the Americas
Architecture
Mesoamerican codices
Cusco painting tradition
Indochristian painting in New Spain
Quito painting tradition
Colonial universities in Latin America
Colonial universities in the Philippines
General Archive of the Indies
Colonial Spanish Horse
Castas
Old inquisition
Slavery in Spanish Empire
British and American slaves granted their freedom by Spain















v
t
e


Diplomacy of the Great Powers 1871–1913



Great powers



Austria–Hungary
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Russia
United Kingdom
United States





Alliances



Triple Alliance

Dual Alliance


Triple Entente

Franco-Russian Alliance
Entente Cordiale
Anglo-Russian Entente


Anglo-Japanese Alliance





Trends



Ottoman Decline

Eastern Question


Revanchism
New Imperialism

Scramble for Africa


Pan-Slavism
The Great Game
The Great Rapprochement





Treaties and
agreements



Treaty of Frankfurt
League of the Three Emperors
Treaty of Berlin
Reinsurance Treaty
Treaty of Paris
Treaty of Björkö
Taft–Katsura Agreement
Japan–Korea Treaty of 1905
Japan–Korea Annexation Treaty
Racconigi agreement





Events



Congress of Berlin
Berlin Conference
Weltpolitik
German Naval Laws
Anglo-German naval arms race

Dreadnought


Fashoda Incident
Annexation of Hawaii
First Moroccan Crisis
Algeciras Conference
Agadir Crisis
Bosnian crisis





Wars



Russo-Turkish
First Sino-Japanese
Spanish–American
Banana Wars
Philippine–American
Boxer Rebellion
Second Boer
Russo-Japanese
Italo-Turkish
Balkan Wars












v
t
e


Philippines articles



History




Timeline



Prehistory (Pre-900)
Archaic Era (900–1521)
Colonial era (1521–1946)

Spanish period (1521–1898)
American period (1898–1946)


Postcolonial era (1946–1986)

Third Republic (1946–65)
Marcos dictatorship (1965–86)


Contemporary history (1986–present)





By topic



Archaeology
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic history
Inventions
Military











Geography







Bays
Biosphere reserves
Climate
Earthquakes
Ecoregions
Environmental issues
Extreme points
Island groups

islands


Lakes
Landmarks
Mountains
National parks
Protected areas
Ramsar sites
Rivers
Volcanoes
Wildlife
World Heritage Sites








Politics








Government




Executive



President

Executive Office


Cabinet
Civil service
National Police





Legislature



Congress

Senate

Senate President
President pro tem


House of Representatives

Speaker









Judiciary



Supreme Court
Judiciary
Court of Appeals





Law



Constitution
Philippine legal codes
Human rights





Intelligence



National Bureau of Investigation
National Counter-Terrorism Action Group
National Intelligence Coordinating Agency
Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency





Uniformed



Armed Forces of the Philippines

Philippine Air Force
Philippine Army
Philippine Navy
Philippine Marine Corps


Philippine Coast Guard











Administrative divisions
Elections
Foreign relations
Political parties











Economy







Agriculture
Business process outsourcing
Central Bank
Energy
Fiscal policy
National debt
Labor
Peso
Stock Exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transportation
Science and technology
Water and Sanitation








Society







Corruption
Crime
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Health
Income inequality
Languages
Poverty
Provinces by HDI
Refugees
Religion
Women




Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural Properties
Dance
Fashion and clothing
Festivals
Historical Markers
Literature
Media
Music
Mythology
Public holidays
Psychology
Sexuality
Sports
Traditional games
Value system





Symbols



Anthem
Coat of arms
Arnis
Flag
Name
Narra
Philippine eagle
Sampaguita














 Philippines portal
 Category












v
t
e


 Armed conflicts involving Philippines



Pre-modern



Manila (1365)
Manila (1500)





Early modern



Mactan
Dagami
Bangkusay Channel
Manila (1574)
Conspiracy of the Maharlikas
Dingras
Cagayan
Magalat
Igorot
Gaddang
La Naval de Manila
Sumuroy
Palaris
Manila (1762)
Cavite





Late modern



Philippine Revolution
Spanish–American War
Philippine–American War

Moro (1899-1913)


World War II

Japanese invasion
Allied invasion


Hukbalahap
Communist
Moro (1969-present)
Cold War

Korean War
Vietnam War














v
t
e


 Cuba topics








History







Pre-Revolution



Timeline
Colonial governors
Slavery
Ten Years' War
Little War
Cuban War of Independence
Sinking of the USS Maine
Spanish–American War
Platt Amendment
World War I
Republic
1932 hurricane
World War II
Revolution





Post-Revolution



Escambray Rebellion
Bay of Pigs Invasion
Cuban Missile Crisis
Cuban intervention in Angola
Mariel boatlift
Special Period
Fidel's transfer of power
United States–Cuban thaw





Cities



History of Havana

Timeline


Other cities

Timelines: Camagüey, Cienfuegos, Guantánamo, Holguín, Matanzas, Santiago de Cuba


















Geography







Cities



Bayamo
Camagüey
Ciego de Ávila
Cienfuegos
Guantánamo
Havana
Holguín
Las Tunas
Matanzas
Pinar del Río
Sancti Spíritus
Santa Clara
Santiago de Cuba





Provinces



Artemisa
Camagüey
Ciego de Ávila
Cienfuegos
Ciudad de La Habana
Granma
Guantánamo
Holguín
Isla de la Juventud
Las Tunas
Matanzas
Mayabeque
Pinar del Río
Sancti Spíritus
Santiago de Cuba
Villa Clara





Other



Almendares River
Earthquakes
List of islands
Sierra Maestra
Tropical cyclones
World Heritage Sites



















Governance
Security
Economy










Governance







Armed Forces
Castroism
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Law
Politics
Presidency






Cuba–United States
relations




Bay of Pigs Invasion
Brothers to the Rescue
Commission for Assistance to a Free Cuba
Coordination of United Revolutionary Organizations
Cuban American
Cuban-American lobby
Cuban dissident movement
Cuban Five
Cuban Missile Crisis
Elián González affair
Fair Play for Cuba Committee
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
Helms–Burton Act
Cuba–United States hijackings
Luis Posada Carriles
Mariel boatlift
Orlando Bosch
Operation Northwoods
Operation Peter Pan
Platt Amendment
Spanish–American War
United States ambassador
United States embargo
United States Interests Section





Political parties




Current



Communist Party
Christian Democratic
Democratic Social-Revolutionary
Democratic Socialist Current
Democratic Solidarity
Liberal
Liberal Movement
Social Democratic Co-ordination





Former



Auténtico
Cuban National
Democratic Union
Independent Republican
Ortodoxo
Popular Socialist
Republican (Havana)











Security




Military



Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces (MINFAR)
Air Force
Army
Navy
Territorial Troops Militia





Law enforcement



National Revolutionary Police Force





Intelligence



Dirección General de Inteligencia
Military Counterintelligence Directorate








Economy



Agriculture

Agrarian reform
Cooperatives


Central bank
Peso (currency)
Convertible peso
International rankings
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport

airline




















Society
Culture









Society



Censorship
Committees for the Defense of the Revolution
Education
Health care
Human rights

LGBT
LGBT history
Women


Language
Rationing
Scouting and Guiding
Sociolismo





Culture



Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Internet
Literature
Media

Newspapers
TV


Music
Musical theater
Festivals
Public holidays
Radio
Religion
Santería
Sport

baseball
boxing
football


Universities


















Demographics
People









Demographics



Cubans
Afro-Cubans
Americans
Cape Verdean
Chinese
Ciboney
Filipino
French
German
Haitian
Isleños
Italian
Japanese
Jews
Koreans
Lebanese
Mexicans
Spanish
White





People




By name



Desi Arnaz
Fulgencio Batista
Leo Brouwer
Fidel Castro
Raúl Castro
Celia Cruz
Ibrahim Ferrer
Osmani García
Máximo Gómez
Elián González
Nicolás Guillén
José Martí
Pablo Milanés
Omara Portuondo
Silvio Rodríguez
Compay Segundo
Félix Varela





By occupation



Academics
Activists
Actors
Architects
Artists
Athletes

baseball players


Ballet dancers
Businesspeople
Chefs
Comedians
Composers
Cosmonauts
Criminals
Dancers
Economists
Educators
Engineers
Entertainers
Farmers
Film directors
Film producers
Geographers
Heads of State
Colonial heads
Historians
Illustrators
Journalists
Judges
Lawyers
Librarians
Mathematicians
Military personnel
Models
Musicians
Notaries
Painters

abstract


Philosophers
Photographers
Physicians
Poets
Politicians
Presidents
Psychologists
Radio personalities
Rappers
Rebels
Religious leaders
Revolutionaries
Sailors
Scientists
Sculptors
Sex workers
Singers
Social scientists
Soldiers
Songwriters
Television personalities
Women
Writers

women



















 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


United States intervention in Latin America



Policy



Monroe Doctrine (1823)
Platt Amendment (1901–04)
Roosevelt Corollary/Big Stick ideology (1904)
Good Neighbor policy (1933)
Dollar diplomacy
Banana Wars





Wars



Mexican–American War (1846-48)
Spanish–American War (1898)
Border War (1910–19)
United States involvement in the Mexican Revolution (1916–19)





Overt actions
and occupations



Paraguay expedition (1858)
First Occupation of Cuba (1899–1902)
Panama–Colombia separation and Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty (1903)
Second Occupation of Cuba (1906–09)
Occupations of Honduras
Occupation of Nicaragua (1912–33)
Occupation of Veracruz (1914)
Occupation of Haiti (1915–34)
Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916–24)
Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
Invasion of Grenada (1983)
Invasion of Panama (1989)





Covert actions



1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Bay of Pigs Invasion (1961)
Operation MONGOOSE
Project FUBELT
1973 Chilean coup d'état





Disputed claims



2002 Venezuelan coup d'état attempt
2004 Haitian rebellion





Other



Cuban Missile Crisis (1962)








Foreign policy of the United States
Latin America–United States relations










Rough Riders



Officers



Leonard Wood
Theodore Roosevelt
Alexander Oswald Brodie
James H. McClintock
Buckey O'Neill
Seth Bullock
John Campbell Greenway
John Avery McIlhenny
Allyn K. Capron Jr.
Allyn K. Capron Sr.
George Curry
Woodbury Kane
Thomas H. Rynning








Enlisted men



George G. McMurtry
Chris Madsen
Hamilton Fish
Thomas Grindell
Henry Barrett
Billy McGinty
Juan Alamia
Frank Frantz
Craig Wadsworth
Henry Nash
Ben Daniels
Frank Knox
Robert Wrenn





Engagements



Spanish–American War
Battle of Las Guasimas
Battle of San Juan Hill
Siege of Santiago





Memorials



Rough Riders Memorial
Buckey O'Neill Cabin
Bucky O'Neill Monument
Bronco Buster
Theodore Roosevelt Monument Assemblage





Film



The Rough Riders (1927 film)
Teddy, the Rough Rider (1940 film)
Rough Riders (1997 mini-series)





See also



Buckhorn Saloon
Arizona Rangers
Three Guardsmen
Canyon Diablo Train Robbery
Tiburón Island Tragedy
Roosevelt's World War I volunteers
The Lost Battalion












v
t
e


History of the United States



Timeline



Prehistory
Pre-Columbian
Colonial
America's Critical Period
1776–89
1789–1849
1849–65
1865–1918
1918–45
1945–64
1964–80
1980–91
1991–2008
2008–present





Topics



American Century
Cities
Constitution
Demographic
Diplomatic
Economic
Education
Immigration
Medical
Merchant Marine
Military
Musical
Religious
Slavery
Southern
Technological and industrial
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Voting rights
Women








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865–1895 / 1896–1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Civil Rights Movement
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal














Authority control



GND: 4182065-4
NDL: 00560582











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spanish–American_War&oldid=818306456"					Categories: Spanish–American WarConflicts in 1898Spanish East IndiesSpanish West IndiesWars involving SpainWars involving the United StatesWars involving CubaWars involving the PhilippinesWars involving Hong Kong1898 in Cuba1898 in Guam1898 in the Philippines1898 in Puerto Rico1898 in Spain1898 in the Spanish East Indies1898 in the Spanish West Indies1898 in the Spanish Empire1898 in the United StatesMilitary history of SpainMilitary history of the United StatesSpain–United States relationsCuba–United States relationsPhilippines–United States relationsUnited States–Caribbean relationsUnited States Marine Corps in the 18th and 19th centuries1890s in the Spanish Empire1890s in the United States19th-century conflictsHistory of the United States (1865–1918)Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 errors: external linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2016Use mdy dates from February 2015Articles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing Filipino-language textAll articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from November 2017Articles needing additional references from April 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles to be expanded from September 2017All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesAccuracy disputes from December 2017Articles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with dead external links from July 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers