"Conquista" redirects here. For other uses, see Conquista (disambiguation).


Part of a series on


European colonization
of the Americas








First wave of European colonization
British
Couronian
Danish
Dutch
French
German
Hospitaller (Maltese)
Norse
Portuguese
Russian
Scottish
Spanish
Swedish
Colonization of Canada
Colonization of the United States
Decolonization





 Colonialism portal





v
t
e









Flag of Spanish conquistadors with crown of Castile on a red flag, used by Hernán Cortés, Francisco Pizarro and others


The Colonial expansion under the crown of Castile was initiated by the Spanish conquistadores and developed by its administrators and missionaries. The motivations for colonial expansion were trade and the spread of the Catholic faith through indigenous conversions.
Beginning with the 1492 arrival of Christopher Columbus and continuing for over three centuries, the Spanish Empire would expand across the Caribbean Islands, half of South America, most of Central America and much of North America (including present day Mexico, Florida and the Southwestern and Pacific Coastal regions of the United States). It is estimated that during the colonial period (1492–1832), a total of 1.86 million Spaniards settled in the Americas and a further 3.5 million immigrated during the post-colonial era (1850–1950).
In the early 19th century, the Spanish American wars of independence resulted in the emancipation of most Spanish colonies in the Americas, except for Cuba and Puerto Rico, which were finally given up in 1898, following the Spanish–American War, together with Guam and the Philippines in the Pacific. Spain's loss of these last territories politically ended the Spanish rule in the Americas.



Contents


1 Conquests

1.1 West Indies
1.2 Mexico
1.3 Peru
1.4 Río de la Plata and Paraguay
1.5 New Granada


2 Governing

2.1 Dominions

2.1.1 North
2.1.2 South




3 19th century

3.1 Demographic impact


4 See also
5 References
6 Bibliography

6.1 Historiography


7 External links



Conquests[edit]






Iberian territory of Crown of Castile. .

Overseas north territory of Crown of Castile (New Spain and Philippines) 

Overseas south territory of Crown of Castile (Perú, New Granada and Río de la Plata) 



The Catholic Monarchs Isabella of Castile, Queen of Castile and her husband King Ferdinand, King of Aragon, pursued a policy of joint rule of their kingdoms and created a single Spanish monarchy. Even though Castile and Aragon were ruled jointly by their respective monarchs, they remained separate kingdoms. The Catholic Monarchs gave official approval for the plans of Genoese mariner Christopher Columbus for a voyage to reach India by sailing West. The funding came from the queen of Castile, so the profits from Spanish expedition flowed to Castile. In the extension of Spanish sovereignty to its overseas territories, authority for expeditions of discovery, conquest, and settlement resided in the monarchy.[1]
West Indies[edit]
Columbus made four voyages to the West Indies as the monarchs granted Columbus the governorship of the new territories, and financed more of his trans-Atlantic journeys. He founded La Navidad on the island later named Hispaniola (now divided into Haiti and the Dominican Republic), in what is present day Haiti on his first voyage. After its destruction by the indigenous Taino people, the town of Isabella was begun in 1493, on his second voyage. In 1496 his brother, Bartholomew, founded Santo Domingo. By 1500, despite a high death rate, there were between 300 and 1000 Spanish settled in the area. The local Taíno people continued to resist, refusing to plant crops and abandoning their Spanish-occupied villages. The first mainland explorations were followed by a phase of inland expeditions and conquest. In 1500 the city of Nueva Cádiz was founded on the island of Cubagua, Venezuela, followed by the founding of Santa Cruz by Alonso de Ojeda in present-day Guajira peninsula. Cumaná in Venezuela was the first permanent settlement founded by Europeans in the mainland Americas,[2] in 1501 by Franciscan friars, but due to successful attacks by the indigenous people, it had to be refounded several times, until Diego Hernández de Serpa's foundation in 1569. The Spanish founded San Sebastian de Uraba in 1509 but abandoned it within the year. There is indirect evidence that the first permanent Spanish mainland settlement established in the Americas was Santa María la Antigua del Darién.[3]
Mexico[edit]
Main article: Spanish conquest of Mexico
For more details on this topic, see Spanish conquest of Yucatán and Spanish conquest of Guatemala.




Spanish Conquest of Mexico, meeting of Cortés and Moctezuma II






Map depicting Cortes' invasion route


The Spanish conquest of Mexico is generally understood to be the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire (1519–21) which was the base for later conquests of other regions. Later conquests were protracted campaigns with less spectacular results than conquest of the Aztecs. The Spanish conquest of Yucatán, the Spanish conquest of Guatemala, the war of Mexico's west, and the Chichimeca War in northern Mexico expanded Spanish control over territory and indigenous populations.[4][5][6] But not until the Spanish conquest of Peru was the conquest of the Aztecs matched in scope by the victory over the Inca empire in 1532.
The Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire was led by Hernán Cortés. The victory over the Aztecs was relatively quick, from 1519 to 1521, and aided by his Tlaxcala and other allies from indigenous city-states or altepetl. These polities allied against the Aztec empire, to which they paid tribute following conquest or threat of conquest, leaving the city-states' political hierarchy and social structure in place.
The Spanish conquest of Yucatán was a much longer campaign, from 1551 to 1697, against the Maya peoples in the Yucatán Peninsula of present-day Mexico and northern Central America. When Hernán Cortés landed ashore at present day Veracruz and founded the Spanish city there on April 22, 1519, marks the beginning of 300 years of Spanish hegemony over the region. The assertion of royal control over the Kingdom of New Spain and the initial Spanish conquerors took over a decade, with importance of the region meriting the creation of the Viceroyalty of New Spain was established by Charles V in 1535 with the appointment of Don Antonio de Mendoza as the first viceroy.
Spain colonized and exerted control of Alta California through the Spanish missions in California until the Mexican secularization act of 1833.
Peru[edit]
Main article: Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire




Vasco Núñez de Balboa claiming possession of the South Sea (Pacific Ocean)






Map depicting the route of Pizarro from Panama to Cuzco


In 1532 at the Battle of Cajamarca a group of Spaniards under Francisco Pizarro and their indigenous Andean Indian auxiliaries native allies ambushed and captured the Emperor Atahualpa of the Inca Empire. It was the first step in a long campaign that took decades of fighting to subdue the mightiest empire in the Americas. In the following years Spain extended its rule over the Empire of the Inca civilization.
The Spanish took advantage of a recent civil war between the factions of the two brothers Emperor Atahualpa and Huáscar, and the enmity of indigenous nations the Incas had subjugated, such as the Huancas, Chachapoyas, and Cañaris. In the following years the conquistadors and indigenous allies extended control over Greater Andes Region. The Viceroyalty of Perú was established in 1542. The last Inca stronghold was conquered by the Spanish in 1572.
Río de la Plata and Paraguay[edit]
European explorers arrived in Río de la Plata in 1516. Their first Spanish settlement in this zone was the Fort of Sancti Spiritu established in 1527 next to the Paraná River. Buenos Aires, a permanent colony, was established in 1536 and in 1537 Asunción was established in the area that is now Paraguay. Buenos Aires suffered attacks by the indigenous peoples that forced the settlers away, and in 1541 the site was abandoned. A second (and permanent) settlement was established in 1580 by Juan de Garay, who arrived by sailing down the Paraná River from Asunción (now the capital of Paraguay). He dubbed the settlement "Santísima Trinidad" and its port became "Puerto de Santa María de los Buenos Aires." The city came to be the head of the Governorate of the Río de la Plata and in 1776 elevated to be the capital of the new Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata.
New Granada[edit]
Main article: Spanish conquest of the Muisca
See also: Spanish conquest of the Chibchan Nations
Between 1537 and 1543, six[citation needed] Spanish expeditions entered highland Colombia, conquered the Muisca Confederation, and set up the New Kingdom of Granada (Spanish: Nuevo Reino de Granada). Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada was the leading conquistador with his brother Hernán second in command.[7] It was governed by the president of the Audiencia of Bogotá, and comprised an area corresponding mainly to modern-day Colombia and parts of Venezuela. The conquistadors originally organized it as a captaincy general within the Viceroyalty of Peru. The crown established the audiencia in 1549. Ultimately, the kingdom became part of the Viceroyalty of New Granada first in 1717 and permanently in 1739. After several attempts to set up independent states in the 1810s, the kingdom and the viceroyalty ceased to exist altogether in 1819 with the establishment of Gran Colombia.[8]
Governing[edit]
Main articles: Viceroyalty of New Spain, Viceroyalty of Peru, and Intendant § The Spanish Monarchy




Argentine Cabildo council


Spain's administration of its colonies in the Americas was divided into the Viceroyalty of New Spain 1535 (capital, México City), and the Viceroyalty of Peru 1542 (capital, Lima). In the 18th century the additional Viceroyalty of New Granada 1717 (capital, Bogotá), and Viceroyalty of Rio de la Plata 1776 (capital, Buenos Aires) were established from portions of the Viceroyalty of Peru.
This evolved from the Council of the Indies and Viceroyalties into an Intendant system, raise more revenue and promote greater efficiency.
Dominions[edit]




Juan Ponce de León (Santervás de Campos, Valladolid, Spain). He was one of the first Europeans to arrive to the current United States because he led the first European expedition to Florida, which he named.


North[edit]

Viceroyalty of New Spain (1535–1821)

Las Californias
Nuevo Reino de León
Nuevo Santander
Nueva Vizcaya
Santa Fe de Nuevo México
Nueva Extremadura
Nueva Galicia


Captaincy General of the Philippines (administered by New Spain from 1565 to 1821, then after Mexican independence transferred to and directly administered by Madrid until 1898)
Captaincy General of Cuba (until 1898) – Included in this captaincy general until 1819 was La Florida, Spain's North American colonies in what is now the southeastern United States.
Captaincy General of Puerto Rico (until 1898)
Santo Domingo (last Spanish rule 1861–1865)
Captaincy General of Guatemala

South[edit]

Viceroyalty of New Granada (1717–1819)
Captaincy General of Venezuela
Viceroyalty of Perú (1542–1824)
Captaincy General of Chile (1541–1818)
Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata (1776–1814)

19th century[edit]
Main article: Spanish American wars of independence




Spanish colonialization in the Americas.


During the Napoleonic Peninsular War in Europe between France and Spain, assemblies called juntas were established to rule in the name of Ferdinand VII of Spain. The Libertadores (Spanish and Portuguese for "Liberators") were the principal leaders of the Spanish American wars of independence. They were predominantly criollos (Americas-born people of European ancestry, mostly Spanish or Portuguese), bourgeois and influenced by liberalism and in some cases with military training in the mother country.
In 1809 the first declarations of independence from Spanish rule occurred in the Viceroyalty of New Granada. The first two were in present-day Bolivia at Sucre (May 25), and La Paz (July 16); and the third in present-day Ecuador at Quito (August 10). In 1810 Mexico declared independence, with the Mexican War of Independence following for over a decade. In 1821 Treaty of Córdoba established Mexican independence from Spain and concluded the War. The Plan of Iguala was part of the peace treaty to establish a constitutional foundation for an independent Mexico.
These began a movement for colonial independence that spread to Spain's other colonies in the Americas. The ideas from the French and the American Revolution influenced the efforts. All of the colonies, except Cuba and Puerto Rico, attained independence by the 1820s. The British Empire offered support, wanting to end the Spanish monopoly on trade with its colonies in the Americas.
In 1898, the United States achieved victory in the Spanish–American War with Spain, ending the Spanish colonial era. Spanish possession and rule of its remaining colonies in the Americas ended in that year with its sovereignty transferred to the United States. The United States took occupation of Cuba, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico continues to be a possession of the United States, now officially continues as a self-governing unincorporated territory.
Demographic impact[edit]
It has been estimated that over 1.86 million Spaniards emigrated to Latin America in the period between 1492 and 1824, with millions more continuing to immigrate following independence.[9]
In Hispaniola, the indigenous Taíno pre-contact population before the arrival of Columbus of several hundred thousand had declined to sixty thousand by 1509. Although population estimates vary, Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas, the "Defender of the Indians" estimated there were 6 million (6,000,000) Taíno and Arawak in the Caribbean at the time of Columbus's arrival in 1492.[citation needed]
The population of the Native Amerindian population in Mexico declined by an estimated 90% (reduced to 1–2.5 million people) by the early 17th century. In Peru the indigenous Amerindian pre-contact population of around 6.5 million declined to 1 million by the early 17th century.[citation needed] The overwhelming cause of decline in both Mexico and Peru was infectious diseases, although the brutality of the Encomienda also played a significant part in the population decline.
Of the history of the indigenous population of California, Sherburne F. Cook (1896–1974) was the most painstakingly careful researcher. From decades of research he made estimates for the pre-contact population and the history of demographic decline during the Spanish and post-Spanish periods. According to Cook, the indigenous Californian population at first contact, in 1769, was about 310,000 and had dropped to 25,000 by 1910. The vast majority of the decline happened after the Spanish period, during the Mexican and US periods of Californian history (1821–1910), with the most dramatic collapse (200,000 to 25,000) occurring in the US period (1846–1910).[10][11][12]
See also[edit]


New Spain portal
Colombia portal
Argentina portal
Ecuador portal
Venezuela portal




Atlantic World
Historiography of Colonial Spanish America
Black Legend
Habsburg Spain
Inter caetera
List of largest empires
New Spain
Old Spanish Trail (trade route)
Population history of indigenous peoples of the Americas
Smallpox Epidemics in the New World
Spanish conquest of Chiapas
Spanish conquest of El Salvador
Spanish conquest of Guatemala
Spanish conquest of Honduras
Spanish conquest of Petén
Spanish conquest of the Maya
Timeline of imperialism#Colonization of North America
Valladolid debate
Viceroyalty of Peru


References[edit]


^ Ida Altman, S.L. Cline, and Javier Pescador, The Early History of Greater Mexico, Pearson, 2003 pp. 35–36.
^ [1] Sucre State Government: Cumaná in History (Spanish)
^ Tibesar, A.S. (1957). "The Franciscan Province of the Holy Cross of Espanañola, 1505–1559". The Americas. 13 (4): 377–389. doi:10.2307/979442. JSTOR 979442. 
^ Robert S. Chamberlain, The Conquest and Colonization of Yucatan. Washington DC: Carnegie Institution.
^ Ida Altman, The War for Mexico's West. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 2010.
^ Philip W. Powell, Soldiers, Indians, and Silver: North America's Last Frontier War. Tempe: Center for Latin America Studies, Arizona State University 1975. First published by University of California Press 1952.
^ Clements Markham, The Conquest of New Granada (1912) online
^ Avellaneda Navas, José Ignacio. The Conquerors of the New Kingdom of Granada (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1995) ISBN 978-0-8263-1612-7
^ https://books.google.com/books?id=lvvynCzrJOwC&pg=PA64&lpg=PA64&dq=emigraci%C3%B3n+espa%C3%B1ola+a+las+indias+cifras&source=bl&ots=WIWVcSlOdq&sig=4XmK7Gkv36L6qQ4jItqp7a553dI&hl=es&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwinzqqfsrLPAhWKAsAKHXbSBf0Q6AEINzAE#v=onepage&q=emigraci%C3%B3n%20espa%C3%B1ola%20a%20las%20indias%20cifras&f=false
^ Baumhoff, Martin A. 1963. Ecological Determinants of Aboriginal California Populations. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 49:155–236.
^ Powers, Stephen. 1875. "California Indian Characteristics". Overland Monthly 14:297–309. on-line
^ Cook's judgement on the effects of U.S rule upon the native Californians is harsh: "The first (factor) was the food supply... The second factor was disease. ...A third factor, which strongly intensified the effect of the other two, was the social and physical disruption visited upon the Indian. He was driven from his home by the thousands, starved, beaten, raped, and murdered with impunity. He was not only given no assistance in the struggle against foreign diseases, but was prevented from adopting even the most elementary measures to secure his food, clothing, and shelter. The utter devastation caused by the white man was literally incredible, and not until the population figures are examined does the extent of the havoc become evident."Cook, Sherburne F. 1976b. The Population of the California Indians, 1769–1970. University of California Press, Berkeley|p. 200


Bibliography[edit]


Brading, D. A., The First America: the Spanish Monarchy, Creole Patriots, and the Liberal State, 1492–1867 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Clark, Larry R. Spanish Attempts to Colonize Southeast North America: 1513–1587 (McFarland & Company, 2010) ISBN 978-0-7864-5909-4
Elliott, J. H. Empires of the Atlantic World: Britain and Spain in America, 1492–1830 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007)
Hanke, Lewis. The Spanish Struggle for Justice in the Conquest of America (Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1965).
Haring, Clarence H. The Spanish Empire in America (London: Oxford University Press, 1947)
Kamen, Henry. Empire: How Spain Became a World Power, 1492–1763 (HarperCollins, 2004)
Merriman, Roger Bigelow. The Rise of the Spanish Empire in the Old World and in the New (Vol. 1. London: Macmillan, 1918)
Portuondo, María M. Secret Science: Spanish Cosmography and the New World (Chicago: Chicago UP, 2009).
Restall, Matthew and Felipe Fernández-Armesto. The Conquistadors: A Very Short Introduction (2012) excerpt and text search
Thomas, Hugh. Rivers of Gold: the rise of the Spanish Empire, from Columbus to Magellan (2005)
Weber, David J. The Spanish Frontier in North America (Yale University Press, 1992)


Historiography[edit]

Alejandro Cañeque. "The Political and Institutional History of Colonial Spanish America" History Compass (April 2013) 114 pp 280–291, DOI: 10.1111/hic3.12043
Weber, David J. "John Francis Bannon and the Historiography of the Spanish Borderlands: Retrospect and Prospect." Journal of the Southwest (1987): 331–363.

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Spanish colonization of the Americas



Spanish Exploration and Conquest of North America
Spain in America (Edward Gaylord Bourne, 1904) 'Spain in America'
The Spanish Borderlands (Herbert E. Bolton, 1921) 'The Spanish Borderlands'
Indigenous Puerto Rico DNA evidence upsets established history
The short film Spanish Empire in the New World (1992) is available for free download at the Internet Archive
“The Political Force of Images,” Vistas: Visual Culture in Spanish America, 1520-1820.








v
t
e


Spanish colonization of the Americas



History



Inter caetera
Pacific Northwest
California
Inca Empire

Chile


Colombia

Chibcha
Muisca


Florida
Texas
Aztec Empire
Maya

Chiapas
Guatemala
Petén
Yucatán


El Salvador
Honduras
Nicaragua








People



Christopher Columbus
Alonso de Ojeda
Diego de Almagro
Pedro de Alvarado
Bernal Díaz del Castillo
Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar
Sebastián de Belalcázar
Francisco Vázquez de Coronado
Hernán Cortés
Luis de Carabajal y Cueva
Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada
Hernán Pérez de Quesada
Juan Ponce de León
Francisco de Montejo
Pánfilo de Narváez
Juan de Oñate
Francisco de Orellana
Pedro de Portocarrero
Francisco Pizarro
Hernando de Soto
Pedro de Valdivia
Inés de Suárez
Pedro de Candia
Juan Pardo
Tristán de Luna y Arellano
Vasco Núñez de Balboa
Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca





Related



Encomienda
Indian auxiliaries
Spanish missions in the Americas












v
t
e


 History of the Americas



History



North America
Mesoamerica
Central America
Caribbean
Latin America
South America
Andean South America
Genetics








Settlement



Indigenous peoples
Indigenous population
Pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact theories
Discovery
Exploration
European colonization
Spanish colonization
French colonization
Portuguese colonization
British colonization
Columbian Exchange
Decolonization





Societies



Paleo-Indians
Pre-Columbian era
Aztec
Maya
Muisca
Inca





Related



Maps
Culture
Geography
Indigenous languages
Epidemics
Slavery





Lists



Pre-Columbian cultures
Indigenous peoples
Population
Conflicts

North America
South America







Chronology



Archaeology of the Americas
North America by period
North American timelines
Mesoamerica by period
Mesoamerica timeline








Era: By period
By region
Three-age system
Ancient history
Pre-Columbian era
Classical Antiquity
Middle Ages
Modern history
Future












v
t
e


Spanish Empire








Timeline






Catholic Monarchs
Habsburgs
Golden Age
Encomiendas
New Laws in favour of the indigenous
Expulsion of the Moriscos
Eighty Years' War
Portuguese Restoration War
Bourbons
Napoleonic invasion
Independence of Spanish continental Americas
Liberal constitution
Carlist Wars
Spanish–American War
German–Spanish Treaty (1899)
Spanish Civil War
Independence of Morocco (Western Sahara conflict)













Territories






Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily and Sardinia
Milan
Union with Holy Roman Empire
Netherlands
Franche-Comté
Portugal
Philippines
East Pacific (Guam, Mariana, Caroline, Palau, Marshall, Micronesia, Moluccas)
Northern Taiwan
Tidore
Florida
New Spain (Western United States, Mexico, Central America, Spanish Caribbean)
Spanish Louisiana
Coastal Alaska
Haiti
Belize
Jamaica
Trinidad and Tobago
Venezuela, Northern and Western Guyana
New Granada (Panama, Colombia, Ecuador, a northernmost portion of Brazilian Amazon)
Peru (Peru, Acre)
Río de la Plata (Argentina, Paraguay, Charcas (Bolivia), Banda Oriental (Uruguay), Falkland Islands)
Chile
Equatorial Guinea
Spanish North Africa (Ifni, Cape Juby, Spanish Morocco and Western Sahara)













Administration






Archivo de Indias
Council of the Indies
Cabildo
Trial of residence
Laws of the Indies
Royal Decree of Graces
Exequatur
Papal bull
School of Salamanca













Administrative subdivisions







Viceroyalties



New Spain
New Granada
Perú
Río de la Plata





Audiencias



Bogotá
Buenos Aires
Caracas
Charcas
Concepción
Cusco
Guadalajara
Guatemala
Lima
Manila
Mexico
Panamá
Quito
Santiago
Santo Domingo





Captaincies General



Chile
Cuba
Guatemala
Philippines
Puerto Rico
Santo Domingo
Venezuela
Yucatán
Provincias Internas





Governorates



Castilla de Oro
Cuba
New Andalusia (1501–1513)
New Andalusia
New Castile
New Toledo
Paraguay
Río de la Plata
















Economy







Currencies



Dollar
Real
Maravedí
Escudo
Columnario





Trade



Manila galleon
Spanish treasure fleet
Casa de Contratación
Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas
Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
















Military







Armies



Tercio
Army of Flanders
Spanish Armada
Indian auxiliaries
Legión





Warriors



Duke of Alba
Antonio de Leyva
Martín de Goiti
Alfonso d'Avalos
García de Toledo Osorio
Duke of Savoy
Álvaro de Bazán the Elder
John of Austria
Charles Bonaventure de Longueval
Pedro de Zubiaur
Ambrosio Spinola
Bernardo de Gálvez





Sailors



Christopher Columbus
Pinzón brothers
Ferdinand Magellan
Juan Sebastián Elcano
Juan de la Cosa
Juan Ponce de León
Miguel López de Legazpi
Pedro Menéndez de Avilés
Sebastián de Ocampo
Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca
Alonso de Ojeda
Vasco Núñez de Balboa
Alonso de Salazar
Andrés de Urdaneta
Antonio de Ulloa
Ruy López de Villalobos
Diego Columbus
Alonso de Ercilla
Nicolás de Ovando
Juan de Ayala
Sebastián Vizcaíno
Juan Fernández
Felipe González de Ahedo





Conquistadors



Hernán Cortés
Francisco Pizarro
Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada
Hernán Pérez de Quesada
Francisco Vázquez de Coronado
Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar
Pedro de Valdivia
Pedro de Alvarado
Martín de Ursúa
Diego de Almagro
Pánfilo de Narváez
Diego de Mazariegos
Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera





Battles




Old World




Won



Bicocca
Landriano
Pavia
Tunis
Mühlberg
St. Quentin
Gravelines
Malta
Lepanto
Antwerp
Azores
Siege of Mons
Gembloux
Siege of Ostend
English Armada
Cape Celidonia
White Mountain
Siege of Breda
Nördlingen
Valenciennes
Siege of Ceuta
Bitonto
Bailén
Vitoria
Tetouan
Alhucemas





Lost



Capo d'Orso
Preveza
Siege of Castelnuovo
Algiers
Ceresole
Djerba
Tunis
Spanish Armada
Leiden
Rocroi
Downs
Passaro
Trafalgar
Somosierra
Annual








New World




Won



Siege of Tenochtitlan
Cajamarca
Cuzco
Bogotá savanna
Reynogüelén
Penco
Guadalupe Island
San Juan
Cartagena de Indias
Cuerno Verde
Pensacola





Lost



La Noche Triste
Tucapel
Chacabuco
Carabobo
Ayacucho
Guam
Santiago de Cuba
Manila Bay
Asomante






















Spanish colonizations






Canary Islands
Aztec
Maya

Chiapas
Yucatán
Guatemala
Petén


El Salvador
Honduras
Nicaragua
Chibchan Nations
Colombia
Peru
Chile













Other civil topics






Spanish missions in the Americas
Architecture
Mesoamerican codices
Cusco painting tradition
Indochristian painting in New Spain
Quito painting tradition
Colonial universities in Latin America
Colonial universities in the Philippines
General Archive of the Indies
Colonial Spanish Horse
Castas
Old inquisition
Slavery in Spanish Empire
British and American slaves granted their freedom by Spain














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spanish_colonization_of_the_Americas&oldid=816914039"					Categories: Spanish colonization of the AmericasSpain in the Age of Discovery16th century in North America16th century in Central America16th century in South America16th century in the Spanish EmpireHistory of indigenous peoples of the AmericasSpanish conquests in the AmericasColony of Santo DomingoColonial MexicoColonial PeruColonial United States (Spanish)History of New SpainSpanish colonial period of CubaSpanish West IndiesFormer empiresFormer Spanish coloniesHistory of the AmericasHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2016Articles containing Spanish-language textArticles with unsourced statements from April 2010