



Marshal's chair in the Sejm, lower chamber of the Polish Parliament


The speaker of a deliberative assembly, especially a legislative body, is its presiding officer, or the chair. The title was first used in 1399 in England.



Contents


1 Usage

1.1 Australia
1.2 Italy
1.3 Canada
1.4 Singapore
1.5 United Kingdom
1.6 United States

1.6.1 Federal
1.6.2 States




2 Similar posts
3 List of current speakers
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading



Usage[edit]




Parliament of Albania


The speaker's official role is to moderate debate, make rulings on procedure, announce the results of votes, and the like. The speaker decides who may speak and has the powers to discipline members who break the procedures of the chamber or house.[1] The speaker often also represents the body in person, as the voice of the body in ceremonial and some other situations. The title was first recorded in 1377 to describe the role of Thomas de Hungerford in the Parliament of England.[2][3]
By convention, speakers are normally addressed in Parliament as 'Mister Speaker', if a man, or 'Madam Speaker', if a woman. In other cultures other styles are used, mainly being equivalents of English "chairman" or "president". Many bodies also have a speaker pro tempore (or deputy speaker), designated to fill in when the speaker is not available.






The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the English-speaking world and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (September 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Australia[edit]
The Speaker of the Australian House of Representatives is the presiding officer of the Australian House of Representatives, the lower house of the Parliament of Australia. The President of the Australian Senate is the presiding officer of the Australian Senate, the upper house of the Parliament of Australia.
Italy[edit]
Italian parliamentarism is centered on the Presidents of the two Houses, vested in defense of the members and of the assembly as a whole;[4] so "the Speaker invites the representative of the Government not to deviate from the rules of parliamentary behavior".[5] Now constitutional community highlights changes also in this role.[6]
Canada[edit]
In Canada, the Speaker of the House of Commons is the individual elected to preside over the House of Commons, the elected lower house. The speaker is a Member of Parliament (MP) and is elected at the beginning of each new parliament by fellow MPs. The Speaker's role in presiding over Canada's House of Commons is similar to that of speakers elsewhere in other countries that use the Westminster system. The Speaker does not vote except in the case of a tie. By convention, if required to vote, the Speaker will vote in favour of continuing debate on a matter, but will not ultimately vote for a measure to be approved.
The Speaker of the Senate of Canada is the presiding officer of the Senate of Canada, the appointed upper house. The Speaker represents the Senate at official functions, rules on questions of parliamentary procedure and parliamentary privilege, and presides over debates and voting in the "Red Chamber". The Speaker of the Senate is appointed by the Governor General of Canada from amongst sitting senators upon the advice of the Prime Minister. The Speaker has a vote on all matters. In the event of a tie, the matter fails.
At the provincial level, the presiding officer of the provincial legidslatures is called the "Speaker" in all provinces except Quebec, where the term "President" is used. The presiding officer fulfills the same role as the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Singapore[edit]
In Singapore, the Speaker of the Parliament of Singapore is the head officer of the country's legislature. By recent tradition, the Prime Minister nominates a person, who may or may not be an elected Member of Parliament (MP), for the role. The person's name is then proposed and seconded by the MPs, before being elected as Speaker.[7] The Constitution states that Parliament has the freedom to decide how to elect its Speaker.[8]
While the Speaker does not have to be an elected MP, they must possess the qualifications to stand for election as an MP as provided for in the Constitution.[9] The Speaker also cannot be a Cabinet Minister or Parliamentary Secretary[10], and must resign from those positions prior to being elected as Speaker.
The Speaker is one of the few public sector roles which allow its office-holder to automatically qualify as a candidate in the Singapore presidential elections.[11]
United Kingdom[edit]
In the United Kingdom, the Speaker of the House of Commons is the individual elected to preside over the elected House of Commons. The speaker is a Member of Parliament (MP) and is elected at the beginning of each new parliament by fellow MPs.
The Lord Speaker is the presiding officer of the House of Lords. The commonly used "Speaker of the House of Lords" is not correct. The presiding officer of the House of Lords was until recently the Lord Chancellor, who was also a member of the government (a cabinet member) and the head of the judicial branch. The Lord Chancellor did not have the same authority to discipline members of the Lords that the speaker of the Commons has in that house. The Lord Speaker is elected by the members of the House of Lords and is expected to be politically impartial.
United States[edit]
Federal[edit]
The Speaker of the United States House of Representatives presides over the lower house of Congress, the House of Representatives. This post is second in line to the presidency—after the vice president—and is therefore the third highest-ranking national office overall. In practice, this post is the highest-ranking in Congress, because the president of the US Senate is the vice president, who has his/her office, and predominant responsibilities, at the White House, and therefore does not have a day-to-day presence at the Congress.
States[edit]
In the forty-nine states that have a bicameral legislature, the highest position in the lower house is usually called the "speaker". In Nebraska—the only state with a unicameral legislature—the senators elect one senator to serve as "Speaker of the Nebraska Legislature". In Tennessee, the senators elect a "Speaker of the Senate" who presides over the Tennessee Senate and serves as lieutenant governor.
Similar posts[edit]




Palace of the Croatian parliament


The presiding officer for an upper house of a bicameral legislature usually has a different title, although substantially the same duties.
When the upper house is called a senate, the equivalent title is often President of the Senate. Australia, Chile, the United States and many other countries have upper houses with presiding officers titled "president". In several American republics, the vice president of the country serves as the president of the upper house.
This pattern is not universal, however. Some upper houses, including those of Canada, have a speaker.
The Presiding Officer of the National Assembly for Wales, Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament, and Presiding Officer of the Northern Ireland Assembly fulfill the same role as the speaker.
List of current speakers[edit]


Country
Legislature (or legislative chamber)
Title
Incumbent


Albania
Parliament of Albania
Speaker
Ilir Meta


Armenia
National Assembly of Armenia
Speaker
Hovik Abrahamyan


Australia
Australian House of Representatives
Speaker
Tony Smith


Austria
National Council
President of the National Council
Doris Bures


Bangladesh
Jatiya Sangsad
Speaker
Shirin Sharmin Chaudhury[12]


Belgium





 »Parliament of Belgium
Chamber of Representatives of Belgium
President (Voorzitter/Président/Präsident)
Siegfried Bracke (N-VA)


 »Parliament of Belgium
Senate of Belgium
President (Voorzitter/Président/Präsident)
Christine Defraigne (MR)


 »Brussels-Capital Region
Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region
President (Président/Voorzitter)
Charles Piqué (PS)


 »Flanders (Community and Region)
Flemish Parliament
President (Voorzitter)
Jan Peumans (N-VA)


 »French Community
Parliament of the French Community
President (Président)
Philippe Courard (PS)


 »German-speaking Community
Parliament of the German-speaking Community
President (Präsident)
Karl-Heinz Lambertz (SP)


 »Wallonia
Parliament of Wallonia
President (Président/Präsident)
André Antoine (politician) (cdH)


Botswana
National Assembly of Botswana
Speaker
Gladys Kokorwe


Bulgaria
National Assembly of Bulgaria
Chairperson
Tsetska Tsacheva


Cambodia
National Assembly of Cambodia
President
Heng Samrin


Canada





 »Parliament of Canada
Senate of Canada
Speaker (Président)
George Furey


 »Parliament of Canada
House of Commons of Canada
Speaker (Président)
Geoff Regan


China





 »National People's Congress
Standing Committee of the National People's Congress
Chairman
Zhang Dejiang


 »Hong Kong
Legislative Council of Hong Kong
President
Andrew Leung


 »Macau
Legislative Assembly of Macau
President (presidente)
Ho Iat Seng


Croatia
Croatian Parliament (Sabor)
President
Željko Reiner


Czech Republic





 » Parliament of the Czech Republic
Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech Republic
Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech Republic
Radek Vondráček


 » Parliament of the Czech Republic
Senate of the Parliament of the Czech Republic
Speaker of the Senate of the Czech Republic
Milan Štěch


Denmark
Parliament of Denmark (Folketinget)
Speaker
Pia Kjærsgaard


 » Faroe Islands
Parliament of the Faroe Islands (Løgtingið)
Speaker
Páll á Reynatúgvu


 » Greenland
Parliament of Greenland (Inatsisartut)
Speaker
Lars Emil Johansen


Egypt
House of Representatives (Egypt)
Speaker
Ali Abdel Aal


Estonia
Riigikogu
Speaker
Eiki Nestor


Finland
Parliament of Finland (eduskunta/riksdagen)
Speaker
Maria Lohela


France
National Assembly (Assemblée Nationale)
President
Claude Bartolone


Ghana
Parliament of Ghana
Speaker
Mrs. Justice Joyce Adeline Bamford-Addo


Germany
Bundestag
President of the Bundestag (Bundestagspräsident)
Wolfgang Schäuble


Greece
Vouli
President
Nikos Voutsis


Hungary
National Assembly of Hungary (Magyar Köztársaság Országgyűlése)
President (elnöke)
László Kövér


Iceland
Parliament of Iceland
Speaker
Steingrímur J. Sigfússon


India
Lok Sabha
Speaker
Sumitra Mahajan


Indonesia
People's Representative Council (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat)
Chairman
Ade Komaruddin


Ireland
Dáil Éireann
Head of the Council (Ceann Comhairle)
Seán Ó Fearghaíl


Iran
Majlis of Iran
Speaker/Chairman [رئیس]
Ali Larijani


Israel
Knesset
Speaker/Chairman [יושב-ראש]
Yuli-Yoel Edelstein


Italy
Italian Chamber of Deputies
President
Laura Boldrini


Japan





 »National Diet
House of Representatives
Speaker
Tadamori Oshima


 »National Diet
House of Councillors
Speaker
Chuichi Date


Kenya





 »Parliament of Kenya
Senate of Kenya
Speaker
Kenneth Lusaka


 »Parliament of Kenya
National Assembly of Kenya
Speaker
Justin Muturi


Kosovo
Assembly of Kosovo
Chairman
Jakup Krasniqi


Latvia
Saeima
Speaker
Ināra Mūrniece


Lebanon
Parliament of Lebanon
Speaker
Nabih Berri


Liechtenstein
Landtag of Liechtenstein
President
Albert Frick


Lithuania
Seimas
Speaker
Loreta Graužinienė


Libya
Council of Deputies
President
Aguila Saleh Issa


Macedonia
Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia
Speaker
Talat Xhaferi


Malaysia
House of Representatives of Malaysia (Dewan Rakyat)
Speaker
Tan Sri Pandikar Amin Mulia


Malta
House of Representatives of Malta
Speaker
Angelo Farrugia


Mexico
Chamber of Deputies (Cámara de Diputados)
President
Ruth Zavaleta Salgado


Moldova
Parliament
President
Marian Lupu


Montenegro
Assembly of Montenegro
President
Ranko Krivokapić


Nepal
Parliament of Nepal
Speaker
Onsari Gharti Magar


Netherlands
House of Representatives of the Netherlands
Speaker
Khadija Arib


New Zealand
House of Representatives
Speaker
Trevor Mallard


Nigeria
National Assembly of Nigeria
Speaker
Yakubu Dogara


Norway
Stortinget
President of the Storting (Stortingspresident)
Olemic Thommessen


North Korea
Supreme People's Assembly
Chairman of the Presidium
Kim Yong-nam


Pakistan
National Assembly of Pakistan
Speaker
Sardar Ayaz Sadiq


Paraguay
Chamber of Senators of Paraguay
President
Mario Abdo Benítez


Philippines
House of Representatives of the Philippines
Speaker
Pantaleon Alvarez


Poland
Sejm of the Republic of Poland
Marshal
Marek Kuchciński


Portugal
Assembly of the Republic
President
Eduardo Ferro Rodrigues


Romania
Chamber of Deputies of Romania
President
Liviu Dragnea


Russia
State Duma
Chairman
Vyacheslav Volodin


Serbia
National Assembly of Serbia
President
Maja Gojković


Singapore
Parliament of Singapore
Speaker
Tan Chuan-Jin


Slovakia
National Council of the Slovak Republic
Speaker
Andrej Danko


Solomon Islands
National Parliament of Solomon Islands
Speaker
Sir Peter Kenilorea


South Africa
National Assembly of South Africa
Speaker
Baleka Mbete


South Korea
National Assembly of South Korea
Speaker
Chung Sye-kyun


South Sudan
National Legislative Assembly of South Sudan
Speaker
James Wani Igga


Spain





 »Cortes Generales
(Spanish parliament)
Congress of the Deputies
President
Ana Pastor


 »Cortes Generales
(Spanish parliament)
Spanish Senate
President
Pío García-Escudero


Sri Lanka
Parliament of Sri Lanka
Speaker
Karu Jayasuriya


Suriname
National Assembly of Suriname (De Nationale Assemblee)
Chairman
Jennifer Simons


Sweden
Riksdag
Speaker
Urban Ahlin


Switzerland
National Council
President
Jürg Stahl


Taiwan
Legislative Yuan
President
Su Jia-chyuan


Thailand
House of Representatives of Thailand
President
Somsak Kiatsuranont


Tonga
Legislative Assembly of Tonga
Speaker
Sialeʻataongo Tuʻivakanō


Ukraine
Verkhovna Rada
Chairman
Andriy Parubiy


United Kingdom





 »Parliament of the United Kingdom
House of Lords of the United Kingdom
Lord Speaker
Norman Fowler


 »Parliament of the United Kingdom
House of Commons of the United Kingdom
Speaker
John Bercow


 » Isle of Man
House of Keys
Speaker
Steve Rodan


 » Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland Assembly
Speaker
Robin Newton


 » Scotland
Scottish Parliament
Presiding Officer
Ken Macintosh


 » Wales
National Assembly for Wales
Presiding Officer
Elin Jones


United States
United States House of Representatives
Speaker
Paul Ryan


Uruguay
Chamber of Deputies of Uruguay
President
Ivonne Passada


Vanuatu
Parliament of Vanuatu
Speaker
George Andre Wells[13]


Venezuela
National Assembly
President
Henry Ramos Allup


Vietnam
National Assembly of Vietnam
Chairman
Nguyễn Sinh Hùng


Zimbabwe
House of Assembly of Zimbabwe
Speaker
Jacob Mudenda


See also[edit]



Generic




Speaker of the senate (disambiguation)
Speaker of the House of Assembly (disambiguation)
Speaker of the House of Commons (disambiguation)
Speaker of the House of Representatives (disambiguation)
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
Speaker of the National Assembly (disambiguation)




Specific




Speaker of the Canadian Senate
List of Speakers of the House of Commons of England
Cathaoirleach (Speaker of the Irish Senate)
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario
Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council
Marshal of the Senate of the Republic of Poland
Lawspeaker
Lord Speaker (Speaker of the United Kingdom House of Lords)
Speaker of the United States House of Representatives

References[edit]


^ As in case of disorders in the floor: Italian traditions knew cases of extreme contestation, not much different from tumults stigmatized in Ukrainian parliaments, Taiwanese and South Korean: Buonomo, Giampiero (2014). "I tre giorni della supercazzola". L’Ago e il filo edizione online.   – via Questia (subscription required)
^ Journal of the House of Commons: January 1559; 1559; accessed August 2015
^ Lee Vol 28, pp. 257,258.
^ Mancini and Galeotti believed that "in the enclosure of the House the exercise of presidential power should not be limits or obstacles whatsoever" (Mancini-Galeotti, Norme ed usi del Parlamento italiano, Roma, 1887, pag. 97).
^ (in Spanish) Sanciones disciplinarias y policía interna en el ordenamiento parlamentario italiano ‘’AA.VV., Derecho parlamentario sancionador’’, Eusko Legebiltazarra, Parlamento Vasco ed., 2005p. 236-271
^ F. Bilancia, L’imparzialità perduta (a proposito dei Presidenti di Assemblea parlamentare), in Aa.Vv., Studi in onore di Gianni Ferrara, vol. I, Giappichelli, Torino 2005, pp. 311 ss..
^ Lee, Min Kok (8 January 2016). "Halimah Yacob to be renominated as Speaker of Parliament: 7 things you may not know about the post". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. 
^ Constitution of the Republic of Singapore, Art. 40(2).
^ "Speaker of Parliament". Parliament of Singapore. Archived from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. 
^ Constitution of the Republic of Singapore, Art. 40(2).
^ Constitution of the Republic of Singapore, Art. 19(3)(a).
^ "Shirin to become first woman Speaker". bdnews24.com. 29 April 2013. Retrieved 29 April 2013. 
^ "01 September confirmed as date for Vanuatu Presidential Election". Islands Business. 2009-09-02. Retrieved 2009-08-20. 


Further reading[edit]

Bergougnous, Georges. Presiding Officers of National Parliamentary Assemblies: A World Comparative Study. Trans. Jennifer Lorenzi. Geneva: Inter-Parliamentary Union, 1997. ISBN 92-9142-028-X.
Green, Matthew N. The Speaker of the House: A Study of Leadership (Yale University Press; 2010) 292 pages; US House






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Speaker_(politics)&oldid=818548551"					Categories: Chairs of lower housesLegislative speakersParliamentary titlesLegislaturesGovernment occupationsPositions of authorityLegal professionsHidden categories: Subscription required using viaPages containing links to subscription-only contentArticles with Spanish-language external linksArticles containing Italian-language textArticles with limited geographic scope from September 2015Anglophone-centric