



Analysis of white light by dispersing it with a prism is an example of spectroscopy.


Spectroscopy /spɛkˈtrɒskəpi/ is the study of the interaction between matter and electromagnetic radiation.[1][2] Historically, spectroscopy originated through the study of visible light dispersed according to its wavelength, by a prism. Later the concept was expanded greatly to include any interaction with radiative energy as a function of its wavelength or frequency. Spectroscopic data are often represented by an emission spectrum, a plot of the response of interest as a function of wavelength or frequency.



Contents


1 Introduction
2 Theory
3 Classification of methods

3.1 Type of radiative energy
3.2 Nature of the interaction
3.3 Type of material

3.3.1 Atoms
3.3.2 Molecules
3.3.3 Crystals and extended materials
3.3.4 Nuclei




4 Other types
5 Applications
6 History
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 External links



Introduction[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Spectroscopy and spectrography are terms used to refer to the measurement of radiation intensity as a function of wavelength and are often used to describe experimental spectroscopic methods. Spectral measurement devices are referred to as spectrometers, spectrophotometers, spectrographs or spectral analyzers.
Daily observations of color can be related to spectroscopy. Neon lighting is a direct application of atomic spectroscopy. Neon and other noble gases have characteristic emission frequencies (colors). Neon lamps use collision of electrons with the gas to excite these emissions. Inks, dyes and paints include chemical compounds selected for their spectral characteristics in order to generate specific colors and hues. A commonly encountered molecular spectrum is that of nitrogen dioxide. Gaseous nitrogen dioxide has a characteristic red absorption feature, and this gives air polluted with nitrogen dioxide a reddish-brown color. Rayleigh scattering is a spectroscopic scattering phenomenon that accounts for the color of the sky.
Spectroscopic studies were central to the development of quantum mechanics and included Max Planck's explanation of blackbody radiation, Albert Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric effect and Niels Bohr's explanation of atomic structure and spectra. Spectroscopy is used in physical and analytical chemistry because atoms and molecules have unique spectra. As a result, these spectra can be used to detect, identify and quantify information about the atoms and molecules. Spectroscopy is also used in astronomy and remote sensing on Earth. Most research telescopes have spectrographs. The measured spectra are used to determine the chemical composition and physical properties of astronomical objects (such as their temperature and velocity).
Theory[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



One of the central concepts in spectroscopy is a resonance and its corresponding resonant frequency. Resonances were first characterized in mechanical systems such as pendulums. Mechanical systems that vibrate or oscillate will experience large amplitude oscillations when they are driven at their resonant frequency. A plot of amplitude vs. excitation frequency will have a peak centered at the resonance frequency. This plot is one type of spectrum, with the peak often referred to as a spectral line, and most spectral lines have a similar appearance.
In quantum mechanical systems, the analogous resonance is a coupling of two quantum mechanical stationary states of one system, such as an atom, via an oscillatory source of energy such as a photon. The coupling of the two states is strongest when the energy of the source matches the energy difference between the two states. The energy 



(
E
)


{\displaystyle (E)}

 of a photon is related to its frequency 



(
ν
)


{\displaystyle (\nu )}

 by 



E
=
h
ν


{\displaystyle E=h\nu }

 where 



h


{\displaystyle h}

 is Planck's constant, and so a spectrum of the system response vs. photon frequency will peak at the resonant frequency or energy. Particles such as electrons and neutrons have a comparable relationship, the de Broglie relations, between their kinetic energy and their wavelength and frequency and therefore can also excite resonant interactions.
Spectra of atoms and molecules often consist of a series of spectral lines, each one representing a resonance between two different quantum states. The explanation of these series, and the spectral patterns associated with them, were one of the experimental enigmas that drove the development and acceptance of quantum mechanics. The hydrogen spectral series in particular was first successfully explained by the Rutherford-Bohr quantum model of the hydrogen atom. In some cases spectral lines are well separated and distinguishable, but spectral lines can also overlap and appear to be a single transition if the density of energy states is high enough. Named series of lines include the principal, sharp, diffuse and fundamental series.
Classification of methods[edit]




A huge diffraction grating at the heart of the ultra-precise ESPRESSO spectrograph.[3]


Spectroscopy is a sufficiently broad field that many sub-disciplines exist, each with numerous implementations of specific spectroscopic techniques. The various implementations and techniques can be classified in several ways.
Type of radiative energy[edit]
Types of spectroscopy are distinguished by the type of radiative energy involved in the interaction. In many applications, the spectrum is determined by measuring changes in the intensity or frequency of this energy. The types of radiative energy studied include:

Electromagnetic radiation was the first source of energy used for spectroscopic studies. Techniques that employ electromagnetic radiation are typically classified by the wavelength region of the spectrum and include microwave, terahertz, infrared, near infrared, visible and ultraviolet, x-ray and gamma spectroscopy.
Particles, due to their de Broglie wavelength, can also be a source of radiative energy and both electrons and neutrons are commonly used. For a particle, its kinetic energy determines its wavelength.
Acoustic spectroscopy involves radiated pressure waves.
Mechanical methods can be employed to impart radiating energy, similar to acoustic waves, to solid materials.

Nature of the interaction[edit]
Types of spectroscopy can also be distinguished by the nature of the interaction between the energy and the material. These interactions include:[1]

Absorption occurs when energy from the radiative source is absorbed by the material. Absorption is often determined by measuring the fraction of energy transmitted through the material; absorption will decrease the transmitted portion.
Emission indicates that radiative energy is released by the material. A material's blackbody spectrum is a spontaneous emission spectrum determined by its temperature; this feature can be measured in the infrared by instruments such as the Atmospheric Emitted Radiance Interferometer (AERI).[4] Emission can also be induced by other sources of energy such as flames or sparks or electromagnetic radiation in the case of fluorescence.
Elastic scattering and reflection spectroscopy determine how incident radiation is reflected or scattered by a material. Crystallography employs the scattering of high energy radiation, such as x-rays and electrons, to examine the arrangement of atoms in proteins and solid crystals.
Impedance spectroscopy studies the ability of a medium to impede or slow the transmittance of energy. For optical applications, this is characterized by the index of refraction.
Inelastic scattering phenomena involve an exchange of energy between the radiation and the matter that shifts the wavelength of the scattered radiation. These include Raman and Compton scattering.
Coherent or resonance spectroscopy are techniques where the radiative energy couples two quantum states of the material in a coherent interaction that is sustained by the radiating field. The coherence can be disrupted by other interactions, such as particle collisions and energy transfer, and so often require high intensity radiation to be sustained. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a widely used resonance method and ultrafast laser methods are also now possible in the infrared and visible spectral regions.

Type of material[edit]
Spectroscopic studies are designed so that the radiant energy interacts with specific types of matter.
Atoms[edit]
Atomic spectroscopy was the first application of spectroscopy developed. Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) and atomic emission spectroscopy (AES) involve visible and ultraviolet light. These absorptions and emissions, often referred to as atomic spectral lines, are due to electronic transitions of outer shell electrons as they rise and fall from one electron orbit to another. Atoms also have distinct x-ray spectra that are attributable to the excitation of inner shell electrons to excited states.
Atoms of different elements have distinct spectra and therefore atomic spectroscopy allows for the identification and quantitation of a sample's elemental composition. Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff discovered new elements by observing their emission spectra. Atomic absorption lines are observed in the solar spectrum and referred to as Fraunhofer lines after their discoverer. A comprehensive explanation of the hydrogen spectrum was an early success of quantum mechanics and explained the Lamb shift observed in the hydrogen spectrum, which further led to the development of quantum electrodynamics.
Modern implementations of atomic spectroscopy for studying visible and ultraviolet transitions include flame emission spectroscopy, inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy, glow discharge spectroscopy, microwave induced plasma spectroscopy, and spark or arc emission spectroscopy. Techniques for studying x-ray spectra include X-ray spectroscopy and X-ray fluorescence (XRF).
Molecules[edit]
The combination of atoms into molecules leads to the creation of unique types of energetic states and therefore unique spectra of the transitions between these states. Molecular spectra can be obtained due to electron spin states (electron paramagnetic resonance), molecular rotations, molecular vibration and electronic states. Rotations are collective motions of the atomic nuclei and typically lead to spectra in the microwave and millimeter-wave spectral regions; rotational spectroscopy and microwave spectroscopy are synonymous. Vibrations are relative motions of the atomic nuclei and are studied by both infrared and Raman spectroscopy. Electronic excitations are studied using visible and ultraviolet spectroscopy as well as fluorescence spectroscopy.
Studies in molecular spectroscopy led to the development of the first maser and contributed to the subsequent development of the laser.
Crystals and extended materials[edit]
The combination of atoms or molecules into crystals or other extended forms leads to the creation of additional energetic states. These states are numerous and therefore have a high density of states. This high density often makes the spectra weaker and less distinct, i.e., broader. For instance, blackbody radiation is due to the thermal motions of atoms and molecules within a material. Acoustic and mechanical responses are due to collective motions as well. Pure crystals, though, can have distinct spectral transitions, and the crystal arrangement also has an effect on the observed molecular spectra. The regular lattice structure of crystals also scatters x-rays, electrons or neutrons allowing for crystallographic studies.
Nuclei[edit]
Nuclei also have distinct energy states that are widely separated and lead to gamma ray spectra. Distinct nuclear spin states can have their energy separated by a magnetic field, and this allows for NMR spectroscopy.
Other types[edit]






This section is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this section to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (April 2016)



Other types of spectroscopy are distinguished by specific applications or implementations:

Acoustic resonance spectroscopy is based on sound waves primarily in the audible and ultrasonic regions
Auger spectroscopy is a method used to study surfaces of materials on a micro-scale. It is often used in connection with electron microscopy.
Cavity ring down spectroscopy
Circular Dichroism spectroscopy
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS) is a recent technique that has high sensitivity and powerful applications for in vivo spectroscopy and imaging.[5]
Cold vapour atomic fluorescence spectroscopy
Correlation spectroscopy encompasses several types of two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy.
Deep-level transient spectroscopy measures concentration and analyzes parameters of electrically active defects in semiconducting materials
Dual polarisation interferometry measures the real and imaginary components of the complex refractive index
Electron phenomenological spectroscopy measures physicochemical properties and characteristics of electronic structure of multicomponent and complex molecular systems.
EPR spectroscopy
Force spectroscopy
Fourier transform spectroscopy is an efficient method for processing spectra data obtained using interferometers. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) is a common implementation of infrared spectroscopy. NMR also employs Fourier transforms.
Hadron spectroscopy studies the energy/mass spectrum of hadrons according to spin, parity, and other particle properties. Baryon spectroscopy and meson spectroscopy are both types of hadron spectroscopy.
Hyperspectral imaging is a method to create a complete picture of the environment or various objects, each pixel containing a full visible, VNIR, NIR, or infrared spectrum.
Inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy (IETS) uses the changes in current due to inelastic electron-vibration interaction at specific energies that can also measure optically forbidden transitions.
Inelastic neutron scattering is similar to Raman spectroscopy, but uses neutrons instead of photons.
Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS), also called Laser-induced plasma spectrometry (LIPS)
Laser spectroscopy uses tunable lasers[6] and other types of coherent emission sources, such as optical parametric oscillators,[7] for selective excitation of atomic or molecular species.
Mass spectroscopy is an historical term used to refer to mass spectrometry. Current recommendations[8] are to use the latter term. Use of the term mass spectroscopy originated in the use of phosphor screens to detect ions.
Mössbauer spectroscopy probes the properties of specific isotopic nuclei in different atomic environments by analyzing the resonant absorption of gamma-rays. See also Mössbauer effect.
Neutron spin echo spectroscopy measures internal dynamics in proteins and other soft matter systems
Photoacoustic spectroscopy measures the sound waves produced upon the absorption of radiation.
Photoemission spectroscopy
Photothermal spectroscopy measures heat evolved upon absorption of radiation.
Pump-probe spectroscopy can use ultrafast laser pulses to measure reaction intermediates in the femtosecond timescale.
Raman optical activity spectroscopy exploits Raman scattering and optical activity effects to reveal detailed information on chiral centers in molecules.
Raman spectroscopy
Saturated spectroscopy
Scanning tunneling spectroscopy
Spectrophotometry
Spin noise spectroscopy traces spontaneous fluctuations of electronic and nuclear spins.[9]
Time-resolved spectroscopy measures the decay rate(s) of excited states using various spectroscopic methods.
Time-Stretch Spectroscopy[10][11]
Thermal infrared spectroscopy measures thermal radiation emitted from materials and surfaces and is used to determine the type of bonds present in a sample as well as their lattice environment. The techniques are widely used by organic chemists, mineralogists, and planetary scientists.
Transient grating spectroscopy measures quasiparticle propagation. It can track changes in metallic materials as they are irradiated.
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS)
Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy
Vibrational circular dichroism spectroscopy
Video spectroscopy
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)

Applications[edit]




UVES is a high-resolution spectrograph on the Very Large Telescope.[12]



Cure monitoring of composites using optical fibers.
Estimate weathered wood exposure times using near infrared spectroscopy.[13]
Measurement of different compounds in food samples by absorption spectroscopy both in visible and infrared spectrum.
Measurement of toxic compounds in blood samples

History[edit]
Main article: History of spectroscopy
The history of spectroscopy began with Isaac Newton's optics experiments (1666–1672). Newton applied the word "spectrum" to describe the rainbow of colors that combine to form white light and that are revealed when the white light is passed through a prism. During the early 1800s, Joseph von Fraunhofer made experimental advances with dispersive spectrometers that enabled spectroscopy to become a more precise and quantitative scientific technique. Since then, spectroscopy has played and continues to play a significant role in chemistry, physics and astronomy.

"In 1672, in the first paper that he submitted to the Royal Society, Sir Isaac Newton described an experiment in which he permitted sunlight to pass through a small hole and then through a prism. Newton found that sunlight, which looks white to us, is actually made up of a mixture of all the colors of the rainbow" [14]
"In 1802, William Hyde Wollaston built an improved spectrometer that included a lens to focus the Sun’s spectrum on a screen. Upon use, Wollaston realized that the colors were not spread uniformly, but instead had missing patches of colors, which appeared as dark bands in the spectrum. Later, in 1815, German physicist Joseph Fraunhofer also examined the solar spectrum, and found about 600 such dark lines (missing colors), which are now known as Fraunhofer lines, or Absorption lines." [14]

See also[edit]


Applied spectroscopy
Astronomical spectroscopy
Biomedical spectroscopy
Coronium
History of spectroscopy
List of spectroscopists
Metamerism (color)
Operando spectroscopy
Scattering theory
Spectral power distributions
Spectroscopic notation
Spectral theory


Notes[edit]


^ a b Crouch, Stanley; Skoog, Douglas A. (2007). Principles of instrumental analysis. Australia: Thomson Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-495-01201-7. 
^ Herrmann, R.; C. Onkelinx (1986). "Quantities and units in clinical chemistry: Nebulizer and flame properties in flame emission and absorption spectrometry (Recommendations 1986)". Pure and Applied Chemistry. 58 (12): 1737–1742. doi:10.1351/pac198658121737. 
^ "A Taste of ESPRESSO". Retrieved 15 September 2015. 
^ Mariani, Z.; Strong, K.; Wolff, M.; Rowe, P.; Walden, V.; Fogal, P. F.; Duck, T.; Lesins, G.; Turner, D. S.; Cox, C.; Eloranta, E.; Drummond, J. R.; Roy, C.; Turner, D. D.; Hudak, D.; Lindenmaier, I. A. (2012). "Infrared measurements in the Arctic using two Atmospheric Emitted Radiance Interferometers". Atmos. Meas. Tech. 5 (2): 329–344. Bibcode:2012AMT.....5..329M. doi:10.5194/amt-5-329-2012. 
^ Evans, C.L.; Xie, X.S. (2008). "Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering Microscopy: Chemical Imaging for Biology and Medicine". Annual Review of Analytical Chemistry. 1: 883–909. Bibcode:2008ARAC....1..883E. doi:10.1146/annurev.anchem.1.031207.112754. PMID 20636101. 
^ W. Demtröder, Laser Spectroscopy, 3rd Ed. (Springer, 2003).
^ Orr BJ; Haub J G; He Y; White RT (2016). "Spectroscopic Applications of Pulsed Tunable Optical Parametric Oscillators". In Duarte FJ. Tunable Laser Applications (3rd ed.). Boca Raton: CRC Press. pp. 17–142. ISBN 978-1-4822-6106-6. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Murray, Kermit K.; Boyd, Robert K.; Eberlin, Marcos N.; Langley, G. John; Li, Liang; Naito, Yasuhide (2013). "Definitions of terms relating to mass spectrometry (IUPAC Recommendations 2013)". Pure and Applied Chemistry. 85 (7): 1. doi:10.1351/PAC-REC-06-04-06. ISSN 0033-4545. 
^ Y. V. Pershin, N. A. Sinitsyn (2016). "The theory of spin noise spectroscopy: a review". Rep. Prog. Phys. 79 (10): 106501. arXiv:1603.06858 . Bibcode:2016RPPh...79j6501S. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/79/10/106501. 
^ Solli, D. R.; Chou, J.; Jalali, B. (2008). "Amplified wavelength–time transformation for real-time spectroscopy". Nature Photonics. 2: 48–51. Bibcode:2008NaPho...2...48S. doi:10.1038/nphoton.2007.253. 
^ Chou, Jason; Solli, Daniel R.; Jalali, Bahram (2008). "Real-time spectroscopy with subgigahertz resolution using amplified dispersive Fourier transformation". Applied Physics Letters. 92 (11): 111102. arXiv:0803.1654 . Bibcode:2008ApPhL..92k1102C. doi:10.1063/1.2896652. 
^ "Media advisory: Press Conference to Announce Major Result from Brazilian Astronomers". ESO Announcement. Retrieved 21 August 2013. 
^ Wang, Xiping; Wacker, James P. (2006). "Using NIR Spectroscopy to Predict Weathered Wood Exposure Times" (PDF). WTCE 2006 – 9th world conference on timber engineering. 
^ a b Fraknoi, Andrew; Morrison, David (13 October 2016). "OpenStax Astronomy". 


References[edit]

John M. Chalmers; Peter Griffiths, eds. (2006). Handbook of Vibrational Spectroscopy (5 Volume Set)|format= requires |url= (help). New York: Wiley. doi:10.1002/0470027320. ISBN 0-471-98847-2. 
Jerry Workman; Art Springsteen, eds. (1998). Applied Spectroscopy. Boston: Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-08-052749-9. 
Peter M. Skrabal (2012). Spectroscopy - An interdisciplinary integral description of spectroscopy from UV to NMR (e-book). ETH Zurich: vdf Hochschulverlag AG. doi:10.3218/3385-4. ISBN 978-3-7281-3385-4. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spectroscopy.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Spectroscopy





Look up spectroscopy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Spectroscopy links at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Amateur spectroscopy links at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
NIST Atomic Spectroscopy Databases
MIT Spectroscopy Lab's History of Spectroscopy
Timeline of Spectroscopy







v
t
e


Analytical chemistry



Instrumentation



Atomic absorption spectrometer
Flame emission spectrometer
Gas chromatograph
High-performance liquid chromatograph
Infrared spectrometer
Mass spectrometer
Melting point apparatus
Microscope
Spectrometer
Spectrophotometer





Techniques



Calorimetry
Chromatography
Electroanalytical methods
Gravimetric analysis
Mass spectrometry
Spectroscopy





Sampling



Coning and quartering
Dilution
Dissolution
Filtration
Masking
Pulverization
Sample preparation
Separation process
Sub-sampling





Calibration



Chemometrics
Calibration curve
Matrix effect
Internal standard
Standard addition
Isotope dilution





Prominent publications



Analyst
Analytica Chimica Acta
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry
Analytical Chemistry
Analytical Biochemistry






Chemistry










v
t
e


Branches of chemistry






Dictionary of chemical formulas
List of biomolecules
List of inorganic compounds
Periodic table





Physical



Chemical kinetics
Chemical physics
Nuclear chemistry
Electrochemistry
Femtochemistry
Geochemistry
Photochemistry
Quantum chemistry
Solid-state chemistry
Spectroscopy
Surface science
Thermochemistry





Organic



Biochemistry
Bioorganic chemistry
Biophysical chemistry
Chemical biology
Clinical chemistry
Fullerene chemistry
Medicinal chemistry
Neurochemistry
Pharmacy
Physical organic chemistry
Polymer chemistry





Inorganic



Bioinorganic chemistry
Cluster chemistry
Coordination chemistry
Materials science
Organometallic chemistry





Others



Actinide chemistry
Analytical chemistry
Astrochemistry
Chemistry education
Clay chemistry
Click chemistry
Computational chemistry
Cosmochemistry
Environmental chemistry
Food chemistry
Forensic chemistry
Green chemistry
Post-mortem chemistry
Supramolecular chemistry
Theoretical chemistry
Wet chemistry








 Category
 Portal
 Commons
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Concepts in organic chemistry






Aromaticity
Covalent bonding
Functional groups
Nomenclature
Organic compounds
Organic reactions
Organic synthesis
Publications
Spectroscopy
Stereochemistry
List of organic compounds












v
t
e


Lasers






List of laser articles
List of laser types
List of laser applications
Laser acronyms



Laser types: Solid-state

Semiconductor


Dye
Gas

Chemical
Excimer
Ion
Metal Vapor








Laser physics



Active laser medium
Amplified spontaneous emission
Continuous wave
Doppler cooling
Laser ablation
Laser cooling
Laser linewidth
Lasing threshold
Magneto-optical trap
Optical tweezers
Population inversion
Resolved sideband cooling
Ultrashort pulse





Laser optics



Beam expander
Beam homogenizer
B Integral
Chirped pulse amplification
Gain-switching
Gaussian beam
Injection seeder
Laser beam profiler
M squared
Mode-locking
Multiple-prism grating laser oscillator
Multiphoton intrapulse interference phase scan
Optical amplifier
Optical cavity
Optical isolator
Output coupler
Q-switching
Regenerative amplification





Laser spectroscopy



Cavity ring-down spectroscopy
Confocal laser scanning microscopy
Laser-based angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
Laser diffraction analysis
Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
Laser-induced fluorescence
Noise-immune cavity-enhanced optical heterodyne molecular spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy
Second-harmonic imaging microscopy
Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy
Tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy
Two-photon excitation microscopy
Ultrafast laser spectroscopy





Laser ionization



Above threshold ionization
Atmospheric-pressure laser ionization
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
Resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization
Soft laser desorption
Surface-assisted laser desorption/ionization
Surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization





Laser fabrication



Laser beam welding
Laser bonding
Laser converting
Laser cutting
Laser cutting bridge
Laser drilling
Laser engraving
Laser-hybrid welding
Laser peening
Multiphoton lithography
Pulsed laser deposition
Selective laser melting
Selective laser sintering





Laser medicine



Computed tomography laser mammography
IntraLASIK
Laser capture microdissection
Laser hair removal
Laser lithotripsy
Laser coagulation
Laser scalpel
Laser surgery
Laser thermal keratoplasty
LASIK
Low level laser therapy
Optical coherence tomography
Photorefractive keratectomy
Photorejuvenation
Soft-tissue laser surgery





Laser fusion



Argus laser
Cyclops laser
GEKKO XII
HiPER
ISKRA lasers
Janus laser
Laboratory for Laser Energetics
Laser integration line
Laser Mégajoule
Long path laser
LULI2000
Mercury laser
National Ignition Facility
Nike laser
Nova (laser)
Novette laser
Shiva laser
Trident laser
Vulcan laser





Civil applications



3D laser scanner
CD
DVD
Laser lighting display
Laser pointer
Laser printer
Laser tag





Military applications



Advanced Tactical Laser
Boeing Laser Avenger
Dazzler (weapon)
Electrolaser
Laser designator
Laser guidance
Laser-guided bomb
Laser guns
Laser rangefinder
Laser warning receiver
Laser weapon
LLM01
Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement System
Tactical High Energy Laser
Tactical light
ZEUS-HLONS (HMMWV Laser Ordnance Neutralization System)








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Spectroscopy



Infrared



FT-IR
Raman
Resonance Raman
Rotational
Vibrational
Rotational-vibrational





UV-Vis-NIR



Ultraviolet-visible
Fluorescence
Vibronic
Near-infrared
Resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI)
Laser-induced





X-ray and
Photoelectron



Photoelectron
Atomic
Emission





Nucleon



Gamma
Mössbauer





Radiowave



NMR
Terahertz
ESR/EPR
Ferromagnetic resonance





Others



Acoustic resonance spectroscopy
Auger spectroscopy
Astronomical spectroscopy
Cavity ring down spectroscopy
Circular Dichroism spectroscopy
Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy
Cold vapour atomic fluorescence spectroscopy
Conversion electron mössbauer spectroscopy
Correlation spectroscopy
Deep-level transient spectroscopy
Dual polarisation interferometry
Electron phenomenological spectroscopy
EPR spectroscopy
Force spectroscopy
Fourier transform spectroscopy
Glow-discharge optical emission spectroscopy
Hadron spectroscopy
Hyperspectral imaging
Inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy
Inelastic neutron scattering
Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy
Mössbauer spectroscopy
Neutron spin echo
Photoacoustic spectroscopy
Photoemission spectroscopy
Photothermal spectroscopy
Pump-probe spectroscopy
Raman optical activity spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy
Saturated spectroscopy
Scanning tunneling spectroscopy
Spectrophotometry
Time-resolved spectroscopy
Time-Stretch
Thermal infrared spectroscopy
Video spectroscopy
Vibrational circular dichroism
Vibrational spectroscopy of linear molecules
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy












v
t
e


Molecules detected in outer space



Molecules




Diatomic



Aluminium monochloride
Aluminium monofluoride
Aluminium monoxide
Argonium
Carbon monophosphide
Carbon monosulfide
Carbon monoxide
Carborundum
Cyanogen radical
Diatomic carbon
Fluoromethylidynium
Hydrogen chloride
Hydrogen fluoride
Hydrogen (molecular)
Hydroxyl radical
Iron(II) oxide
Magnesium monohydride cation
Methylidyne radical
Nitric oxide
Nitrogen (molecular)
Nitrogen monohydride
Nitrogen sulfide
Oxygen (molecular)
Phosphorus monoxide
Phosphorus mononitride
Potassium chloride
Silicon carbide
Silicon mononitride
Silicon monoxide
Silicon monosulfide
Sodium chloride
Sodium iodide
Sulfur monohydride
Sulfur monoxide
Titanium oxide
















Triatomic



Aluminium hydroxide
Aluminium isocyanide
Amino radical
Carbon dioxide
Carbonyl sulfide
CCP radical
Chloronium
Diazenylium
Dicarbon monoxide
Disilicon carbide
Ethynyl radical
Formyl radical
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN)
Hydrogen isocyanide (HNC)
Hydrogen sulfide
Hydroperoxyl
Iron cyanide
Isoformyl
Magnesium cyanide
Magnesium isocyanide
Methylene radical
N2H+
Nitrous oxide
Nitroxyl
Ozone
Phosphaethyne
Potassium cyanide
Protonated molecular hydrogen
Sodium cyanide
Sodium hydroxide
Silicon carbonitride
c-Silicon dicarbide
Silicon naphthalocyanine
Sulfur dioxide
Thioformyl
Thioxoethenylidene
Titanium dioxide
Tricarbon
Water





Four
atoms



Acetylene
Ammonia
Cyanic acid
Cyanoethynyl
Cyclopropynylidyne
Formaldehyde
Fulminic acid
HCCN
Hydrogen peroxide
Hydromagnesium isocyanide
Isocyanic acid
Isothiocyanic acid
Ketenyl
Methylene amidogen
Methyl radical
Propynylidyne
Protonated carbon dioxide
Protonated hydrogen cyanide
Silicon tricarbide
Thioformaldehyde
Tricarbon monoxide
Tricarbon sulfide
Thiocyanic acid





Five
atoms



Ammonium ion
Butadiynyl
Carbodiimide
Cyanamide
Cyanoacetylene
Cyanoformaldehyde
Cyanomethyl
Cyclopropenylidene
Formic acid
Isocyanoacetylene
Ketene
Methane
Methoxy radical
Methylenimine
Propadienylidene
Protonated formaldehyde
Protonated formaldehyde
Silane
Silicon-carbide cluster





Six
atoms



Acetonitrile
Cyanobutadiynyl radical
E-Cyanomethanimine
Cyclopropenone
Diacetylene
Ethylene
Formamide
HC4N
Ketenimine
Methanethiol
Methanol
Methyl isocyanide
Pentynylidyne
Propynal
Protonated cyanoacetylene





Seven
atoms



Acetaldehyde
Acrylonitrile

Vinyl cyanide


Cyanodiacetylene
Ethylene oxide
Hexatriynyl radical
Methylacetylene
Methylamine
Methyl isocyanate
Vinyl alcohol





Eight
atoms



Acetic acid
Aminoacetonitrile
Cyanoallene
Ethanimine
Glycolaldehyde
Heptatrienyl radical
Hexapentaenylidene
Methylcyanoacetylene
Methyl formate
Propenal





Nine
atoms



Acetamide
Cyanohexatriyne
Cyanotriacetylene
Dimethyl ether
Ethanol
Methyldiacetylene
Octatetraynyl radical
Propene
Propionitrile





Ten
atoms
or more



Acetone
Benzene
Buckminsterfullerene (C60 fullerene, buckyball)
C70 fullerene
Cyanodecapentayne
Cyanopentaacetylene
Cyanotetra-acetylene
Ethylene glycol
Ethyl formate
Methyl acetate
Methyl-cyano-diacetylene
Methyltriacetylene
Propanal
n-Propyl cyanide
Pyrimidine








Deuterated
molecules



Ammonia
Ammonium ion
Formaldehyde
Formyl radical
Heavy water
Hydrogen cyanide
Hydrogen deuteride
Hydrogen isocyanide
Methylacetylene
N2D+
Trihydrogen cation





Unconfirmed



Anthracene
Dihydroxyacetone
Ethyl methyl ether
Glycine
Graphene
H2NCO+
Linear C5
Naphthalene cation
Phosphine
Pyrene
Silylidine





Related



Abiogenesis
Astrobiology
Astrochemistry
Atomic and molecular astrophysics
Chemical formula
Circumstellar envelope
Cosmic dust
Cosmic ray
Cosmochemistry
Diffuse interstellar band
Earliest known life forms
Extraterrestrial life
Extraterrestrial liquid water
Forbidden mechanism
Helium hydride ion
Homochirality
Intergalactic dust
Interplanetary medium
Interstellar medium
Photodissociation region
Iron–sulfur world theory
Kerogen
Molecules in stars
Nexus for Exoplanet System Science
Organic compound
Outer space
PAH world hypothesis
Panspermia
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)
RNA world hypothesis
Spectroscopy
Tholin








 Book:Chemistry
 Category:Astrochemistry
 Category:Molecules
 Portal:Astrobiology
 Portal:Astronomy
 Portal:Chemistry









Authority control



GND: 4056138-0
NDL: 00561016











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spectroscopy&oldid=814708574"					Categories: SpectroscopyObservational astronomyScattering, absorption and radiative transfer (optics)Scientific techniquesGustav KirchhoffHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles needing additional references from April 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing cleanup from April 2016All pages needing cleanupArticles with sections that need to be turned into prose from April 2016Pages using div col with small parameterPages using citations with format and no URLArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers