For a complete species list of this family, see Sphingidae species list.


Hawk moths





Hummingbird hawk-moth
Macroglossum stellatarum


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Animalia


Clade:
Euarthropoda


Class:
Insecta


Order:
Lepidoptera


Superfamily:
Bombycoidea


Family:
Sphingidae
Latreille, 1802


Type species


Sphinx ligustri
Linnaeus, 1758


Subfamilies



Macroglossinae
Smerinthinae
Sphinginae



Diversity


About 200 genera,
roughly 1,450 species


The Sphingidae are a family of moths (Lepidoptera), commonly known as hawk moths, sphinx moths, and hornworms; it includes about 1,450 species.[1] It is best represented in the tropics, but species are found in every region.[2] They are moderate to large in size and are distinguished among moths for their rapid, sustained flying ability.[2] Their narrow wings and streamlined abdomens are adaptations for rapid flight.
Some hawk moths, such as the hummingbird hawk-moth or the white-lined sphinx, hover in midair while they feed on nectar from flowers, so are sometimes mistaken for hummingbirds. This hovering capability is only known to have evolved four times in nectar feeders: in hummingbirds, certain bats, hoverflies, and these sphingids[3] (an example of convergent evolution). Sphingids have been much studied for their flying ability, especially their ability to move rapidly from side to side while hovering, called 'swing-hovering' or 'side-slipping'. This is thought to have evolved to deal with ambush predators that lie in wait in flowers.[3]
Sphingids are some of the faster flying insects; some are capable of flying at over 5.3 m/s (12 miles per hour).[4] They have wingspans from 4 to over 10 cm [3.9 in].




Vine hawk moth larva (Hippotion celerio)






an example of the posterior "horn" seen on the tomato hornworm


Most species are multivoltine, capable of producing several generations a year if weather conditions permit.[5] Females lay translucent, greenish, flattened, smooth eggs, usually singly on the host plants. Egg development time varies highly, from three to 21 days.




A Hyles gallii caterpillar seeking a place to pupate: the colour of the caterpillar darkens before pupation.


Sphingid caterpillars are medium to large in size, with stout bodies. They have five pairs of prolegs.[5] Usually, their bodies lack any hairs or tubercules, but most species have a "horn" at the posterior end,[2] which may be reduced to a button, or absent, in the final instar.[5] Many are cryptic greens and browns, and have countershading patterns to conceal them. Others are more conspicuously coloured, typically with white spots on a black or yellow background along the length of the body. A pattern of diagonal slashes along the side is a common feature. When resting, the larva usually holds its legs off the surface and tucks its head underneath (praying position), which, resembling the Egyptian Sphinx, gives rise to the name 'sphinx moth'.[5] Some tropical larvae are thought to mimic snakes.[2][6] Larvae are quick to regurgitate their sticky, often toxic, foregut contents on attackers such as ants and parasitoids.[5] Development rate depends on temperature, and to speed development, some northern and high-altitude species sunbathe.[5] Larvae burrow into soil to pupate, where they remain for 2–3 weeks before they emerge as adults.
In some Sphingidae, the pupa has a free proboscis, rather than being fused to the pupal case as is most common in the Macrolepidoptera.[2] They have a cremaster at the tip of the abdomen.[5] Usually, they pupate off the host plant, in an underground chamber, among rocks, or in a loose cocoon.[5] In most species, the pupa is the overwintering stage.




A feeding hawk moth at Olympiaki Akti (Greece)





Contents


1 Description

1.1 Behavior
1.2 Flight


2 Food plants

2.1 Larvae
2.2 Adults


3 Relationships and species
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Description[edit]




Frenulum of a male comma nephele hawk moth as seen when the fore wing is pulled back. It pierces a retinaculum on vein Sc on the ventral side of the fore wing,[7] and couples the wings in flight for efficiency.[8] In males it consists of a single but compound bristle while in females it consists of several compound bristles.[9] A reduced frenulum is found in some Smerinthini.[8]


Antennae are generally not very feathery, even in the males.[2] They lack tympanal organs, but members of the group Choerocampini have hearing organs on their heads.[2] They have a frenulum and retinaculum to join hind wings and fore wings.[2] The thorax, abdomen, and wings are densely covered in scales. Some sphingids have a rudimental proboscis, but most have a very long one,[2] which is used to feed on nectar from flowers. Most are crepuscular or nocturnal, but some species fly during the day.[5] Both males and females are relatively long-lived (living 10 to 30 days).[5] Prior to flight, most species shiver their flight muscles to warm them up, and, during flight, body temperatures may surpass 40 °C (104 °F).[5]
In some species, differences in form between the sexes is quite marked. For example, in the African species Agrius convolvuli (the convolvulus or morning glory hawk moth), the antennae are thicker and wing markings more mottled in the male than in the female. Only males have both an undivided frenular hook and a retinaculum. Also, all male hawk moths have a partial comb of hairs along their antennae.[10] Females call males to them with pheromones. The male may douse the female with a pheromone[5] before mating.
Behavior[edit]
Some species fly only for short periods either around dusk or dawn, while other species only appear later in the evening and others around midnight, but such species may occasionally be seen feeding on flowers during the day. A few common species in Africa, such as Cephonodes hylas virescens (the Oriental bee hawk), Macroglossum hirundo, and Macroglossum trochilus, are diurnal.[10]
Flight[edit]
In studies with Manduca sexta, moths have dynamic flight sensory abilities due to their antennae. The antennae are vibrated in a plane so that when the body of the moth rotates during controlled aerial maneuvers, the antennae are subject to the inertial coriolis forces that are linearly proportional to the angular velocity of the body.[11] The coriolis forces cause deflections of the antennae, which are detected by the Johnston's organ at the base of each antenna, with strong frequency responses at the beat frequency of the antennae (around 25 Hz) and at twice the beat frequency. The relative magnitude of the two frequency responses enables the moth to distinguish rotation around the different principal axes, allowing for rapid course control during aerial maneuvers.[12]
Food plants[edit]
Larvae[edit]




Bee hawk moth (Cephonodes kingii), Crows Nest, New South Wales


Sphingid larvae tend to be specific feeders, rather than generalists.[5] Compared to similarly sized saturniids, sphingids eat soft young leaves of host plants with small toxic molecules, and chew and mash the food into very small bits.[13] Some species can tolerate quite high concentrations of specific toxins. Tobacco hornworms, Manduca sexta, detoxify and rapidly excrete nicotine, as do several other related sphinx moths in the subfamilies Sphinginae and Macroglossinae, but members of the Smerinthinae that were tested are susceptible.[14] The species that are able to tolerate the toxin do not sequester it in their tissues; 98% was excreted. However, other species, such as Hyles euphorbiae and Daphnis nerii, do sequester toxins from their hosts, but do not pass them on to the adult stage.[5]
Adults[edit]




Hemaris thysbe or hummingbird clearwing moth feeding on lantana flowers


Most adults feed on nectar, although a few tropical species feed on eye secretions, and the death's-head hawkmoth steals honey from bees.[5] Night-flying sphingids tend to prefer pale flowers with long corolla tubes and a sweet odour, a pollination syndrome known as 'sphingophily'.[3] Some species are quite general in visitations, while others are very specific, with the plant only being successfully pollinated by a particular species of moth.[3] Orchids frequently have such specific relations with hawk moths, and very long corolla tubes. The comet orchid, Angraecum sesquipedale, a rare Malagasy flower with its nectar stored at the bottom of a 30-cm-long tube, was described in 1822 by Louis-Marie Aubert du Petit-Thouars, and later, Charles Darwin famously predicted there must be some specialised animal to feed from it:

"[A. sesquipetale has] nectaries 11 and a half inches long [29 cm], with only the lower inch and a half [3.8 cm] filled with very sweet nectar [...] it is, however, surprising, that any insect should be able to reach the nectar: our English sphinxes have probosces as long as their bodies, but in Madagascar there must be moths with probosces capable of extension to a length of between 10 and 12 inches! [30 cm]"[15]

Alfred Russel Wallace published a sort of "wanted poster" (properly, a drawing in a book)[16][unreliable source?] of what this butterfly might look like, and, concurring with his colleague, added:

"[The proboscis of a hawk moth] from tropical Africa ([Xanthopan] morganii) is seven inches and a half [19 cm]. A species having a proboscis two or three inches longer [7.6 cm] could reach the nectar in the largest flowers of Angræcum sesquipedale, whose nectaries vary in length from ten to fourteen inches [36 cm]. That such a moth exists in Madagascar may be safely predicted, and naturalists who visit that island should search for it with as much confidence as astronomers searched for the planet Neptune, – and they will be equally successful."[17]

A possible species was discovered 21 years later, for which the hawk moth in question was found and described as a subspecies of the one mentioned by Wallace: Xanthopan morganii praedicta,[18] for which, the subspecific name praedicta ("the predicted one") was given. The subspecies has, however, been subsequently declared as invalid due to its similarity to mainland species.
Relationships and species[edit]




Oleander hawk moth (Daphnis nerii), in Mangaon, Maharashtra






A sphinx moth, subfamily Macroglossinae, in Cibodas Botanical Garden, Java


The Sphingidae is sometimes assigned its own exclusive superfamily, Sphingoidea, but is alternatively included with the more encompassing Bombycoidea. Following Hodges (1971) two subfamilies are accepted, namely the Sphinginae and Macroglossinae.[7] Around 1,450 species of hawk moths are classified into around 200 genera. Some of the best-known hawk moth species are:

Privet hawk moth (Sphinx ligustri)
Death's-head hawk moth (Acherontia atropos)
Lime hawk moth (Mimas tiliae)
Poplar hawk moth (Laothoe populi)
Convolvulus hawk moth (Agrius convolvuli)
Catalpa sphinx (Ceratomia catalpae)
Hummingbird hawk-moth (Macroglossum stellatarum)
Elephant hawk moth (Deilephila elpenor)
Vine hawk moth (Hippotion celerio)
Spurge hawk moth (Hyles euphorbiae)
Oleander hawk moth (Daphnis nerii)
Pandora sphinx moth (Eumorpha pandorus)
Tomato worm (Manduca quinquemaculata)
Tobacco hornworm (Manduca sexta)

See also[edit]

Sphingidae species list
Twin-spotted Sphinx moth
List of moths of India
List of moths of Great Britain (Sphingidae)

References[edit]


^ van Nieukerken; et al. (2011). "Order Lepidoptera Linnaeus, 1758. In: Zhang, Z.-Q. (Ed.) Animal biodiversity: An outline of higher-level classification and survey of taxonomic richness" (PDF). Zootaxa. 3148: 212–221. 
^ a b c d e f g h i Scoble, Malcolm J. (1995): The Lepidoptera: Form, Function and Diversity (2nd edition). Oxford University Press & Natural History Museum London. ISBN 0-19-854952-0
^ a b c d Kitching, Ian J (2002). "The phylogenetic relationships of Morgan's Sphinx, Xanthopan morganii (Walker), the tribe Acherontiini, and allied long-tongued hawkmoths (Lepidoptera: Sphingidae, Sphinginae)". Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society. 135 (4): 471–527. doi:10.1046/j.1096-3642.2002.00021.x. 
^ Stevenson, R.; Corbo, K.; Baca, L.; Le, Q. (1995). "Cage size and flight speed of the tobacco hawkmoth Manduca sexta" (PDF). The Journal of Experimental Biology. 198 (Pt 8): 1665–1672. PMID 9319572. Retrieved 10 August 2012. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Pittaway, A. R. (1993): The hawkmoths of the western Palaearctic. Harley Books & Natural History Museum, London. ISBN 0-946589-21-6
^ Hossie, Thomas; Sherratt, Thomas (August 2013). "Defensive posture and eyespots deter avian predators from attacking caterpillar models". Animal Behaviour. 86 (2): 383–389. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2013.05.029. Retrieved 4 February 2014. 
^ a b Common, I.F.B. (1990). Moths of Australia. Leiden: Brill. p. 24. ISBN 9789004092273. 
^ a b Schreiber, Harald (1978). Dispersal Centres of Sphingidae (Lepidoptera) in the Neotropical Region. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. p. 18. ISBN 9789400999602. 
^ Messenger, Charlie (1997). "The Sphinx Moths (Lepidoptera: Sphingidae) of Nebraska". Transactions of the Nebraska Academy of Sciences (24): 91–93. Retrieved 18 April 2016. 
^ a b Pinhey, E. (1962): Hawk Moths of Central and Southern Africa. Longmans Southern Africa, Cape Town.
^ McNiell Alexander, R. (February 2007). "Antennae as Gyroscopes" (PDF). Science. 315: 771–772. doi:10.1126/science.1136840. PMID 17289963. 
^ Sane, S.; Dieudonné, A.; Willis, M.; Daniel, T. (February 2007). "Antennal mechanosensors mediate flight control in moths". Science. 315: 863–866. doi:10.1126/science.1133598. PMID 17290001. 
^ Bernays, E. A.; Janzen, D. H. (1988). "Saturniid and sphingid caterpillars: two ways to eat leaves". Ecology. 69 (4): 1153–1160. doi:10.2307/1941269. 
^ Wink, M.; Theile, Vera (2002). "Alkaloid tolerance in Manduca sexta and phylogenetically related sphingids (Lepidoptera: Sphingidae)". Chemoecology. 12: 29–46. doi:10.1007/s00049-002-8324-2. 
^ Darwin, Charles (1862): On the Various Contrivances by Which British and Foreign Orchids are Fertilised by Insects, and on the Good Effects of Intercrossing John Murray, London. HTML fulltext
^ "Image at perso.orange.fr". Retrieved 2011-10-18. 
^ Wallace, Alfred R. (1867). "Creation by law". Quarterly Journal of Science. 4: 470–488.  (p. 477)
^ Rothschild, Walter; Jordan, Karl (1903). "A revision of the lepidopterous family Sphingidae". Novitates Zoologicae. 9 (Supplement): 1–972. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sphingidae.





Wikispecies has information related to Sphingidae



European Butterflies and Moths
Sphingidae at Lepidoptera.pro
Images of Sphingidae of Costa Rica.
Images of Sphingidae species in New Zealand
List of Sphingidae Types from Museum Witt München.
Flickr Images







v
t
e


Extant Lepidoptera families






Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
Class: Insecta
Subclass: Pterygota
Infraclass: Neoptera
Superorder: Endopterygota










Suborder Zeugloptera







Micropterigoidea

Micropterigidae (mandibulate archaic moths)














Suborder Aglossata







Agathiphagoidea

Agathiphagidae (kauri moths)














Suborder Heterobathmiina







Heterobathmioidea

Heterobathmiidae














Suborder Glossata











Dacnonypha




Eriocranioidea



Eriocraniidae








Acanthoctesia




Acanthopteroctetoidea



Acanthopteroctetidae (archaic sun moths)








Lophocoronina




Lophocoronoidea

Lophocoronidae






Neopseustina




Neopseustoidea

Neopseustidae (archaic bell moths)






Exoporia




Hepialoidea



Anomosetidae
Hepialidae (swift moths, ghost moths)
Neotheoridae (Amazonian primitive ghost moths)
Palaeosetidae (miniature ghost moths)
Prototheoridae (African primitive ghost moths)





Mnesarchaeoidea



Mnesarchaeidae (New Zealand primitive moths)











H
e
t
e
r
o
n
e
u
r
a




M
o
n
o
t
r
y
s
i
a




Incurvarioidea



Adelidae (fairy longhorn moths)
Cecidosidae
Crinopterygidae
Heliozelidae
Incurvariidae
Prodoxidae (yucca moths)





Andesianoidea



Andesianidae (Andean endemic moths)





Nepticuloidea



Nepticulidae (pigmy, or midget moths)
Opostegidae (white eyecap moths)





Palaephatoidea



Palaephatidae (Gondwanaland moths)





Tischerioidea



Tischeriidae (trumpet leaf miner moths)








D
i
t
r
y
s
i
a








Simaethistoidea



Simaethistidae





Tineoidea



Acrolophidae (burrowing webworm moths)
Arrhenophanidae
Eriocottidae (Old World spiny-winged moths)
Lypusidae
Psychidae (bagworm moths)
Tineidae (fungus moths)





Gracillarioidea



Bucculatricidae (ribbed cocoon makers)
Douglasiidae (Douglas moths)
Gracillariidae
Roeslerstammiidae





Yponomeutoidea



Acrolepiidae (false diamondback moths)
Bedelliidae
Glyphipterigidae (sedge moths)
Heliodinidae
Lyonetiidae
Plutellidae
Yponomeutidae (ermine moths)
Ypsolophidae





Gelechioidea



Autostichidae
Batrachedridae
Blastobasidae
Coleophoridae (case-bearers, case moths)
Cosmopterigidae (cosmet moths)
Elachistidae (grass-miner moths)
Gelechiidae (twirler moths)
Lecithoceridae (long-horned moths)
Metachandidae
Momphidae (mompha moths)
Oecophoridae (concealer moths)
Pterolonchidae
Scythrididae (flower moths)
Xyloryctidae (timber moths)





Galacticoidea



Galacticidae





Zygaenoidea



Heterogynidae
Zygaenidae (burnet, forester, or smoky moths)
Himantopteridae
Lacturidae
Somabrachyidae
Megalopygidae (flannel moths)
Aididae
Anomoeotidae
Cyclotornidae
Epipyropidae (planthopper parasite moths)
Dalceridae (slug caterpillars)
Limacodidae (slug, or cup moths)





Cossoidea



Cossidae (carpenter millers, or goat moths)
Dudgeoneidae (dudgeon carpenter moths)





Sesioidea



Brachodidae (little bear moths)
Castniidae (castniid moths: giant butterfly-moths, sun moths)
Sesiidae (clearwing moths)





Choreutoidea



Choreutidae (metalmark moths)





Tortricoidea



Tortricidae (tortrix moths)





Urodoidea



Urodidae (false burnet moths)





Schreckensteinioidea



Schreckensteiniidae (bristle-legged moths)





Epermenioidea



Epermeniidae (fringe-tufted moths)





Alucitoidea



Alucitidae (many-plumed moths)
Tineodidae (false plume moths)





Pterophoroidea



Pterophoridae (plume moths)





Whalleyanoidea



Whalleyanidae





Immoidea



Immidae





Copromorphoidea



Copromorphidae (tropical fruitworm moths)
Carposinidae (fruitworm moths)





Hyblaeoidea



Hyblaeidae (teak moths)
















Pyraloidea



Pyralidae (snout moths)
Crambidae (grass moth)





Thyridoidea



Thyrididae (picture-winged leaf moths)





Mimallonoidea



Mimallonidae (sack bearer moths)





Lasiocampoidea



Lasiocampidae (eggars, snout moths, or lappet moths)





Bombycoidea



Anthelidae (Australian lappet moth)
Bombycidae (silk moths)
Brahmaeidae (Brahmin moths)
Carthaeidae (Dryandra moth)
Endromidae (Kentish glory and relatives)
Eupterotidae
Lemoniidae
Saturniidae (saturniids)
Sphingidae (hawk moths, sphinx moths and hornworms)
Phiditiidae





Noctuoidea



Doidae
Erebidae (underwing, tiger, tussock, litter, snout, owlet moths)
Euteliidae
Noctuidae (daggers, sallows, owlet moths, quakers, cutworms, darts)
Nolidae (tuft moths)
Notodontidae (prominents, kittens)
Oenosandridae





Drepanoidea



Epicopeiidae (oriental swallowtail moths)
Drepanidae (hook-tips)





Geometroidea



Sematuridae
Uraniidae
Geometridae (geometer moths)





Cimelioidea



Cimeliidae (gold moths)





Calliduloidea



Callidulidae (Old World butterfly-moths)





Superfamily unassigned



Millieriidae








Rhopalocera
(butterflies)




Hedyloidea



Hedylidae (American moth-butterflies)





Hesperioidea



Hesperiidae (skippers)





Papilionoidea
(true butterflies)



Lycaenidae (gossamer-winged butterflies: blues, coppers and relatives)
Nymphalidae (brush-footed, or four-footed butterflies)
Papilionidae (swallowtail butterflies)
Pieridae (whites, yellows, orangetips, sulphurs)
Riodinidae (metalmarks)


















Note: division Monotrysia is not a clade.












Taxonomy of the Lepidoptera
Lists by region









Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q157683
BAMONA: Sphingidae
BugGuide: 193
EoL: 905
Fauna Europaea: 6818
Fossilworks: 71815
GBIF: 8868
ITIS: 117293
NCBI: 7128









Authority control



LCCN: sh85126604
GND: 4194387-9











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sphingidae&oldid=811547662"					Categories: Moth familiesSphingidaePollinator insectsTaxa named by Pierre André LatreilleHidden categories: Articles using diversity taxoboxArticles with 'species' microformatsAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from October 2011Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers