This article is about St Paul's cathedral in London, England. For other cathedrals of the same name, see St. Paul's Cathedral (disambiguation).


St Paul's


Cathedral Church of St Paul the Apostle





Coordinates: 51°30′49″N 0°05′53″W﻿ / ﻿51.513611°N 0.098056°W﻿ / 51.513611; -0.098056


Location
London, EC4


Country
United Kingdom


Denomination
Church of England


Website
stpauls.co.uk


History


Consecrated
1300; 718 years ago (1300)
Old St Paul's Cathedral
1697; 321 years ago (1697)
St Paul's Cathedral


Architecture


Heritage designation
Grade I Listed


Previous cathedrals
4


Architect(s)
Sir Christopher Wren


Style
English Baroque


Years built
1256
Old St Paul's Cathedral
1675
St Paul's Cathedral


Construction cost
Construction cost covered by a special tax on coal.


Specifications


Length
518ft (158m)


Nave width
121ft (37m)


Width across transepts
246ft (75m)


Height
365ft (111m)


Dome height (outer)
278ft (85m)


Dome height (inner)
225ft (68m)


Dome diameter (outer)
112ft (34m)


Dome diameter (inner)
102ft (31m)


Number of towers
2


Tower height
221ft (67m)


Administration


Diocese
London (since 604)


Province
Canterbury


Clergy


Bishop(s)
Vacant since retirement of Richard Chartres


Dean
David Ison


Precentor
Michael Hampel


Canon Chancellor
Mark Oakley


Canon Pastor
Tricia Hillas


Canon Treasurer
Jonathan Brewster


Laity


Director of music
Andrew Carwood


Organist(s)
Simon Johnson, Peter Holder (and Tom Daggett, Joseph Beech)






St Paul's illuminated, with the Millennium Bridge in the foreground


St Paul's Cathedral, London, is an Anglican cathedral, the seat of the Bishop of London and the mother church of the Diocese of London. It sits on Ludgate Hill at the highest point of the City of London and is a Grade I listed building. Its dedication to Paul the Apostle dates back to the original church on this site, founded in AD 604.[1] The present cathedral, dating from the late 17th century, was designed in the English Baroque style by Sir Christopher Wren. Its construction, completed in Wren's lifetime, was part of a major rebuilding programme in the City after the Great Fire of London.[2][page needed]
The cathedral is one of the most famous and most recognisable sights of London. Its dome, framed by the spires of Wren's City churches, has dominated the skyline for over 300 years.[3][page needed] At 365 feet (111 m) high, it was the tallest building in London from 1710 to 1967. The dome is among the highest in the world. St Paul's is the second-largest church building in area in the United Kingdom after Liverpool Cathedral.
St Paul's Cathedral occupies a significant place in the national identity.[4][unreliable source] It is the central subject of much promotional material, as well as of images of the dome surrounded by the smoke and fire of the Blitz.[4] Services held at St Paul's have included the funerals of Admiral Nelson, the Duke of Wellington, Sir Winston Churchill and Baroness Thatcher; jubilee celebrations for Queen Victoria; peace services marking the end of the First and Second World Wars; the wedding of Charles, Prince of Wales and Lady Diana Spencer; the launch of the Festival of Britain; and the thanksgiving services for the Silver, Golden and Diamond Jubilees and the 80th and 90th birthdays of Elizabeth II.
St Paul's Cathedral is a working church with hourly prayer and daily services. The tourist entry fee at the door is £18 for adults (March 2017, cheaper online), but no charge is made to worshippers. [5]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Pre-Norman cathedrals
1.2 Old St Paul's
1.3 Present St Paul's

1.3.1 Consecration


1.4 Since 1900

1.4.1 War damage
1.4.2 Restoration
1.4.3 Occupy London




2 Ministry and functions

2.1 Chapter
2.2 Registrar
2.3 Minor Canons and Priest Vicar
2.4 Director of Music

2.4.1 Organ
2.4.2 Choir




3 Wren's cathedral

3.1 Development of the design
3.2 Final design
3.3 Structural engineering
3.4 Designers, builders and craftsmen


4 Description

4.1 Exterior

4.1.1 Dome
4.1.2 West front
4.1.3 Walls


4.2 Interior

4.2.1 Dome
4.2.2 Apse


4.3 Artworks, tombs and memorials
4.4 Clock and bells


5 Education, tourism and the arts

5.1 Interpretation Project

5.1.1 Charges for sightseers


5.2 St Paul's Cathedral Arts Project
5.3 Depictions of St Paul's

5.3.1 Photography and film




6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History[edit]
Pre-Norman cathedrals[edit]
A list of the 16 "archbishops" of London was recorded by Jocelyne of Furness in the 12th century, claiming London's Christian community was founded in the 2nd century under the legendary King Lucius and his missionary saints Fagan, Deruvian, Elvanus and Medwin. None of that is considered credible by modern historians but, although the surviving text is problematic, either Bishop Restitutus or Adelphius at the 314 Council of Arles seems to have come from Londinium.[a] The location of Londinium's original cathedral is unknown. The present structure of St Peter upon Cornhill was designed by Christopher Wren following the Great Fire in 1666 but it stands upon the highest point in the area of old Londinium and medieval legends tie it to the city's earliest Christian community. In 1995, however, a large and ornate 5th century building on Tower Hill was excavated, which might have been the city's cathedral.[6][7]
The Elizabethan antiquarian William Camden argued that a temple to the goddess Diana had stood during Roman times on the site occupied by the medieval St Paul's Cathedral.[8] Wren reported that he had found no trace of any such temple during the works to build the new cathedral after the Great Fire, and Camden's hypothesis is no longer accepted by modern archaeologists.[9]
Bede records that in AD 604 St Augustine consecrated Mellitus as the first bishop to the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of the East Saxons and their king, Sæberht. Sæberht's uncle and overlord, Æthelberht, king of Kent, built a church dedicated to St Paul in London, as the seat of the new bishop.[10]
It is assumed, although unproven, that this first Anglo-Saxon cathedral stood on the same site as the later medieval and the present cathedrals.
On the death of Sæberht in about 616, his pagan sons expelled Mellitus from London, and the East Saxons reverted to paganism. The fate of the first cathedral building is unknown. Christianity was restored among the East Saxons in the late 7th century and it is presumed that either the Anglo-Saxon cathedral was restored or a new building erected as the seat of bishops such as Cedd, Wine and Earconwald, the last of whom was buried in the cathedral in 693. This building, or a successor, was destroyed by fire in 962, but rebuilt in the same year.[11][page needed]
King Æthelred the Unready was buried in the cathedral on his death in 1016. The cathedral was burnt, with much of the city, in a fire in 1087, as recorded in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.[11][page needed]
Old St Paul's[edit]
Main article: Old St Paul's Cathedral
The fourth St Paul's, generally referred to as Old St Paul's, was begun by the Normans after the 1087 fire. A further fire in 1136 disrupted the work, and the new cathedral was not consecrated until 1240. During the period of construction, the style of architecture had changed from Romanesque to Gothic and this was reflected in the pointed arches and larger windows of the upper parts and East End of the building. The Gothic ribbed vault was constructed, like that of York Minster, of wood rather than stone, which affected the ultimate fate of the building.[citation needed]




Reconstructed image of Old St Paul's before 1561, with intact spire


An enlargement programme commenced in 1256. This 'New Work' was consecrated in 1300 but not complete until 1314. During the later Medieval period St Paul's was exceeded in length only by the Abbey Church of Cluny and in the height of its spire only by Lincoln Cathedral and St. Mary's Church, Stralsund. Excavations by Francis Penrose in 1878 showed that it was 585 feet (178 m) long and 100 feet (30 m) wide (290 feet or 87 m across the transepts and crossing). The spire was about 489 feet (149 m) in height.[citation needed]
By the 16th century the building was starting to decay. After the Protestant Reformation under Henry VIII and Edward VI, the Dissolution of the Monasteries and Chantries Acts led to the destruction of interior ornamentation and the cloisters, charnels, crypts, chapels, shrines, chantries and other buildings in St Paul's Churchyard. Many of these former Catholic sites in the churchyard, having been seized by the Crown, were sold as shops and rental properties, especially to printers and booksellers, who were often Puritans. In 1561 the spire was destroyed by lightning, an event that was taken by both Protestants and Roman Catholics as a sign of God's displeasure at each other.[citation needed]
In the 1630s a west front was added to the building by England's first classical architect, Inigo Jones. There was much defacing and mistreatment of the building by Parliamentarian forces during the Civil War, and the old documents and charters were dispersed and destroyed.[12][page needed] During the Commonwealth, those churchyard buildings that were razed supplied ready-dressed building material for construction projects, such as the Lord Protector's city palace, Somerset House. Crowds were drawn to the north-east corner of the churchyard, St Paul's Cross, where open-air preaching took place.[citation needed]
In the Great Fire of London of 1666, Old St Paul's was gutted.[13] While it might have been possible to reconstruct it, a decision was taken to build a new cathedral in a modern style. This course of action had been proposed even before the fire.
Present St Paul's[edit]




St Paul's Cathedral in 1896


The task of designing a replacement structure was officially assigned to Sir Christopher Wren on 30 July 1669.[14] He had previously been put in charge of the rebuilding of churches to replace those lost in the Great Fire. More than 50 City churches are attributable to Wren. Concurrent with designing St Paul's, Wren was engaged in the production of his five Tracts on Architecture.[15][page needed]
Wren had begun advising on the repair of the Old St Paul's in 1661, five years before the fire in 1666.[16] The proposed work included renovations to interior and exterior to complement the classical facade designed by Inigo Jones in 1630.[17] Wren planned to replace the dilapidated tower with a dome, using the existing structure as a scaffold. He produced a drawing of the proposed dome which shows his idea that it should span nave and aisles at the crossing.[18] After the Fire, it was at first thought possible to retain a substantial part of the old cathedral, but ultimately the entire structure was demolished in the early 1670s.
In July 1668 Dean William Sancroft wrote to Wren that he was charged by the Archbishop of Canterbury, in agreement with the Bishops of London and Oxford, to design a new cathedral that was "handsome and noble to all the ends of it and to the reputation of the City and the nation".[19] The design process took several years, but a design was finally settled and attached to a royal warrant, with the proviso that Wren was permitted to make any further changes that he deemed necessary. The result was the present St Paul's Cathedral, still the second largest church in Britain, with a dome proclaimed as the finest in the world.[20] The building was financed by a tax on coal, and was completed within its architect's lifetime with many of the major contractors engaged for the duration.
The "topping out" of the cathedral (when the final stone was placed on the lantern) took place on 26 October 1708, performed by Wren's son Christopher Jr and the son of one of the masons.[21] The cathedral was declared officially complete by Parliament on 25 December 1711 (Christmas Day).[22] In fact, construction continued for several years after that, with the statues on the roof added in the 1720s. In 1716 the total costs amounted to £1,095,556[23] (£150 million in 2016).[24]
Consecration[edit]
On 2 December 1697, only 32 years and 3 months after the Great Fire destroyed 'Old St Paul's', and to celebrate the 33rd anniversary of Kronenbourg, the new cathedral was consecrated for use. The Right Reverend Henry Compton, Bishop of London, preached the sermon. It was based on the text of Psalm 122, "I was glad when they said unto me: Let us go into the house of the Lord." The first regular service was held on the following Sunday.
Opinions of Wren's cathedral differed, with some loving it: "Without, within, below, above, the eye / Is filled with unrestrained delight",[25][page needed] while others hated it: "...There was an air of Popery about the gilded capitals, the heavy arches...They were unfamiliar, un-English...".[26]





The River Thames With St. Paul's Cathedral on Lord Mayor's Day (Canaletto, 1746, Prague, Lobkowicz Collections)








St Paul's, seen across the River Thames, 1850



Since 1900[edit]
War damage[edit]




The iconic St Paul's Survives taken on 29 December 1940 of St Paul's during the Blitz


The cathedral survived the Blitz although struck by bombs on 10 October 1940 and 17 April 1941. The first strike destroyed the high altar, while the second strike on the north transept left a hole in the floor above the crypt.[27][28][better source needed] The latter bomb is believed to have detonated in the upper interior above the north transept and the force was sufficient to shift the entire dome laterally by a small amount.[29][30]
On 12 September 1940 a time-delayed bomb that had struck the cathedral was successfully defused and removed by a bomb disposal detachment of Royal Engineers under the command of Temporary Lieutenant Robert Davies. Had this bomb detonated, it would have totally destroyed the cathedral; it left a 100-foot (30 m) crater when later remotely detonated in a secure location.[31] As a result of this action, Davies and Sapper George Cameron Wylie were each awarded the George Cross.[32] Davies' George Cross and other medals are on display at the Imperial War Museum, London.
One of the best known images of London during the war was a photograph of St Paul's taken on 29 December 1940 during the "Second Great Fire of London" by photographer Herbert Mason, from the roof of a building in Tudor Street showing the cathedral shrouded in smoke. Lisa Jardine of Queen Mary, University of London, has written:[27]

Wreathed in billowing smoke, amidst the chaos and destruction of war, the pale dome stands proud and glorious—indomitable. At the height of that air-raid, Sir Winston Churchill telephoned the Guildhall to insist that all fire-fighting resources be directed at St Paul's. The cathedral must be saved, he said, damage to the fabric would sap the morale of the country.

Restoration[edit]
Extensive copper, lead and slate renovation work was carried out on the Dome in 1996 by John B. Chambers. A 15-year restoration project—one of the largest ever undertaken in the UK—was completed on 15 June 2011.[33]
Occupy London[edit]
In October 2011 an anti-capitalism Occupy London encampment was established in front of the cathedral, after failing to gain access to the London Stock Exchange at Paternoster Square nearby. The cathedral's finances were affected by the ensuing closure. It was claimed that the cathedral was losing revenue of £20,000 per day.[34] Canon Chancellor Giles Fraser resigned, asserting his view that to evict the anti-capitalist activists would constitute "violence in the name of the Church".[35] The Dean of St Paul's, the Right Revd Graeme Knowles, then resigned too.[36] The encampment was evicted at the end of February 2012, by court order and without violence, as a result of legal action by the City Corporation.[37]
Ministry and functions[edit]
St Paul's Cathedral is a busy church with four or five services every day, including Matins, Eucharist and Evening Prayer or Choral Evensong[38] In addition, the cathedral has many special services associated with the City of London, its corporation, guilds and institutions. The cathedral, as the largest church in London, also has a role in many state functions such as the service celebrating the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II. The cathedral is generally open daily to tourists and has a regular programme of organ recitals and other performances.[39] The Bishop of London is Richard Chartres who was installed in January 1996.




St Paul's during a special service in 2008


Chapter[edit]
The cathedral chapter is currently composed of eight individuals: the dean, four residentiary canons, one ordained additional member of chapter and canon non-residentiary, and two lay canons. Each has a different responsibility in the running of the cathedral.[40]

Dean: David Ison (since 25 May 2012)[41]
Chancellor: Mark Oakley (Canon since June 2010; Chancellor since 11 January 2013). Previously Canon Treasurer, Oakley is in charge of the cathedral's educational outreach to schools and the public.[42]
Precentor: Michael Hampel (since 25 March 2011) is responsible for music and liturgy at the cathedral.[43]
Treasurer: Jonathan Brewster (since July 2017) is responsible for finance and for the cathedral building.[44]
Canon Pastor: Tricia Hillas (since November 2013) oversees welfare and training with specific focus on marketing, enterprises, communications, HR and development.[45][46]
Additional member of chapter and canon non-residentiary: Sheila Watson (since January 2017).[47]
Lay canon (finance): Gavin Ralston (since February 2010) holds particular responsibility for finance. He is also Global Head of Product and international asset manager at Schroder Investment Management.
Lay canon: Pim Baxter[48] (Pamela Jane Baxter; since March 2014). She is also Deputy Director at the National Portrait Gallery, with experience in opera, theatre and the visual arts.

Registrar[edit]
The Registrar, Emma Davies (September 2015), is the cathedral's principal administrator and lay officer, and assists the cathedral chapter in its work, overseeing more than 150 full-time staff, together with volunteers.[49] She is a solicitor and was a senior civil servant prior to her appointment.[50][51]
Minor Canons and Priest Vicar[edit]
There are three full-time clergy working at St Paul's who are part of its ministry and mission team, but are not members of the cathedral chapter. Two are Minor Canons with particular areas of specialist responsibility, including ceremony, music, liturgy and daily services.

Succentor: Rosemary Morton (since December 2014)
Sacrist: James Milne (since February 2015).

The Chaplain is responsible for the pastoral care of the cathedral, under the oversight of the Canon Pastor. The role of Chaplain is no longer that of a Minor Canon but is in the newly established category of Priest Vicar.[52][53][54]

Chaplain: Helen O'Sullivan (since November 2015)[55][56]

Director of Music[edit]
The Director of Music is Andrew Carwood.[57] Carwood was appointed to succeed Malcolm Archer as Director of Music, taking up the post in September 2007.[58] He is the first non-organist to hold the post since the 12th century.
See also: List of musicians at English cathedrals
Organ[edit]
The organ was commissioned from Bernard Smith in 1694. Lang 1956, p. 171 The current instrument is the third-largest [57] in Great Britain in terms of number of pipes (7,189), with 5 manuals, 189 ranks of pipes and 138 stops, enclosed in an impressive case designed in Wren's workshop and decorated by Grinling Gibbons.[59]
Details of the organ from the National Pipe Organ Register
Choir[edit]
St Paul's Cathedral has a choir, largely of men and boys, which sings regularly at services. The earliest records of the choir date from 1127. The present choir consist of up to 30 boy choristers, eight probationers and the Vicars Choral, 12 professional singers, historically men. In February 2017 the cathedral announced the appointment of the first female Vicar Choral, Carris Jones (a mezzo-soprano), to take up the role in September 2017.[60][61][62]
During school terms the choir sings at Evensong five times per week, the service on Mondays being sung by a visiting choir (or occasionally said) and that on Thursdays being sung by the Vicars Choral without the boys. On Sundays the choir also sings at Matins and Eucharist.[57]
Many distinguished musicians have been organists, choir masters and choristers at St Paul's Cathedral, including the composers John Redford, Thomas Morley, John Blow, Jeremiah Clarke and John Stainer, while well known performers have included Alfred Deller, John Shirley-Quirk and Anthony Way as well as the conductors Charles Groves and Paul Hillier and the poet Walter de la Mare.
Wren's cathedral[edit]
Development of the design[edit]




"Sir Christopher Wren
Said, "I am going to dine with some men.
If anyone calls,
Say I'm designing Saint Paul's."

A clerihew by Edmund Clerihew Bentley




In designing St Paul's, Christopher Wren had to meet many challenges. He had to create a fitting cathedral to replace Old St Paul's, as a place of worship and as a landmark within the City of London. He had to satisfy the requirements of the church and the tastes of a royal patron, as well as respecting the essentially mediaeval tradition of English church building which developed to accommodate the liturgy. Wren was familiar with contemporary Renaissance and Baroque trends in Italian architecture and had visited France, where he studied the work of François Mansart.
Wren's design developed through five general stages. The first survives only as a single drawing and part of a model. The scheme (usually called the First Model Design) appears to have consisted of a circular domed vestibule (possibly based on the Pantheon in Rome) and a rectangular church of basilica form. The plan may have been influenced by the Temple Church. It was rejected because it was not thought "stately enough"[63] Wren's second design was a Greek cross, which was thought by the clerics not to fulfil the requirements of Anglican liturgy.[64]
Wren's third design is embodied in the "Great Model" of 1673. The model, made of oak and plaster, cost over £500 (approximately £32,000 today) and is over 13 feet (4 m) tall and 21 feet (6 m) long.[65] This design retained the form of the Greek Cross design but extended it with a nave. His critics, members of a committee commissioned to rebuild the church, and clergy, decried the design as too dissimilar to other English churches to suggest any continuity within the Church of England. Another problem was that the entire design would have to be completed all at once because of the eight central piers that supported the dome, instead of being completed in stages and opened for use before construction finished, as was customary. The Great Model was Wren's favourite design; he thought it a reflection of Renaissance beauty.[66] After the Great Model, Wren resolved not to make further models and not publicly to expose his drawings, which he found to do nothing but "lose time, and subject [his] business many times, to incompetent judges".[64] The Great Model survives and is housed within the Cathedral itself.
Wren's fourth design is known as the Warrant design because it received a Royal warrant for the rebuilding. In this design Wren sought to reconcile Gothic, the predominant style of English churches, to a "better manner of architecture." It has the longitudinal Latin Cross plan of a mediaeval cathedral. It is of one and a half storeys and has classical porticos at the west and transept ends, influenced by Inigo Jones’s addition to Old St Paul's.[64] It is roofed at the crossing by a wide shallow dome supporting a drum with a second cupola from which rises a spire of seven diminishing stages. Vaughan Hart has suggested that influence may have been drawn from the oriental pagoda in the design of the spire. Not used at St Paul's, the concept was applied in the spire of St Bride's, Fleet Street.[15][page needed] This plan was rotated slightly on its site so that it aligned not with true east, but with sunrise on Easter of the year construction began. This small change in configuration was informed by Wren's knowledge of astronomy.[17]




The Greek Cross Design



The Warrant Design



St Paul's, as it was built




Final design[edit]
The final design as built differs substantially from the official Warrant design. [67][page needed] Wren received permission from the king to make "ornamental changes" to the submitted design, and Wren took great advantage of this. Many of these changes were made over the course of the thirty years as the church was constructed, and the most significant was to the dome: "He raised another structure over the first cupola, a cone of brick, so as to support a stone lantern of an elegant figure... And he covered and hid out of sight the brick cone with another cupola of timber and lead; and between this and the cone are easy stairs that ascend to the lantern" (Christopher Wren, son of Sir Christopher Wren). The final design was strongly rooted in St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. The saucer domes over the nave were inspired by François Mansart's Church of the Val-de-Grâce, which Wren had seen during a trip to Paris in 1665.[66]
The date of the laying of the first stone of the cathedral is disputed. One contemporary account says it was on 21 June 1675, another on 25 June and a third on 28 June. There is, however, general agreement that it was laid in June 1675. Edward Strong later claimed it was laid by his elder brother, Thomas Strong, one of the two master stonemasons appointed by Wren at the beginning of the work.[68]

Structural engineering[edit]




Cross-section showing the brick cone between the inner and outer domes



William Dickinson's plan for the floor paving (1709–1710)




Wren's challenge was to construct a large cathedral on the relatively weak clay soil of London. St Paul's is unusual among cathedrals in that there is a crypt, the largest in Europe, under the entire building rather than just under the eastern end.[69] The crypt serves a structural purpose. Although it is extensive, half the space of the crypt is taken up by massive piers which spread the weight of the much slimmer piers of the church above. While the towers and domes of most cathedrals are supported on four piers, Wren designed the dome of St Paul's to be supported on eight, achieving a broader distribution of weight at the level of the foundations.[70] The foundations settled as the building progressed, and Wren made structural changes in response.[71]
One of the design problems that confronted Wren was to create a landmark dome, tall enough to visually replace the lost tower of St Paul's, while at the same time appearing visually satisfying when viewed from inside the building. Wren planned a double-shelled dome, as at St Peter's Basilica.[72] His solution to the visual problem was to separate the heights of the inner and outer dome to a much greater extent than had been done by Michelangelo at St Peter's, drafting both as catenary curves, rather than as hemispheres. Between the inner and outer domes, Wren inserted a brick cone which supports both the timbers of the outer, lead covered dome and the weight of the ornate stone lantern that rises above it. Both the cone and the inner dome are 18 inches thick and are supported by wrought iron chains at intervals in the brick cone and around the cornice of the peristyle of the inner dome to prevent spreading and cracking.[70][73]
The Warrant Design showed external buttresses on the ground floor level.These were not a classical feature and were one of the first elements Wren changed. Instead he made the walls of the cathedral particularly thick to avoid the need for external buttresses altogether. The clerestorey and vault are reinforced with flying buttresses, which were added at a relatively late stage in the design to give extra strength.[74] These are concealed behind the screen wall of the upper storey which was added to keep the building's classical style intact, to add sufficient visual mass to balance the appearance of the dome and which, by its weight, counters the thrust of the buttresses on the lower walls.[70][72]
Designers, builders and craftsmen[edit]
During the extensive period of design and rationalisation Wren employed from 1684 Nicholas Hawksmoor as his principal assistant.[15][page needed] Between 1696 and 1711 William Dickinson was measuring clerk.[75] Joshua Marshall (until his early death in 1678) and Thomas and his brother Edward Strong were master masons, the latter two working on the construction for its entirety. John Langland was the master carpenter for over thirty years.[59] Grinling Gibbons was the chief sculptor, working in both stone on the building itself, including the pediment of the north portal, and wood on the internal fittings.[59] The sculptor Caius Gabriel Cibber created the pediment of the south transept[76] while Francis Bird was responsible for the relief in the west pediment depicting the Conversion of St Paul, as well as the seven large statues on the west front.[77] The floor was paved by William Dickinson in black and white marble in 1709–10[78] Jean Tijou was responsible for the decorative wrought ironwork of gates and balustrades.[59] The ball and cross on the dome were provided by an armorer, Andrew Niblett.[79]
Description[edit]







Audio description of the cathedral by Sandy Nairne






Plan


St Paul's Cathedral is built in a restrained Baroque style which represents Wren's rationalisation of the traditions of English medieval cathedrals with the inspiration of Palladio, the classical style of Inigo Jones, the baroque style of 17th century Rome, and the buildings by Mansart and others that he had seen in France.[2][page needed] It is particularly in its plan that St Paul's reveals medieval influences.[70] Like the great medieval cathedrals of York and Winchester, St Paul's is comparatively long for its width, and has strongly projecting transepts. It has much emphasis on its facade, which has been designed to define rather than conceal the form of the building behind it. In plan, the towers jut beyond the width of the aisles as they do at Wells Cathedral. Wren's uncle Matthew Wren was the Bishop of Ely, and through having worked for his uncle Wren was familiar with the unique octagonal lantern tower over the crossing of the Cathedral in Ely which spans the aisles as well as the central nave, unlike the central towers and domes of most churches. Wren adapted this characteristic in designing the dome of St Paul's.[70] In section St Paul's also maintains a medieval form, having the aisles much lower than the nave, and a defined clerestory.
Exterior[edit]
The most notable exterior feature is the dome, which rises 365 feet (111 m) to the cross at its summit,[80] and dominates views of the City. The height of 365 feet is explained by Wren's interest in astronomy. Until the late 20th century St Paul's was the tallest building on the City skyline, designed to be seen surrounded by the delicate spires of Wren's other city churches. The dome is described by Sir Banister Fletcher as "probably the finest in Europe", by Helen Gardner as "majestic", and by Sir Nikolaus Pevsner as "one of the most perfect in the world". Sir John Summerson said that Englishmen and "even some foreigners" consider it to be without equal.[81]
Dome[edit]




The dome


Wren drew inspiration from Michelangelo's dome of St Peter's Basilica, and that of Mansart's Church of the Val-de-Grâce, which he had visited.[82] Unlike those of St Peter's and Val-de-Grâce, the dome of St Paul's rises in two clearly defined storeys of masonry, which, together with a lower unadorned footing, equal a height of about 95 feet. From the time of the Greek Cross Design it is clear that Wren favoured a continuous colonnade (peristyle) around the drum of the dome, rather than the arrangement of alternating windows and projecting columns that Michelangelo had used and which had also been employed by Mansart.[83] Summerson suggests that he was influenced by Bramante's "Tempietto" in the courtyard of San Pietro in Montorio.[84] In the finished structure, Wren creates a diversity and appearance of strength by placing niches between the columns in every fourth opening.[84] The peristyle serves to buttress both the inner dome and the brick cone which rises internally to support the lantern.
Above the peristyle rises the second stage surrounded by a balustraded balcony called the "Stone Gallery". This attic stage is ornamented with alternating pilasters and rectangular windows which are set just below the cornice, creating a sense of lightness. Above this attic rises the dome, covered with lead, and ribbed in accordance with the spacing of the pilasters. It is pierced by eight light wells just below the lantern, but these are barely visible. They allow light to penetrate through openings in the brick cone, which illuminates the interior apex of this shell, partly visible from within the cathedral through the ocular opening of the lower dome.[70]
The lantern, like the visible masonry of the dome, rises in stages. The most unusual characteristic of this structure is that it is of square plan, rather than circular or octagonal. The tallest stage takes the form of a tempietto with four columned porticos facing the cardinal points. Its lowest level is surrounded by the "Golden Gallery" and its upper level supports a small dome from which rises a cross on a golden ball. The total weight of the lantern is about 850 tons.[20]
West front[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







St Pauls Cathedral West Front Dome Street View






West Front


For the Renaissance architect designing the west front of a large church or cathedral, the universal problem was how to use a facade to unite the high central nave with the lower aisles in a visually harmonious whole. Since Alberti's additions to Santa Maria Novella in Florence, this was usually achieved by the simple expedient of linking the sides to the centre with large brackets. This is the solution that Wren saw employed by Mansart at Val-de-Grâce. Another feature employed by Mansart was a boldly projecting Classical portico with paired columns. Wren faced the additional challenge of incorporating towers into the design, as had been planned at St Peter's Basilica. At St Peter's, Carlo Maderno had solved this problem by constructing a narthex and stretching a huge screen facade across it, differentiated at the centre by a pediment. The towers at St Peter's were not built above the parapet.
Wren's solution was to employ a Classical portico, as at Val-de-Grâce, but rising through two storeys, and supported on paired columns. The remarkable feature here is that the lower storey of this portico extends to the full width of the aisles, while the upper section defines the nave that lies behind it. The gaps between the upper stage of the portico and the towers on either side are bridged by a narrow section of wall with an arch-topped window.
The towers stand outside the width of the aisles, but screen two chapels located immediately behind them. The lower parts of the towers continue the theme of the outer walls, but are differentiated from them in order to create an appearance of strength. The windows of the lower storey are smaller than those of the side walls and are deeply recessed, a visual indication of the thickness of the wall. The paired pilasters at each corner project boldly.
Above the main cornice, which unites the towers with the portico and the outer walls, the details are boldly scaled, in order to read well from the street below and from a distance. The towers rise above the cornice from a square block plinth which is plain apart from large oculi, that on the south being filled by the clock, while that on the north is void. The towers are composed of two complementary elements, a central cylinder rising through the tiers in a series of stacked drums, and paired Corinthian columns at the corners, with buttresses above them, which serve to unify the drum shape with the square plinth on which it stands. The entablature above the columns breaks forward over them to express both elements, tying them together in a single horizontal band. The cap, an ogee-shaped dome, supports a gilded pineapple-shaped finial.[85]
The transepts each have a semi-circular entrance portico. Wren was inspired in the design by studying engravings of Pietro da Cortona's Baroque facade of Santa Maria della Pace in Rome.[86][page needed] These projecting arcs echo the shape of the apse at the eastern end of the building.
Walls[edit]




St Paul's from the south-east with the tower of the destroyed Church of St Augustine to the right.


The building is of two storeys of ashlar masonry, above a basement, and surrounded by a balustrade above the upper cornice. The balustrade was added, against Wren's wishes, in 1718.[86][page needed] The internal bays are marked externally by paired pilasters with Corinthian capitals at the lower level and Composite at the upper level. Where the building behind is of only one storey (at the aisles of both nave and choir) the upper storey of the exterior wall is sham.[20] It serves a dual purpose of supporting the buttresses of the vault, and providing a satisfying appearance when viewed rising above buildings of the height of the 17th century city. This appearance may still be seen from across the River Thames.
Between the pilasters on both levels are windows. Those of the lower storey have semi-circular heads and are surrounded by continuous mouldings of a Roman style, rising to decorative keystones. Beneath each window is a floral swag by Grinling Gibbons, constituting the finest stone carving on the building and some of the greatest architectural sculpture in England. A frieze with similar swags runs in a band below the cornice, tying the arches of the windows and the capitals. The upper windows are of a restrained Classical form, with pediments set on columns, but are blind and contain niches. Beneath these niches, and in the basement level, are small windows with segmental tops, the glazing of which catches the light and visually links them to the large windows of the aisles. The height from ground level to the top of the parapet is approximately 110 feet.
Interior[edit]




The nave, looking towards the choir



The choir, looking towards the nave




Internally, St Paul's has a nave and choir in each of its three bays. The entrance from the west portico is through a square domed narthex, flanked by chapels: the Chapel of St Dunstan to the north and the Chapel of the Order of St Michael and St George to the south.[70] The nave is 91 feet (28 m) in height and is separated from the aisles by an arcade of piers with attached Corinthian pilasters rising to an entablature. The bays, and therefore the vault compartments, are rectangular, but Wren roofed these spaces with saucer-shaped domes and surrounded the clerestorey windows with lunettes.[70] The vaults of the choir are decorated with mosaics by Sir William Blake Richmond.[70] The dome and the apse of the choir are all approached through wide arches with coffered vaults which contrast with the smooth surface of the domes and punctuate the division between the main spaces. The transepts extend to the north and south of the dome and are called (in this instance) the North Choir and the South Choir.
The choir holds the stalls for the clergy, cathedral officers and the choir, and the organ. These wooden fittings, including the pulpit and Bishop's throne, were designed in Wren's office and built by joiners. The carvings are the work of Grinling Gibbons who Summerson describes as having "astonishing facility", suggesting that Gibbons aim was to reproduce popular Dutch flower painting in wood.[59] Jean Tijou, a French metalworker, provided various wrought iron and gilt grills, gates and balustrades of elaborate design, of which many pieces have now been combined into the gates near the sanctuary.[59]
The cathedral is some 574 feet (175 m) in length (including the portico of the Great West Door), of which 223 feet (68 m) is the nave and 167 feet (51 m) is the choir. The width of the nave is 121 feet (37 m) and across the transepts is 246 feet (75 m).[87] The cathedral is slightly shorter but somewhat wider than Old St Paul's.
Dome[edit]




The interior of the dome showing how Thornhill's painting continues an illusion of the real architectural features.



This view of an arch spanning the aisle shows how Wren succeeded in giving an impression of eight equal arches.




The main internal space of the cathedral is that under the central dome which extends the full width of the nave and aisles. The dome is supported on pendentives rising between eight arches spanning the nave, choir, transepts, and aisles. The eight piers that carry them are not evenly spaced. Wren has maintained an appearance of eight equal spans by inserting segmental arches to carry galleries across the ends of the aisles, and has extended the mouldings of the upper arch to appear equal to the wider arches.[72]
Above the keystones of the arches, at 99 feet (30 m) above the floor and 112 feet (34 m) wide, runs a cornice which supports the Whispering Gallery so called because of its acoustic properties: a whisper or low murmur against its wall at any point is audible to a listener with an ear held to the wall at any other point around the gallery. It is reached by 259 steps from ground level.
The dome is raised on a tall drum surrounded by pilasters and pierced with windows in groups of three, separated by eight gilded niches containing statues, and repeating the pattern of the peristyle on the exterior. the dome rises above a gilded cornice at 173 feet (53 m) to a height of 214 feet (65 m). Its painted decoration by Sir James Thornhill shows eight scenes from the life of St Paul set in illusionistic architecture which continues the forms of the eight niches of the drum.[88] At the apex of the dome is an oculus inspired by that of the Pantheon in Rome. Through this hole can be seen the decorated inner surface of the cone which supports the lantern. This upper space is lit by the light wells in the outer dome and openings in the brick cone. Engravings of Thornhill's paintings were published in 1720.[89]
Apse[edit]




The choir, looking east



The apse and high altar




The eastern apse extends the width of the choir and is the full height of the main arches across choir and nave. It is decorated with mosaics, in keeping with the choir vaults. The original reredos and high altar were destroyed by bombing in 1940. The present high altar and baldacchino are the work of W. Godfrey Allen and Stephen Dykes Bower.[69] The apse was dedicated in 1958 as the American Memorial Chapel.[90] It was paid for entirely by donations from British people.[91] The Roll of Honour contains the names of more than 28,000 Americans who gave their lives while on their way to, or stationed in, the United Kingdom during the Second World War.[92] It is in front of the chapel's altar. The three windows of the apse date from 1960 and depict themes of service and sacrifice, while the insignia around the edges represent the American states and the US armed forces. The limewood panelling incorporates a rocket—a tribute to America's achievements in space.[93]
Artworks, tombs and memorials[edit]




The south choir organ




St Paul's at the time of its completion, was adorned by sculpture in stone and wood, most notably that of Grinling Gibbons, by the paintings in the dome by Thornhill, and by Jean Tijou's elaborate metalwork. It has been further enhanced by Sir William Richmond's mosaics and the fittings by Dykes Bower and Godfrey Allen.[69] Other artworks in the cathedral include, in the south aisle, William Holman Hunt's copy of his painting The Light of the World, the original of which hangs in Keble College, Oxford. The St. Paul's version was completed with a significant input from Edward Robert Hughes as Hunt was now suffering from glaucoma. In the north choir aisle is a limestone sculpture of the Madonna and Child by Henry Moore, carved in 1943.[69] The crypt contains over 200 memorials and numerous burials. Christopher Wren was the first person to be interred, in 1723. On the wall above his tomb in the crypt is written in Latin: Lector, si monumentum requiris, circumspice ("Reader, if you seek his monument, look around you").




Sarcophagus of Nelson in the crypt


The largest monument in the cathedral is that to the Duke of Wellington by Alfred Stevens. It stands on the north side of the nave and has on top a statue of Wellington astride his horse "Copenhagen". Although the equestrian figure was planned at the outset, objections to the notion of having a horse in the church prevented its installation until 1912. The horse and rider are by John Tweed. The Duke is buried in the crypt.[69]




A 1913 memorial by Max Gill commemorating those who were buried or memorialised in Old St. Paul's Cathedral.


The tomb of Horatio, Lord Nelson is located in the crypt, next to that of Wellington.[94] The marble sarcophagus which holds his remains was made for Cardinal Wolsey but not used as the cardinal had fallen from favour.[95][69] At the eastern end of the crypt is the Chapel of the Order of the British Empire, instigated in 1917, and designed by Lord Mottistone.[69] There are many other memorials commemorating the British military, including several lists of servicemen who died in action, the most recent being the Gulf War.
Also remembered are Florence Nightingale, J. M. W. Turner, Arthur Sullivan, Hubert Parry, Samuel Johnson, Lawrence of Arabia, William Blake and Sir Alexander Fleming as well as clergy and residents of the local parish. There are lists of the Bishops and cathedral Deans for the last thousand years. One of the most remarkable sculptures is that of the Dean and poet, John Donne. Before his death, Donne posed for his own memorial statue and was depicted by Nicholas Stone as wrapped in a burial shroud, and standing on a funeral urn. The sculpture, carved around 1630, is the only one to have survived the conflagration of 1666 intact.[69] The treasury is also in the crypt but the cathedral has very few treasures as many have been lost, and on 22 December 1810 a major robbery took almost all of the remaining precious artefacts.[96]
The funerals of many notable figures have occurred at the cathedral, including those of Lord Nelson, the Duke of Wellington, Winston Churchill, George Mallory and Margaret Thatcher.[97]





360° view of the interior near the High Altar.



Clock and bells[edit]
A clock was installed in the south-west tower by Langley Bradley in 1709 but was worn out by the end of the 19th century.[98] The present mechanism was built in 1893 by Smith of Derby incorporating a design of escapement by Edmund Denison Beckett similar to that used by Edward Dent on the Elizabeth Tower's mechanism in 1895. The clock mechanism is 19 feet (5.8 m) long and is the most recent of the clocks introduced to St Paul's Cathedral over the centuries. Since 1969 the clock has been electrically wound with equipment designed and installed by Smith of Derby, relieving the clock custodian from the work of cranking up the heavy drive weights.
The southwest tower also contains four bells, of which Great Paul, cast in 1881 by Taylor's bell foundry of Loughborough, at 16 1⁄2 long tons (16,800 kg) was the largest bell in the British Isles until the casting of the Olympic Bell for the 2012 London Olympics.[99] This bell has traditionally sounded at 1 pm each day. Great Paul has not been rung for several years because of a broken chiming mechanism.[100] The clock bells included Great Tom, which was moved from St Stephen's Chapel at the Palace of Westminster and has been recast several times, the last time by Richard Phelps. It chimes the hour and is traditionally tolled on occasions of a death in the royal family, the Bishop of London, or the Lord Mayor of London, although an exception was made at the death of the US president James Garfield.[101] It was last tolled for the death of Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, in 2002.[99] In 1717, Richard Phelps cast two more bells that were added as "quarter jacks" that ring on the quarter hour. Still in use today, the first weighs 13 long cwt (1,500 lb; 660 kg), is 41 inches (100 cm) in diameter and is tuned to A♭; the second weighs 35 long cwt (3,900 lb; 1,800 kg) and is 58 inches (150 cm) in diameter and is tuned to E♭.
The northwest tower contains a ring of 12 bells by John Taylor & Co of Loughborough hung for change ringing and the original service or "Communion" bell dating from 1700 and known as "the Banger" which is rung before 8 am services.[99]




The southwest tower



Details of the bells

Bell
Weight
Nominal
Hz
Note
Diameter
Date
cast
Founder


long measure
lb
kg
in
cm


1
8 long cwt 1 qr  4 lb
928
421
1,461.0
F
30.88
78.4
1878
John Taylor & Co


2
9 long cwt 0 qr 20 lb
1,028
466
1,270.0
E♭
32.50
82.6
1878
John Taylor & Co


3
9 long cwt 3 qr 12 lb
1,104
501
1,199.0
D
34.00
86.4
1878
John Taylor & Co


4
11 long cwt 2 qr 22 lb
1,310
594
1,063.0
C
36.38
92.4
1878
John Taylor & Co


5
13 long cwt 1 qr  0 lb
1,484
673
954.0
B♭
38.63
98.1
1878
John Taylor & Co


6
13 long cwt 2 qr 14 lb
1,526
692
884.0
A
39.63
100.7
1878
John Taylor & Co


7
16 long cwt 1 qr 18 lb
1,838
834
784.0
G
43.75
111.1
1878
John Taylor & Co


8
21 long cwt 3 qr 18 lb
2,454
1,113
705.0
F
47.63
121.0
1878
John Taylor & Co


9
27 long cwt 1 qr 22 lb
3,074
1,394
636.0
E♭
52.50
133.4
1878
John Taylor & Co


10
29 long cwt 3 qr 21 lb
3,353
1,521
592.0
D
55.25
140.3
1878
John Taylor & Co


11
43 long cwt 2 qr  0 lb
4,872
2,210
525.0
C
61.25
155.6
1878
John Taylor & Co


12
61 long cwt 2 qr 12 lb
6,900
3,130
468.0
B♭
69.00
175.3
1878
John Taylor & Co


Clock
12 long cwt 2 qr  9 lb
1,409
639

A♭


1707
Richard Phelps


Clock
24 long cwt 2 qr 26 lb
2,770
1,256

E♭


1707
Richard Phelps


Clock
102 long cwt 1 qr 22 lb
11,474
5,205

A♭
82.88
210.5
1716
Richard Phelps


Bourdon
334 long cwt 2 qr 19 lb
37,483
17,002
317.1
E♭
114.75
291.5
1881
John Taylor & Co


Communion
18 long cwt 2 qr 26 lb
2,098
952

E♭
49.50
125.7
1700
Philip Wightman


Education, tourism and the arts[edit]




Gilt statue of Saint Paul at the top of St Paul's Cross in the cathedral precinct


Interpretation Project[edit]
The Interpretation Project is a long term project concerned with bringing St Paul's to life for all its visitors. In 2010, the Dean and Chapter of St Paul's opened St Paul's Oculus, a 270° film experience that brings 1400 years of history to life.[102] Located in the former Treasury in the crypt, the film takes visitors on a journey through the history and daily life of St Paul's Cathedral. Oculus was funded by American Express Company in partnership with the World Monuments Fund, J. P . Morgan, the Garfield Weston Trust for St Paul’s Cathedral, the City of London Endowment Trust and AIG.
In 2010, new touchscreen multimedia guides were also launched. These guides are included in the price of admission. Visitors can discover the cathedral’s history, architecture and daily life of a busy working church with these new multimedia guides. They are available in 12 different languages: English, French, German, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Polish, Russian, Mandarin, Japanese, Korean and British Sign Language (BSL). The guides have fly-through videos of the dome galleries and zoomable close-ups of the ceiling mosaics, painting and photography. Interviews and commentary from experts include the Dean of St Paul’s, conservation team and the Director of Music. Archive film footage includes major services and events from the cathedral's history.
Charges for sightseers[edit]
St Paul's charges for the admission of those people who are sightseers, rather than worshippers; the charge is £18 (£16 when purchased online).[103] Outside service times, people seeking a quiet place to pray or worship are admitted to St Dunstan's Chapel free of charge. On Sundays people are admitted only for services and concerts and there is no sightseeing. The charge to sightseers is made because St Paul's receives little regular or significant funding from the Crown, the Church of England or the state and relies on the income generated by tourism to allow the building to continue to function as a centre for Christian worship, as well as to cover general maintenance and repair work.[104][unreliable source]
St Paul's Cathedral Arts Project[edit]
The St Paul’s Cathedral Arts Project explores art and faith. Projects have included installations by Gerry Judah, Antony Gormley, Rebecca Horn, Yoko Ono and Martin Firrell.
In 2014, St Paul's commissioned Gerry Judah to create an artwork in the nave to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the beginning of the First World War. Two spectacular sculptures consisting of three-dimensional white cruciforms reflect the meticulously maintained war graves of northern France and further afield. Each sculpture is also embellished with miniaturised destroyed residential blocks depicting war zones in the Middle East—Syria, Baghdad, Afghanistan—thus connecting 100 years of warfare.[105]
Bill Viola has created two altarpieces for permanent display in St Paul's Cathedral. The project commenced production in mid-2009. Following the extensive programme of cleaning and repair of the interior of St Paul's, completed in 2005, Viola was commissioned to create two altarpieces on the themes of Mary and Martyrs. These two multi-screen video installations are permanently located at the end of the Quire aisles, flanking the High Altar of the cathedral and the American Memorial Chapel. Each work employs an arrangement of multiple plasma screen panels configured in a manner similar to historic altarpieces.
In summer 2010, St Paul's chose two new works by the British artist Mark Alexander to be hung either side of the nave. Both entitled Red Mannheim, Alexander's large red silkscreens are inspired by the Mannheim Cathedral altarpiece (1739–41), which was damaged by bombing in the Second World War. The original sculpture depicts Christ on the cross, surrounded by a familiar retinue of mourners. Rendered in splendid giltwood, with Christ's wracked body sculpted in relief, and the flourishes of flora and incandescent rays from heaven, this masterpiece of the German Rococo is an object of ravishing beauty and intense piety.
In March 2010, Flare II, a sculpture by Antony Gormley, was installed in the Geometric Staircase.[106]
In 2007, the Dean and Chapter commissioned Martin Firrell to create a major public artwork to mark the 300th anniversary of the topping-out of Wren's building. The Question Mark Inside consisted of digital text projections to the cathedral dome, West Front and inside onto the Whispering Gallery. The text was based on blog contributions by the general public as well as interviews conducted by the artist and on the artist's own views. The project presented a stream of possible answers to the question: 'What makes life meaningful and purposeful, and what does St Paul's mean in that contemporary context?' The Question Mark Inside opened on 8 November 2008 and ran for eight nights.
Depictions of St Paul's[edit]
St Paul's Cathedral has been depicted many times in paintings, prints and drawings. Among the well-known artists to have painted it are Canaletto, Turner, Daubigny, Pissarro, Signac, Derain, Lloyd Rees,

Paintings and engravings of St Paul's






18th century engraving of St Paul's from the north-west by J. M. Mueller









19th century coloured engraving from the south-west by Thomas Hosmer Shepherd









Romantic 19th century engraving of St Paul's in the evening after rain by Edward Angelo Goodall









Oil painting, John O'Connor, Evening on Ludgate Hill (1887) St Paul's looms beyond St Martin's.









St Paul's from Richmond House by the Venetian painter Canaletto (1747)









St Paul's viewed from a loggia (c. 1748) by Antonio Joli who also worked in Venice.









An Impressionist view of St Paul's from the River by Ernest Dade (before 1936)









St Paul's from Bankside, a watercolour by Frederick E. J. Goff (before 1931)




Photography and film[edit]
St Paul's Cathedral has been the subject of many photographs, most notably the iconic image of the dome surrounded by smoke during the Blitz.(see above) It has also been used in films and TV programmes, either as the focus of the film, as in the episode of Climbing Great Buildings; as a feature of the film, as in Mary Poppins; or as an incidental location such as Wren's Geometric Staircase in the south-west tower which has appeared in several films including Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban.
Films in which St Paul's has been depicted include:

St. Paul's Cathedral (1942), a wartime documentary film for the British Council, the final part of which shows bomb damage in and around St Paul's.[107]
Lawrence of Arabia (1962) shows the exterior of the building and the bust of T.E.Lawrence.
Mary Poppins (1964) shows the steps and west front of the cathedral, the main setting for the song '"Feed the Birds'".
St Paul's Cathedral has appeared as a filming location twice in Doctor Who, in the 1968 serial The Invasion, and in the 2014 two-part story "Dark Water"/"Death in Heaven". In both, the Cybermen are shown descending steps outside the Cathedral.
St Paul's is seen briefly in the Goodies episode "Kitten Kong" (1971). During his rampage through London, Twinkle damages London landmarks, including St Paul's Cathedral, the dome of which is knocked off.
In the BBC educational programme "A Guide to Armageddon," (1982) a 1-megaton nuclear weapon is detonated over London, with St Paul's used as ground zero.
The Madness of King George (1994) shows the Geometric Staircase in the South West Bell Tower.
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (2004) shows the Geometric Staircase in the south west bell tower, representing the staircase towards the Divination classroom.
Industrial Revelations: Best of British Engineering – Buildings, with Rory McGrath series 5, episode 1, 2008, focuses on St Paul's Cathedral.
Sherlock Holmes (2009) shows the North side of the West Steps, and the Geometric Staircase in the South West Bell Tower.
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (2009); the southern façade was briefly shown.
Climbing Great Buildings (2010)
Star Trek Into Darkness (2013) depicts St Paul's in 23rd century London along with other notable modern-day London buildings.[b]
Thor: The Dark World (2013) depicts St Paul's as one of several London landmarks that Thor and his enemy, Malekith, fight over during an attack on the city.
London Has Fallen (2016) depicts the cathedral as the scheduled site of the British Prime Minister's funeral.


St Paul's in photography and film






An airship, Nulli Secundus, circling St Paul's on a flight from Farnborough to London (1907)









A member of the Royal Observer Corps on watch during the Battle of Britain (1940)









The geometric staircase appears in several films including Sherlock Holmes (2009)




See also[edit]


Anglicanism portal
London portal



Cyril Raikes (fire watching on the dome of the St Paul's Cathedral in the Second World War)
Category:Burials at St Paul's Cathedral
List of cathedrals in the United Kingdom
List of churches and cathedrals of London
Paternoster Square
St Paul's Cathedral School
Tall buildings in London
The Light of the World (painting)
Magnificat and Nunc dimittis for St Paul's Cathedral

Notes[edit]



^ "Nomina Episcoporum, cum Clericis Suis, Quinam, et ex Quibus Provinciis, ad Arelatensem Synodum Convenerint" ["The Names of the Bishops with Their Clerics who Came Together at the Synod of Arles and from which Province They Came"](from Labbé & Cossart 1671, col. 1429 included in Thackery 1843, pp. 272 ff.).
^ Advertising poster for Star Trek Into Darkness (2013) – bottom right, the dome is visible to the left of and behind 30 St Mary Axe (the Gherkin)





^ Weinreb & Hibbert, p. 778.
^ a b Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2004.
^ Betjeman 1970.
^ a b Pierce, Rebecca (2004), National Identity and the British Empire: the Image of Saint Paul’s Cathedral (PDF), Master's Thesis, Marshall University 
^ "Sightseeing, Times & Prices". stpauls.co.uk. The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral. Retrieved 13 July 2017. 
^ Denison 1995.
^ Sankey 1998, pp. 78–82.
^ Camden 1607, pp. 306–307.
^ Clark 1996, pp. 1–9.
^ Bede 1969, pp. 142–143.
^ a b Garmonsway 1953.
^ Kelly 2004.
^ "404". The Telegraph. Retrieved 2017-11-08. 
^ Campbell 2007, p. 26.
^ a b c Hart 2002.
^ Campbell 2007, p. 10.
^ a b Lang 1956, pp. 47–63.
^ Summerson 1983, p. 204.
^ Summerson 1983, p. 223.
^ a b c Fletcher 1962, p. 913.
^ Keene, Burn & Saint 2004, p. 219.
^ Campbell 2007, p. 161.
^ Campbell 2007, p. 69.
^ UK Consumer Price Index inflation figures are based on data from Clark, Gregory (2017). "The Annual RPI and Average Earnings for Britain, 1209 to Present (New Series)". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved November 6, 2017. 
^ Wright 1693.
^ Tinniswood 2001, p. 31.
^ a b Jardine 2006.
^ EI staff 1941
^ The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral 2014.
^ Geffen 2014.
^ 1942531 Sapper George Cameron Wylie. Bomb Disposal: Royal Engineers—George Cross, 33 Engineer regiment, Royal Engineers website, retrieved 28 January 2008 
^ "No. 34956". The London Gazette (Supplement). 27 September 1940. pp. 5767–5768. 
^ BBC staff 2011.
^ Walker & Butt 2011.
^ Ward 2011.
^ Walker 2011.
^ BBC staff 2012.
^ "Worship - Choral Evensong". St Paul's Cathedral. Retrieved 12 October 2017. 
^ The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral (2016), Home – St Paul's Cathedral, retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral 2016c.
^ News & Press, retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ The Revd Mark Oakley appointed Canon Chancellor of St Paul's, retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ St Paul's Cathedral – Installation of Hampel as Precentor Archived 31 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ https://www.stpauls.co.uk/news-press/latest-news/jonathan-brewster-installed-as-residentiary-canon-of-st-pauls
^ The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral 2016d.
^ The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral 2016e.
^ https://www.stpauls.co.uk/news-press/latest-news/appointment-of-the-venerable-sheila-watson-as-additional-chapter-member-and-canon-non-residentiary-of-st-pauls-cathedral
^ Gov.uk
^ Cathedral Governance, retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ "Emma Davies appointed Registrar of St Paul's Cathedral", Diocese of London, retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ Senior civil servant appointed to top administrative role at St Paul's, retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ Stpauls.co.uk
^ St Paul's — Working Document: Constitution and Statutes Statute XIII, p. 18 (Accessed 6 January 2017)
^ The former College of Minor Canons and the former titles of Senior and Junior Cardinal were abolished in the Constitution and Statutes made by Instrument under the Common Seal of the Cathedral Church of St Paul in London on 1 February 2016 and coming into effect on that date. The consent of the Council was confirmed on 18 December 2015 under the hand of the Chairman. The Bishop of London gave his consent on 20 January 2016. A draft (only) of the amended measures appears in the working document referred to above.
^ Minor Canons, retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ New Chaplain for a ‘re-imagined’ role at St Paul’s Cathedral, retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ a b c "Cathedral Choirs & Musicians". stpauls.co.uk. The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral. Retrieved 13 July 2017. 
^ "Appointment of new Director of Music". St Paul's Cathedral website, news section. Dean and Chapter of St Paul's. 21 May 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 2007-05-23. 
^ a b c d e f Summerson 1983, pp. 238–240.
^ Rudgard, Olivia (28 February 2017). "St Paul's Cathedral appoints first female chorister in 1,000-year history". The Telegraph. Retrieved 13 July 2017. 
^ "St Paul's Cathedral admits first woman to choir". BBC News. 28 February 2017. Retrieved 13 July 2017. 
^ de la Ware, Tess (1 March 2017). "St Paul's appoints first full-time female chorister in 1,000-year history". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 July 2017. 
^ Campbell 2007, pp. 27–28.
^ a b c Downes 1987, pp. 11–34.
^ Saunders 2001, p. 60.
^ a b Hart 1995, pp. 17–23.
^ Barker & Hyde 1982.
^ Campbell 2007, pp. 53–54.
^ a b c d e f g h Harris 1988, pp. 214–15.
^ a b c d e f g h i Fletcher 1962, p. 906.
^ Campbell 2007, p. 56–59.
^ a b c Summerson 1983, p. 228.
^ Campbell 2007, p. 137.
^ Campbell 2007, pp. 105–114.
^ Tinniswood 2010, p. 203.
^ Lang 1956, p. 209.
^ Lang 1956, pp. 252, 230.
^ St Paul's website, Miscellaneous Drawings Archived 20 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ St Paul's Cathedral website, Climb the Dome
^ Fletcher 1962, p. 912.
^ Fletcher 1962, p. 913; Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2004, pp. 604–05;Pevsner 1964, pp. 324–26; Summerson 1983, p. 236.
^ Summerson 1983, p. 236.
^ Pevsner 1964, pp. 324–26.
^ a b Summerson 1983, p. 234.
^ https://www.stpauls.co.uk/history-collections/the-collections/architectural-archive/wren-office-drawings/6-the-western-towers-c16851710
^ a b Leapman 1995.
^ St. Paul's Cathedral, The History Channel, archived from the original on 23 May 2008, retrieved 18 April 2008 
^ Lang 1956, p. 252.
^ Entered in the Entry Book at Stationers' Hall on 7 May 1720 by Thornhill. The Bodleian Library's deposit copy survives (Arch.Antiq.A.III.23).
^ St. Paul's Cathedral American Memorial Chapel
^ Paul's Cathedral, St. (28 November 2006), Explore St. Paul's, explore-stpauls.net, retrieved 28 November 2006 
^ Roll of Honour, archived from the original on 6 August 2014, retrieved 26 October 2014 
^ St. Paul's Cathedral (28 November 2006), St. Paul's Cathedral Floor, stpauls.co.uk, archived from the original on 27 September 2006, retrieved 28 November 2006 
^ Holmes 2002, p. 297.
^ Hibbert 1994, p. 394
^ MP staff 1810.
^ Quinn 2013.
^ "The New Clock of St Paul's". Nottingham Evening Post. England. 21 December 1893. Retrieved 4 December 2016 – via British Newspaper Archive. (Subscription required (help)). 
^ a b c The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral (2016), Home webpage, St Paul's Cathedral 
^ The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral 2016b, Bells.
^ Dunton 1896, pp. 25–26.
^ Oculus: an eye into St Paul's Archived 31 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Sightseeing Times & Prices, St Paul's Cathedral, retrieved 27 April 2014 
^ Talbot, Hannah (8 July 2011), Comment on "Rip-Off London – Pay £14.50 to get into a church!", Trip Advisor, retrieved 30 October 2011 
^ Giant white crosses remind St Paul's worshippers and visitors of the horrors of warfare, retrieved 18 February 2016 
^ 6 Unique Staircases in the UK You Wish You Could Walk Over, medium.com 
^ "British Council Film Collection – St. Paul's Cathedral". film.britishcouncil.org. British Council. 2015. Retrieved 2 September 2016. 


References[edit]

Barker, Felix; Hyde, Ralph (1982), London as it might have been, John Murray 
BBC staff (15 June 2011), St Paul's Cathedral completes £40m restoration project, BBC News, retrieved 23 November 2011 
BBC staff (28 February 2012), St Paul's protest: Occupy London camp evicted, BBC 
Bede (1969), Colgrave, Bertram; Mynors, R. A. B., eds., Ecclesiastical History of the English People, Oxford: Clarendon, pp. 142–143 
Betjeman, John (1970), A Pictorial History of English Architecture, John Murray, ISBN 0-7195-2640-X 
Camden, William (1607), Britannia (in Latin), London: G. Bishop & J. Norton, pp. 306–7 
Campbell, James W. P. (2007), Building St Paul's, London: Thames and Hudson, ISBN 978-0-500-34244-2 
The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral (4 March 2014), Cutting edge technology reveals historical secrets of St Paul's in new TV series, St Paul's Cathedral 
The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral (2016b), The Organs and Bells, St Paul's Cathedral, retrieved 18 February 2016 
The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral (2016c), Who are we?, St Paul's Cathedral 
The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral (2016d), Members of Chapter, St Paul's Cathedral, retrieved 18 February 2016 
The Chapter of St Paul's Cathedral (2016e), New Canon Pastor appointed at St Paul's, St Paul's Cathedral, retrieved 18 February 2016 
Clark, John (1996), "The Temple of Diana", in Bird, Joanna; et al., Interpreting Roman London, Oxbow Monograph, 58, Oxford: Oxbow, pp. 1–9 
Denison, Simon (June 1995), "News: In Brief", British Archaeology, Council for British Archaeology, archived from the original on 13 May 2013, retrieved 30 March 2013 
Downes, Kerry (1987), Sir Christopher Wren: the Design of St Paul's Cathedral, London: Trefoil Publications, pp. 11–34 
Dunton, Larkin (1896), The World and Its People, Silver, Burdett, pp. 25–26 
EI staff (19 April 1941), "St. Paul's Cathedral in London Hit by Bomb", The Evening Independent 
Fletcher, Banister (1962), A History of Architecture on the Comparative Method (seventeenth edition), Athlone Press, University of London 
Geffen, Anthony (producer) (8 July 2014), "Time Scanners: St. Paul's Cathedral", Scanners, Atlantic Productions 
Hart, Vaughan (1995), St Paul's Cathedral, Christopher Wren, London: Phaidon Press Limited, pp. 17–23 .
Hart, Vaughan (2002), Nicholas Hawksmoor: Rebuilding Ancient Wonders, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-09699-6 
Gardner, Helen; Kleiner, Fred S.; Mamiya, Christin J. (2004), Gardner's Art through the Ages, Thomson Wadsworth, ISBN 0-15-505090-7 
Garmonsway, G. N., trans. (1953), The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, London: Dent 
Harris, Brian L. (1988), Harris's Guide to Churches and Cathedrals, Ebury Press, ISBN 0091912512 
Keene, Derek; Burn, R. Arthur; Saint, Andrew, eds. (2004), St Paul's – The Cathedral Church of London 604–2004, Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-09276-8 
Kelly, S.E., ed. (2004), Charters of St Paul's, London, Anglo-Saxon Charters, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-726299-6 
Holmes, Richard (2002), Wellington: The Iron Duke, London: Harper Collins Publishers, ISBN 978-0-00-713750-3 
Jardine, Lisa (15 May 2006), "Homage to Highbury", BBC News, retrieved 7 September 2010 
Lang, Jane (1956), Rebuilding St Paul's after the Great Fire of London, Oxford: Oxford University Press 
Leapman, Michael (1995), Eyewitness Travel Guide to Great Britain, Dorling Kindersley, ISBN 0751300055 
MP staff (24 December 1810), "Robbery at St Paul's Cathedral", Morning Post, retrieved 11 July 2014 
Pevsner, Nikolaus (1964), An Outline of European Architecture, Pelican Books 
Quinn, Jennifer (8 April 2013), "Margaret Thatcher, former British prime minister known as 'The Iron Lady,' dies at 87", Toronto Star 
Sankey, D. (1998), "Cathedrals, granaries and urban vitality in late Roman London", in Watson, Bruce, Roman London: Recent Archaeological Work, JRA Supplementary Series, 24, Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman Archaeology, pp. 78–82 
Saunders, Ann (2001), St Paul's: The Story of the Cathedral, London: Collins and Brown Limited, p. 60 
Summerson, John (1983), Architecture of Britain 1530–1830, The Pelican History of Art, Penguin Books, ISBN 0140560033 
Thackery, Francis (1843), Researches into the Ecclesiastical and Political State of Ancient Britain under the Roman Emperors: with Observations upon the Principal Events and Characters Connected with the Christian Religion, during the First Five Centuries, London: T. Cadell, pp. 272 ff. 

Labbé, Philippe; Cossart, Gabriel, eds. (1671), "Ab Initiis Æræ Christianæ ad Annum CCCXXIV: From the Beginning of the Christian Era to the Year 324: col. 1429.", Sacrosancta Concilia ad Regiam Editionem Exacta: quae Nunc Quarta Parte Prodit Actior: The Sancrosanct Councils Exacted for the Royal Edition: which the Editors Now Produce in Four Parts& (in Latin), I, Paris: The Typographical Society for Ecclesiastical Books 


Tinniswood, Adrian (2001), His Invention so Fertile: A Life of Christopher Wren, London: Oxford Press, p. 31 
Tinniswood, Adrian (2010), His Invention So Fertile, London: Random House, p. 203 
Walker, Peter; Butt, Riazat (27 October 2011), "St Paul's may seek injunction to move Occupy London activists", The Guardian, London 
Walker, Peter (31 October 2011), "Dean of St Paul's Cathedral resigns over Occupy London protest row", the Guardian 
Ward, Victoria (28 October 2011), "Giles Fraser resignation: 'I couldn't face Dale Farm on the steps of St Paul's'", Daily Telegraph, London 
Weinreb, B.; Hibbert, C. (eds.), The London Encyclopaedia, p. 778 [full citation needed]
Wright, James (1693), The Choire, London 

Further reading[edit]

Atkinson, Frank (1985), St Paul's and the City, Park Lane Press, London: Michael Joseph, ISBN 0-7181-2629-7  — With numerous photographic plates, both in colour, and black and white).
Clifton-Taylor, Alec (1967), The Cathedrals of England, Thames and Hudson 
Harvey, John (1961), English Cathedrals, Batsford 
Hood, Frederic (1967), The Chapel of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire  — With a foreword by Prince Phillip. It contains 65 pages of mainly colour plates on glossy paper relating to St Paul's Cathedral and is a republished section of the book published by the Oxford University Press.
Owen, James (2010), Danger UXB, Little, Brown, ISBN 978-1-4087-0255-0  — contains a chapter on St Paul's in wartime and the unexploded bomb which closed it
Tatton-Brown, Tim; Crook, John (2002), The English Cathedral, New Holland Publishers, ISBN 1-84330-120-2 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to St. Paul's Cathedral.



"The Sound of Bells – Great Paul.", St Paul's Cathedral: Credits, retrieved 16 October 2014 
St Paul's Cathedral official website
St. Paul's Cathedral at Google Cultural Institute
A Popular Description of St. Paul's Cathedral By Maria Hackett, published 1828, 87 pages.
Biographical Illustrations of St. Paul's Cathedral By George Lewis Smyth, published 1843, 284 pages.
St Paul's Cathedral by Canaletto (painting)
Wren's various designs
St Paul's Cathedral Photo Gallery — 125 photos
Old St Paul's Cathedral by William Benham – eText from Project Gutenberg
The 'Registrum Statutorum..' of St Paul's – collected charters and other documents from the earliest years until the nineteenth century. Published by the cathedral in 1873, Latin and English.
BBC News account of the bombing
Bells of St Paul's
A history of the choristers of St Paul's Cathedral
Mystery Worshipper Report at the Ship of Fools website
Central London live webcam showing St Paul's, Westminster and Big Ben
The Chapel of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire – OBE Chapel
St Paul's lithographs c. 1647–1817
The Jubilee Cope commissioned for the Bishop of London by St Paul’s Cathedral in honour of the Silver Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II [1]&[2].







v
t
e


St Paul's Cathedral



Deans




High Medieval



Wulman
Ranulf Flambard (disputed)
William de Mareni
Ralph de Langford
Hugh de Mareni
Ralph de Diceto
Alard de Burnham
Gervase de Howbridge
Robert de Watford
Martin de Pattishall
Geoffrey de Lucy
William of Sainte-Mère-Église
Henry de Cornhill
Walter de Saleron
Robert de Barton
Peter de Newport
Richard Talbot
John de Ebulo
Geoffrey de Fering
John Chishull
Hervey de Boreham
Thomas Ingoldsthorpe
Roger de La Legh
William de Montfort
Ralph Baldock





Late Medieval



Arnald Frangerius de Cantilupo
John Sandale
Richard Newport
Roger Northburgh
Vitalis de Testa
John de Everdon
Gilbert de Bruera
Richard de Kilvington
Walter de Alderbury
Thomas Trilleck
John de Appleby
Thomas de Eure
Thomas Stowe
Thomas More
Reginald Kentwood
Thomas Lisieux
Lawrence Booth
William Say
Roger Radclyffe
Thomas Wynterbourne
William Worsley





Early modern



Robert Sherborne
John Colet
Richard Pace
Richard Sampson
John Incent
William May
John Feckenham
Henry Cole
William May (again)
Alexander Nowell
John Overall
Valentine Cary
John Donne
Thomas Winniffe
Richard Steward
Matthew Nicholas
John Barwick
William Sancroft
Edward Stillingfleet
John Tillotson
William Sherlock
Henry Godolphin
Francis Hare
Joseph Butler
Thomas Secker
John Hume
Frederick Cornwallis
Thomas Newton
Thomas Thurlow





Late modern



George Pretyman Tomline
William Van Mildert
Charles Sumner
Edward Copleston
Henry Hart Milman
Henry Longueville Mansel
Richard William Church
Robert Gregory
William Inge
Walter Matthews
Martin Sullivan
Alan Webster
Eric Evans
John Moses
Graeme Knowles
Michael Colclough (acting)
David Ison











Clergy
(current)



Mark Oakley (Canon Chancellor)
Michael Hampel (Canon Precentor)
Philippa Boardman (Canon Treasurer)
Tricia Hillas (Canon Pastor)
Rosemary Morton (Minor Canon, Succentor & Senior Cardinal)
James Milne (Minor Canon, Sacrist & Junior Cardinal)
Helen O'Sullivan (Priest Vicar & Chaplain)








Burials
Christopher Wren
College of Minor Canons
Old St Paul's Cathedral

Paul's walk
St Paul's Cross


St Paul's Cathedral School
St Paul's Survives








 Category
 Commons










Links to related articles











v
t
e


History of London



Evolution



Londinium
Lundenwic
City of London
City of Westminster
Middlesex
County of London
Greater London
Timeline








Periods



Roman London
Anglo-Saxon London
Norman and Medieval London
Tudor London
Stuart London
18th-century London
19th-century London
1900–39
The Blitz
1945–2000
21st century





Events



Peasants' Revolt
Black Death
Great Plague
Great Fire
1854 cholera outbreak
Great Stink
Great Exhibition
1908 Franco-British Exhibition
The Battle of Cable Street
Festival of Britain
Great Smog
Swinging London
London Plan
1966 FIFA World Cup Final
7/7 bombings
Olympic Games (1908
1948
2012)
2012 Summer Paralympics
Grenfell Tower fire





Government



Metropolitan Board of Works
London County Council
Greater London Council
Greater London Authority
London Assembly
Mayor of London
London independence





Services



Bow Street Runners
Metropolitan Police Service
London Ambulance Service
London Fire Brigade
Port of London Authority
London sewerage system
London Underground





City of London



City of London Corporation
Lord Mayor of the City of London
Wards of the City of London
Guildhall
Livery Companies
Lord Mayor's Show
City of London Police
Bank of England





Structures



St Paul's Cathedral
Tower of London
Palace of Whitehall
Westminster Hall
London Bridge
Tower Bridge
Westminster Abbey
Big Ben
The Monument
Fortifications








 Category












v
t
e


Cathedrals of the Church of England



Province of
Canterbury



Birmingham
Bristol
Canterbury
Chelmsford
Chichester
Coventry
Derby
Ely
Exeter
Gibraltar
Gloucester
Guildford
Hereford
Leicester
Lichfield
Lincoln
London, St Paul's
Norwich
Oxford, Christ Church
Peterborough
Portsmouth
Rochester
St Albans
St Edmundsbury
Salisbury
Southwark
Truro
Wells
Winchester
Worcester





Province of
York



Blackburn
Bradford
Carlisle
Chester
Durham
Liverpool
Manchester
Newcastle upon Tyne
Peel
Ripon
Sheffield
Southwell
Wakefield
York












v
t
e


Churches in the City of London



Extant churches



All Hallows-by-the-Tower
All Hallows-on-the-Wall
City Temple
Dutch Church, Austin Friars
St Andrew-by-the-Wardrobe
St Andrew, Holborn
St Andrew Undershaft
St Anne and St Agnes
St Bartholomew-the-Great
St Bartholomew-the-Less
St Benet, Paul's Wharf
St Botolph, Aldersgate
St Botolph, Aldgate
St Botolph-without-Bishopsgate
St Bride, Fleet Street
St Clement, Eastcheap
St Dunstan-in-the-West
St Edmund, King and Martyr
St Ethelburga, Bishopsgate
St Giles, Cripplegate
St Helen, Bishopsgate
St James, Garlickhythe
St Katharine Cree
St Lawrence Jewry
St Magnus the Martyr
St Margaret Lothbury
St Margaret Pattens
St Martin, Ludgate
St Mary Abchurch
St Mary Aldermary
St Mary Moorfields
St Mary Woolnoth
St Mary-at-Hill
St Mary-le-Bow
St Michael, Cornhill
St Michael, Paternoster Royal
St Nicholas, Cole Abbey
St Olave, Hart Street
St Paul's Cathedral
St Peter upon Cornhill
St Sepulchre-without-Newgate
St Stephen Walbrook
St Vedast alias Foster
Temple Church





Churches of which
only the tower remains



All Hallows, Staining
Christ Church, Greyfriars
St Alban, Wood Street
St Alphage London Wall
St Augustine, Watling Street
St Dunstan-in-the-East
St Martin Orgar
St Mary Somerset
St Olave, Old Jewry





Churches rebuilt after the
Great Fire but since demolished



All Hallows Bread Street
All Hallows Lombard Street
All-Hallows-the-Great
St Antholin, Budge Row
St Bartholomew-by-the-Exchange
St Benet Fink
St Benet Gracechurch
St Christopher le Stocks
St Dionis Backchurch
St George Botolph Lane
St Katherine Coleman
St Mary Aldermanbury
St Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street
St Matthew Friday Street
St Michael Bassishaw
St Michael, Crooked Lane
St Michael Queenhithe
St Michael-le-Querne
St Michael Wood Street
St Mildred, Bread Street
St Mildred, Poultry
St Stephen Coleman Street
St Swithin, London Stone





Churches destroyed in the
Great Fire and not rebuilt



All Hallows Honey Lane
All-Hallows-the-Less
Holy Trinity the Less
St Andrew Hubbard
St Ann Blackfriars
St Benet Sherehog
St Botolph Billingsgate
St Faith under St Paul's
St Gabriel Fenchurch
St Gregory by St Paul's
St John the Baptist upon Walbrook
St John the Evangelist Friday Street
St John Zachary
St Laurence Pountney
St Leonard, Eastcheap
St Leonard, Foster Lane
St Margaret Moses
St Margaret, New Fish Street
St Martin Pomary
St Martin Vintry
St Mary Bothaw
St Mary Colechurch
St Mary Magdalen Milk Street
St Mary Mounthaw
St Mary Staining
St Mary Woolchurch Haw
St Michael-le-Querne
St Nicholas Acons
St Nicholas Olave
St Olave, Silver Street
St Pancras, Soper Lane
St Peter, Paul's Wharf
St Peter, Westcheap
St Thomas the Apostle





Other former churches



College of Minor Canons
Holy Trinity Gough Square
Hospital of St Thomas of Acre
Old St Paul's Cathedral
St Audoen within Newgate
St Augustine Papey
St James Duke's Place
St Martin Outwich
St Mary Axe
St Nicholas Shambles
St Peter le Poer












v
t
e


London landmarks



Buildings and
structures




Bridges



Albert Bridge
Blackfriars Bridge
Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges
Lambeth Bridge
London Bridge
Millennium Footbridge
Southwark Bridge
Tower Bridge
Vauxhall Bridge
Waterloo Bridge
Westminster Bridge





Entertainment
venues




Cinemas



Empire, Leicester Square
BFI IMAX
Odeon Leicester Square





Football stadia



Wembley Stadium (national stadium)
Craven Cottage (Fulham)
The Den (Millwall)
Emirates Stadium (Arsenal)
Loftus Road (Queens Park Rangers)
Olympic Stadium (West Ham United)
Selhurst Park (Crystal Palace)
Stamford Bridge (Chelsea)
The Valley (Charlton Athletic)
White Hart Lane (Tottenham Hotspur)





Other major
sports venues



All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
The Championship Course (rowing)
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
Lord's (cricket)
Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park
The Oval (cricket)
Twickenham Stadium (rugby)





Theatres



London Coliseum
London Palladium
The Old Vic
Royal National Theatre
Royal Opera House
Shakespeare's Globe
Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
Theatre Royal Haymarket





Other



Alexandra Palace
Brixton Academy
ExCeL
Hammersmith Apollo
O2 Arena
Royal Albert Hall
Royal Festival Hall
Wembley Arena








Government



10 Downing Street
Admiralty Arch
Bank of England
City Hall
County Hall
Guildhall
Horse Guards
Mansion House
National Archives
Old Bailey
Palace of Westminster
Royal Courts of Justice
Scotland Yard
SIS Building





Museums and
galleries



British Museum
Cutty Sark
Golden Hinde
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum
Madame Tussauds
Museum of London
National Gallery
National Maritime Museum
Natural History Museum
Royal Academy of Arts
Royal Observatory
Science Museum
Tate Britain
Tate Modern
Tower of London
Victoria and Albert Museum





Places of worship



All Hallows-by-the-Tower
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir
Bevis Marks Synagogue
Methodist Central Hall
Regent's Park Mosque
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Mary-le-Bow
St Paul's Cathedral
Southwark Cathedral
Westminster Abbey
Westminster Cathedral





Retailing




Shops



Fortnum & Mason
Hamleys
Harrods
Liberty
Peter Jones
Selfridges





Shopping centres
and markets



Borough Market
Brent Cross
Burlington Arcade
Kensington Arcade
Leadenhall Market
The Mall Wood Green
One New Change
Petticoat Lane Market
Royal Exchange
Westfield London
Westfield Stratford City








Royal buildings




Partly occupied by
the Royal Family



Buckingham Palace
Clarence House
Kensington Palace
St James's Palace





Unoccupied



Banqueting House
Hampton Court Palace
Kew Palace
The Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace








Skyscrapers



1 Canada Square
8 Canada Square
20 Fenchurch Street
30 St Mary Axe
125 London Wall
Broadgate Tower
BT Tower
Centre Point
Citigroup Centre
Heron Tower
Leadenhall Building
Lloyd's building
Millbank Tower
Senate House
The Shard
Shell Centre
St George Wharf Tower
Strata SE1
Tower 42





Structures



Albert Memorial
ArcelorMittal Orbit
Cleopatra's Needle
Crystal Palace transmitting station
London Eye
London Wall
Marble Arch
Monument to the Great Fire
Nelson's Column
Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain ("Eros")
Thames Barrier
Wellington Arch





Transport



City Airport
Heathrow Airport
Charing Cross station
Clapham Junction station
Euston station
King's Cross station
Liverpool Street station
London Bridge station
Paddington station
St Pancras station
Victoria station
Waterloo station
Emirates Air Line
Victoria Coach Station





Other



Barbican Estate
Battersea Power Station
British Library
Kew Gardens
Lambeth Palace
London Zoo
Oxo Tower
St Bartholomew's Hospital
Smithfield Market
Somerset House








Parks




Royal Parks



Bushy Park
Green Park
Greenwich Park
Hampton Court Park
Hyde Park
Kensington Gardens
Regent's Park
Richmond Park
St. James's Park





Other



Battersea Park
Burgess Park
Clapham Common
College Green
Epping Forest
Finsbury Park
Gunnersbury Park
Hampstead Heath
Holland Park
Mitcham Common
Osterley Park
Trent Park
Victoria Park
Wandsworth Common
Wimbledon Common








Squares and
public spaces



Covent Garden
Horse Guards Parade
Leicester Square
Oxford Circus
Parliament Square
Piccadilly Circus
Sloane Square
Trafalgar Square





Streets



Aldwych
Baker Street
Bishopsgate
Bond Street
Cannon Street
Carnaby Street
Chancery Lane
Charing Cross Road
Cheapside
Cornhill
Denmark Street
Fenchurch Street
Fleet Street
Haymarket
Jermyn Street
Kensington High Street
King's Road
Lombard Street
The Mall
Oxford Street
Park Lane
Piccadilly
Portobello Road
Regent Street
Shaftesbury Avenue
Sloane Street
Strand
Threadneedle Street
Tottenham Court Road
Victoria Embankment
Whitehall






Buildings and structures under construction shown in italics












Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 150895894
LCCN: n79086816
ISNI: 0000 0001 1540 7522
GND: 4223812-2
SUDOC: 084330716
NLA: 36254533
NKC: xx0026893











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=St_Paul%27s_Cathedral&oldid=818266020"					Categories: St Paul's Cathedral604 establishmentsAnglican cathedrals in EnglandChristopher Wren churches in LondonChurches completed in 1708Churches in the City of LondonDiocese of LondonDomesEnglish Baroque architectureGrade I listed buildings in the City of LondonGrade I listed cathedralsGrade I listed churches in LondonNicholas Hawksmoor buildingsRebuilt churches in the United KingdomTourist attractions in the City of LondonHidden categories: Pages containing London Gazette template with parameter supp set to yWebarchive template wayback linksPages containing links to subscription-only contentUse dmy dates from June 2015Use British English from October 2011Coordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2016All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from February 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017Articles needing additional references from October 2017All articles needing additional referencesCS1 Latin-language sources (la)Articles needing more detailed referencesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers