For other uses, see Standard Chinese (disambiguation).
"Huayu" redirects here. For other uses, see Huayu (disambiguation).


Standard Chinese


Modern Standard Mandarin


普通话 / 普通話 Pǔtōnghuà
国语 / 國語 Guóyǔ
华语 / 華語 Huáyǔ


Native to
China, Taiwan, Singapore



Native speakers

(has begun acquiring native speakers cited 1988, 2014)[1][2]
L2 speakers: 7% of China (2014)[3][4]



Language family


Sino-Tibetan

Chinese

Mandarin

Beijing dialect

Standard Chinese












Early form


Middle Mandarin




Writing system

Traditional Chinese
Simplified Chinese
Mainland Chinese Braille
Taiwanese Braille
Two-Cell Chinese Braille



Signed forms

Wenfa Shouyu[5]


Official status



Official language in

 China (as Putonghua)
 Taiwan (as Guoyu)
 Singapore (as Huayu)
 United Nations
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
 Myanmar (Wa State)


Regulated by
National Language Regulating Committee (China)[6]
National Languages Committee (Taiwan)
Promote Mandarin Council (Singapore)
Chinese Language Standardisation Council (Malaysia)


Language codes


ISO 639-3
–


ISO 639-6
goyu (Guoyu)
huyu (Huayu)
cosc (Putonghua)


Glottolog
None


This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.







Common name in China


Traditional Chinese
普通話


Simplified Chinese
普通话


Literal meaning
Common speech





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Pǔtōnghuà


Wade–Giles
P'u3-t'ung1-hua4


Yale Romanization
Pǔtūnghwà


IPA
[pʰùtʰʊ́ŋxwâ]





Common name in Taiwan


Traditional Chinese
國語


Simplified Chinese
国语


Literal meaning
National language





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Guóyǔ


Wade–Giles
Kuo2-yü3


Yale Romanization
gwóyǔ


IPA
[kwǒ.ỳ]





Common name in Singapore and Southeast Asia


Traditional Chinese
華語


Simplified Chinese
华语


Literal meaning
Chinese language





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Huáyǔ


Wade–Giles
Hua2-yü3


Yale Romanization
hwáyǔ


IPA
[xwǎ.ỳ]








Standard Chinese, also known as Modern Standard Mandarin, Standard Mandarin, or simply Mandarin, is a standard variety of Chinese that is the sole official language of both China and Taiwan, and also one of the four official languages of Singapore. Its pronunciation is based on the Beijing dialect, its vocabulary on the Mandarin dialects, and its grammar is based on written vernacular Chinese.
Like other varieties of Chinese, Standard Chinese is a tonal language with topic-prominent organization and subject–verb–object word order. It has more initial consonants but fewer vowels, final consonants and tones than southern varieties. Standard Chinese is an analytic language, though with many compound words.
There exist two standardised forms of the language, namely Putonghua in Mainland China and Guoyu in Taiwan. Aside from a number of differences in pronunciation and vocabulary, Putonghua is written using simplified Chinese characters (plus Hanyu Pinyin romanization for teaching), while Guoyu is written using traditional Chinese characters (plus Zhuyin for teaching). There are many characters that are identical between the two systems.



Contents


1 Names

1.1 Putonghua and Guoyu
1.2 Huayu
1.3 Mandarin


2 History

2.1 Late empire
2.2 Modern China


3 Current role

3.1 Standard Chinese and the educational system


4 Phonology

4.1 Regional accents


5 Vocabulary
6 Syntax
7 Writing system
8 Common phrases
9 See also
10 References

10.1 Works cited


11 Further reading
12 External links



Names
In Chinese, the standard variety is known as:

Pǔtōnghuà (普通话; 普通話; "common speech") in the People's Republic of China, as well as Hong Kong and Macau;
Guóyǔ (國語; "national language") in Taiwan;
Huáyǔ (华语; 華語; "Chinese language") in Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines and the rest of Southeast Asia;[7] and
Hànyǔ (汉语; 漢語; "language of the Han tribe") in the United States and elsewhere in the Chinese diaspora.

Putonghua and Guoyu
In English, the governments of China and Hong Kong use Putonghua,[8][9] Putonghua Chinese,[10] Mandarin Chinese, and Mandarin,[11][12][13] while those of Taiwan,[14][15] Singapore,[16][17] and Malaysia,[18] use Mandarin.
The term Guoyu had previously been used by non-Han rulers of China to refer to their languages, but in 1909 the Qing education ministry officially applied it to Mandarin, a lingua franca based on northern Chinese varieties, proclaiming it as the new "national language".[19]
The name Putonghua also has a long, albeit unofficial, history. It was used as early as 1906 in writings by Zhu Wenxiong to differentiate a modern, standard Chinese from classical Chinese and other varieties of Chinese.

China's Education Ministry published research on September, 2014, that only 70% percent of people of the PRC had good understanding and speaking skill of Putonghua despite People's Republic of China Government was promoting Putonghua on TV, radio and public services like buses and like that to develop Putonghua as PRC official language to ease communication between all people of the PRC, because many ethnic groups had their own dialects, so it was problem to understand each other. To develop the Putonghua as the official common language of the PRC is difficult sometimes because some ethnic groups that are using other dialects don't like using the Putonghua because they think they are losing their own native dialect and cultural identity, for example, when in the summer of 2010 appeared some reports of increasing the using of the Putonghua on a local TV broadcasting in Cantonese dialect in the province of Guangdong, then thousands of Cantonese-speaking citizens were protesting on the demonstration against the plan.[20]

For some linguists of the early 20th century, the Putonghua, or "common tongue/speech", was conceptually different from the Guoyu, or "national language". The former was a national prestige variety, while the latter was the legal standard.[clarification needed]
Based on common understandings of the time, the two were, in fact, different. Guoyu was understood as formal vernacular Chinese, which is close to classical Chinese. By contrast, Putonghua was called "the common speech of the modern man", which is the spoken language adopted as a national lingua franca by conventional usage.
The use of the term Putonghua by left-leaning intellectuals such as Qu Qiubai and Lu Xun influenced the People's Republic of China government to adopt that term to describe Mandarin in 1956. Prior to this, the government used both terms interchangeably.[21]
In Taiwan, Guoyu (national language) continues to be the official term for Standard Chinese. The term Guoyu however, is less used in the PRC, because declaring a Beijing dialect-based standard to be the national language would be deemed unfair to speakers of other varieties and to the ethnic minorities.[citation needed] The term Putonghua (common speech), on the contrary, implies nothing more than the notion of a lingua franca.[citation needed]
During the government of a pro-Taiwan independence coalition (2000–2008), Taiwan officials promoted a different reading of Guoyu as all of the "national languages", meaning Hokkien, Hakka and Formosan as well as Standard Chinese.[22]
Huayu
Huayu, or "language of the Chinese nation", originally simply meant "Chinese language", and was used in overseas communities to contrast Chinese with foreign languages. Over time, the desire to standardise the variety of Chinese spoken in these communities led to the adoption of the name "Huayu" to refer to Mandarin.
This name also avoids choosing a side between the alternative names of Putonghua and Guoyu, which came to have political significance after their usages diverged along political lines between the PRC and the ROC. It also incorporates the notion that Mandarin is usually not the national or common language of the areas in which overseas Chinese live.
Mandarin
The term "Mandarin" is a translation of Guānhuà (官话/官話, literally "official's speech"), which referred to the lingua franca of the late Chinese empire. The Chinese term is obsolete as a name for the standard language, but is used by linguists to refer to the major group of Mandarin dialects spoken natively across most of northern and southwestern China.[23]
In English, "Mandarin" may refer to the standard language, the dialect group as a whole, or to historic forms such as the late Imperial lingua franca.[23] The name "Modern Standard Mandarin" is sometimes used by linguists who wish to distinguish the current state of the shared language from other northern and historic dialects.[24]
History
Main article: History of Mandarin

The Chinese have different languages in different provinces, to such an extent that they cannot understand each other.... [They] also have another language which is like a universal and common language; this is the official language of the mandarins and of the court; it is among them like Latin among ourselves.... Two of our fathers [Michele Ruggieri and Matteo Ricci] have been learning this mandarin language...
— Alessandro Valignano, Historia del Principio y Progresso de la Compañia de Jesus en las Indias Orientales (1542–1564)[25]

Chinese has long had considerable dialectal variation, hence prestige dialects have always existed, and linguae francae have always been needed. Confucius, for example, used yǎyán (雅言; "elegant speech") rather than colloquial regional dialects; text during the Han Dynasty also referred to tōngyǔ (通语; "common language"). Rime books, which were written since the Northern and Southern dynasties, may also have reflected one or more systems of standard pronunciation during those times. However, all of these standard dialects were probably unknown outside the educated elite; even among the elite, pronunciations may have been very different, as the unifying factor of all Chinese dialects, Classical Chinese, was a written standard, not a spoken one.
Late empire
Main article: Mandarin (late imperial lingua franca)




Zhongguo Guanhua (中国官话/中國官話), or Medii Regni Communis Loquela ("Middle Kingdom's Common Speech"), used on the frontispiece of an early Chinese grammar published by Étienne Fourmont (with Arcadio Huang) in 1742[26]


The Ming Dynasty (1368–1644) and the Qing Dynasty (1644–1912) began to use the term guānhuà (官话/官話), or "official speech", to refer to the speech used at the courts. The term "Mandarin" is borrowed directly from Portuguese. The Portuguese word mandarim, derived from the Sanskrit word mantrin "counselor or minister", was first used to refer to the Chinese bureaucratic officials. The Portuguese then translated guānhuà as "the language of the mandarins" or "the mandarin language".[24]
In the 17th century, the Empire had set up Orthoepy Academies (正音书院/正音書院 Zhèngyīn Shūyuàn) in an attempt to make pronunciation conform to the standard. But these attempts had little success, since as late as the 19th century the emperor had difficulty understanding some of his own ministers in court, who did not always try to follow any standard pronunciation.
Before the 19th century, the standard was based on the Nanjing dialect, but later the Beijing dialect became increasingly influential, despite the mix of officials and commoners speaking various dialects in the capital, Beijing.[27] By some accounts, as late as the early 20th century, the position of Nanjing Mandarin was considered to be higher than that of Beijing by some and the postal romanization standards set in 1906 included spellings with elements of Nanjing pronunciation.[28] Nevertheless, by 1909, the dying Qing dynasty had established the Beijing dialect as guóyǔ (国语/國語), or the "national language".
As the island of Taiwan had fallen under Japanese rule per the 1895 Treaty of Shimonoseki, the term kokugo (Japanese: 國語, "national language") referred to the Japanese language until the handover to the ROC in 1945.
Modern China
After the Republic of China was established in 1912, there was more success in promoting a common national language. A Commission on the Unification of Pronunciation was convened with delegates from the entire country.[29] A Dictionary of National Pronunciation (国音字典/國音字典) was published in 1919, defining a hybrid pronunciation that did not match any existing speech.[30][31] Meanwhile, despite the lack of a workable standardized pronunciation, colloquial literature in written vernacular Chinese continued to develop apace.[32]
Gradually, the members of the National Language Commission came to settle upon the Beijing dialect, which became the major source of standard national pronunciation due to its prestigious status. In 1932, the commission published the Vocabulary of National Pronunciation for Everyday Use (国音常用字汇/國音常用字彙), with little fanfare or official announcement. This dictionary was similar to the previous published one except that it normalized the pronunciations for all characters into the pronunciation of the Beijing dialect. Elements from other dialects continue to exist in the standard language, but as exceptions rather than the rule.[33]
After the Chinese Civil War, the People's Republic of China continued the effort, and in 1955, officially renamed guóyǔ as pǔtōnghuà (普通话/普通話), or "common speech". By contrast, the name guóyǔ continued to be used by the Republic of China which, after its 1949 loss in the Chinese Civil War, was left with a territory consisting only of Taiwan and some smaller islands. Since then, the standards used in the PRC and Taiwan have diverged somewhat, especially in newer vocabulary terms, and a little in pronunciation.[34]
In 1956, the standard language of the People's Republic of China was officially defined as: "Pǔtōnghuà is the standard form of Modern Chinese with the Beijing phonological system as its norm of pronunciation, and Northern dialects as its base dialect, and looking to exemplary modern works in báihuà 'vernacular literary language' for its grammatical norms."[35][36] By the official definition, Standard Chinese uses:

The phonology or sound system of Beijing. A distinction should be made between the sound system of a variety and the actual pronunciation of words in it. The pronunciations of words chosen for the standardized language do not necessarily reproduce all of those of the Beijing dialect. The pronunciation of words is a standardization choice and occasional standardization differences (not accents) do exist, between Putonghua and Guoyu, for example.
The vocabulary of Mandarin dialects in general. This means that all slang and other elements deemed "regionalisms" are excluded. On the one hand, the vocabulary of all Chinese varieties, especially in more technical fields like science, law, and government, are very similar. (This is similar to the profusion of Latin and Greek words in European languages.) This means that much of the vocabulary of Standard Chinese is shared with all varieties of Chinese. On the other hand, much of the colloquial vocabulary of the Beijing dialect is not included in Standard Chinese, and may not be understood by people outside Beijing.[37]
The grammar and idiom of exemplary modern Chinese literature, such as the work of Lu Xun, collectively known as "vernacular" (baihua). Modern written vernacular Chinese is in turn based loosely upon a mixture of northern (predominant), southern, and classical grammar and usage. This gives formal Standard Chinese structure a slightly different feel from that of street Beijing dialect.

In the early 1950s, this standard language was understood by 41% of the population of the country, including 54% of speakers of Mandarin dialects, but only 11% of people in the rest of the country. In 1984, the proportion understanding the standard language nationally rose to 90% and the proportion understanding the standard language among the speakers of Mandarin dialects rose to 91%.[38] A survey conducted by the China's Education Ministry in 2007 indicated that 53.06% of the population were able to effectively communicate orally in Standard Chinese.[39]
Current role




Map of eastern China and Taiwan, showing the historic distribution of all the varieties of Mandarin Chinese in light brown. Standard Chinese is based on the Beijing dialect of Mandarin.


From an official point of view, Standard Chinese serves the purpose of a lingua franca—a way for speakers of the several mutually unintelligible varieties of Chinese, as well as the Chinese minorities, to communicate with each other. The very name Putonghua, or "common speech," reinforces this idea. In practice, however, due to Standard Chinese being a "public" lingua franca, other Chinese varieties and even non-Sinitic languages, have shown signs of losing ground to the standard.
In both China and Taiwan, the use of Mandarin as the medium of instruction in the educational system and in the media has contributed to the spread of Mandarin. As a result, Mandarin is now spoken fluently, though often with some regional or personal variation from the standard in terms of pronunciation or lexicon, by most people in mainland China and Taiwan. In 2014, the Ministry of Education estimated that about 70% of the population of China spoke Standard Mandarin to some degree, but only one tenth of those could speak it "fluently and articulately".[3][40] However, there is a 20% difference in penetration between eastern and western parts of China and a 50% difference between urban and rural areas. In addition, there are still 400 million Chinese who are only able to listen and understand Mandarin and not able to speak it.[41] Therefore, in China's 13th Five Year Plan, the general goal is to raise the penetration rate to over 80% by 2020.[42]
Both mainland China and Taiwan use Standard Chinese in the official context and the governments are keen to promote its use as a national lingua franca. The PRC in particular has enacted a law (the National Common Language and Writing Law) which states that the government must "promote" Standard Mandarin. There is no explicit official intent to have Standard Chinese replace the regional varieties, but local governments have enacted regulations (such as the Guangdong National Language Regulations) which "implement" the national law by way of coercive measures to control the public use of regional spoken varieties and traditional characters in writing. In practice, some elderly or rural Chinese-language speakers do not speak Standard Chinese fluently, if at all, though most are able to understand it. But urban residents and the younger generations, who received their education with Standard Mandarin as the primary medium of education, are almost all fluent in a version of Standard Chinese, some to the extent of being unable to speak their local dialect.
Further information: Promotion of Putonghua
In the predominantly Han areas in mainland China, while the use of Standard Chinese is encouraged as the common working language, the PRC has been somewhat sensitive to the status of minority languages and, outside the education context, has generally not discouraged their social use. Standard Chinese is commonly used for practical reasons, as, in many parts of southern China, the linguistic diversity is so large that neighboring city dwellers may have difficulties communicating with each other without a lingua franca.
In Taiwan, the relationship between Standard Chinese and other varieties, particularly Taiwanese Hokkien, has been more politically heated. During the martial law period under the Kuomintang (KMT) between 1949 and 1987, the KMT government revived the Mandarin Promotion Council and discouraged or, in some cases, forbade the use of Hokkien and other non-standard varieties. This produced a political backlash in the 1990s. Under the administration of Chen Shui-Bian, other Taiwanese varieties were taught in schools. The former President, Chen Shui-Bian, often spoke in Hokkien during speeches, while after the late 1990s, former President Lee Teng-hui, also speaks Hokkien openly.
In Hong Kong and Macau, which are now special administrative regions of the People's Republic of China, Cantonese is the primary language spoken by the majority of the population. Cantonese remains the official government language of Hong Kong and Macau. After Hong Kong's handover from the United Kingdom and Macau's handover from Portugal, Putonghua is the language used by the governments of the two territories to communicate with the Central People's Government of the PRC. There have been widespread efforts to promote usage of Putonghua in Hong Kong since the handover,[43] with specific efforts to train police[44] and teachers.[45]
In Singapore, the government has heavily promoted a "Speak Mandarin Campaign" since the late 1970s, with the use of other Chinese varieties in broadcast media being prohibited and their use in any context officially discouraged until recently.[46] This has led to some resentment amongst the older generations, as Singapore's migrant Chinese community is made up almost entirely of people of south Chinese descent. Lee Kuan Yew, the initiator of the campaign, admitted that to most Chinese Singaporeans, Mandarin was a "stepmother tongue" rather than a true mother language. Nevertheless, he saw the need for a unified language among the Chinese community not biased in favor of any existing group.[47]
Mandarin is now spreading overseas beyond East Asia and Southeast Asia as well. In New York City, the use of Cantonese that dominated the Manhattan Chinatown for decades is being rapidly swept aside by Mandarin, the lingua franca of most of the latest Chinese immigrants.[48]
Standard Chinese and the educational system




A poster outside a high school in Yangzhou urges people to "speak Putonghua, welcome guests from all parts" and "use civilised language".


In both the PRC and Taiwan, Standard Chinese is taught by immersion starting in elementary school. After the second grade, the entire educational system is in Standard Chinese, except for local language classes that have been taught for a few hours each week in Taiwan starting in the mid-1990s.
In December 2004, the first survey of language use in the People's Republic of China revealed that only 53% of its population, about 700 million people, could communicate in Standard Chinese.[49] This 53% is defined as a passing grade above 3-B (a score above 60%) of the Evaluation Exam.
With the fast development of the country and the massive internal migration in China, the standard Putonghua Proficiency Test has quickly become popular. Many university graduates in mainland China and Hong Kong take this exam before looking for a job. Employers often require varying proficiency in Standard Chinese from applicants depending on the nature of the positions. Applicants of some positions, e.g. telephone operators, may be required to obtain a certificate. People raised in Beijing are sometimes considered inherently 1-A (A score of at least 97%) and exempted from this requirement.[citation needed] As for the rest, the score of 1-A is rare. According to the official definition of proficiency levels, people who get 1-B (A score of at least 92%) are considered qualified to work as television correspondents or in broadcasting stations.[citation needed] 2-A (A score of at least 87%) can work as Chinese Literature Course teachers in public schools.[citation needed] Other levels include: 2-B (A score of at least 80%), 3-A (A score of at least 70%) and 3-B (A score of at least 60%). In China, a proficiency of level 3-B usually cannot be achieved unless special training is received. Even though many Chinese do not speak with standard pronunciation, spoken Standard Chinese is widely understood to some degree.
The China National Language And Character Working Committee was founded in 1985. One of its important responsibilities is to promote Standard Chinese proficiency for Chinese native speakers.
Phonology
Main article: Standard Chinese phonology
The phoneme inventory of Standard Chinese consists of about two dozen consonants, of which only /n/, /ŋ/, and under certain circumstances the retroflex approximant /ɻ / can occur in the syllable coda, about half a dozen vowels, some of which form diphthongs, and four tones, one of which is marked with creaky voice.[50] Statistically, vowels and tones are of similar importance in the language.[51]
Regional accents
It is common for Standard Chinese to be spoken with the speaker's regional accent, depending on factors such as age, level of education, and the need and frequency to speak in official or formal situations. This appears to be changing, though, in large urban areas, as social changes, migrations, and urbanization take place.
Due to evolution and standardization, Mandarin, although based on the Beijing dialect, is no longer synonymous with it. Part of this was due to the standardization to reflect a greater vocabulary scheme and a more archaic and "proper-sounding" pronunciation and vocabulary.
Distinctive features of the Beijing dialect are the use of erhua, a final "er" (/ɻ /) sound, often as a diminutive, in vocabulary items that are left unadorned in descriptions of the standard such as the Xiandai Hanyu Cidian, as well as more neutral tones.[52] An example of standard versus Beijing dialect would be the standard men (door) and Beijing menr.
Most Standard Chinese as spoken on Taiwan differs mostly in the tones of some words as well as some vocabulary. Minimal use of the neutral tone and erhua (final "er"; /ɻ/), and technical vocabulary constitute the greatest divergences between the two forms.
The stereotypical "southern Chinese" accent does not distinguish between retroflex and alveolar consonants, pronouncing pinyin zh [tʂ], ch [tʂʰ], and sh [ʂ] in the same way as z [ts], c [tsʰ], and s [s] respectively.[53] Southern-accented Standard Chinese may also interchange l and n, final n and ng, and vowels i and ü [y]. Attitudes towards southern accents, particularly the Cantonese accent, range from disdain to admiration.[54]
Vocabulary
Many formal, polite and humble words that were in use in imperial China have not been used in daily conversation in modern-day Mandarin, such as jiàn (贱/賤 "my humble") and guì (贵/貴 "your honorable").
Although Chinese speakers make a clear distinction between Standard Chinese and the Beijing dialect, there are aspects of Beijing dialect that have made it into the official standard. Standard Chinese has a T–V distinction between the polite and informal "you" that comes from the Beijing dialect, although its use is quite diminished in daily speech. In addition, it also distinguishes between "zánmen" (we including the listener) and "wǒmen" (we not including the listener). In practice, neither distinction is commonly used by most Chinese, at least outside the Beijing area.
The following samples are some phrases from the Beijing dialect which are not yet accepted into Standard Chinese:[citation needed]

倍儿 bèir means 'very much'; 拌蒜 bànsuàn means 'stagger'; 不吝 bù lìn means 'do not worry about'; 撮 cuō means 'eat'; 出溜 chūliū means 'slip'; (大)老爷儿们儿 dà lǎoyermenr means 'man, male'.

The following samples are some phrases from Beijing dialect which have become accepted as Standard Chinese:[citation needed]

二把刀 èr bǎ dāo means 'not very skillful'; 哥们儿 gēménr means 'good male friend(s)', 'buddy(ies)'; 抠门儿 kōu ménr means 'frugal' or 'stingy'.

Syntax
Main article: Chinese grammar
Chinese is a very analytic or isolating language, having almost no inflectional morphemes. It follows a similar sentence structure to English, frequently forming sentences in the order subject-predicate. The predicate can be an intransitive verb, a transitive verb followed by a direct object, a linking verb followed by a predicate nominative, etc.
Chinese differs from English in distinguishing between names of things, which can stand as predicate nominatives, and names of characteristics. Names of characteristics (e.g., green) cannot follow linking verbs. There is not an equivalent to the English predicate adjective. Instead, abstract characterizations such as "green", "angry", "hot", etc., stand as complete predicates in their own right. For example, 我不累。Wǒ bú lèi. A word-for-word version in English might be "I not tired." Another common phrase, 你好 (nǐ hăo), demonstrates this feature. While it gets translated into English as "hello", the transliteration is "You good".
Chinese additionally differs from English in that it forms another kind of sentence by stating a topic and following it by a comment.[55] To do this in English, speakers generally flag the topic of a sentence by prefacing it with "as for." For instance, one might say, "As for the money that Mom gave us, I have already bought candy with it." Note that the comment in this case is itself a complete sentence with subject, verb, and object. The Chinese version is simply, 妈妈给我们的钱,我已经买了糖果。'Māma gěi wǒmen de qián, wǒ yǐjīng mǎile tángguǒ(r). This might be directly translated as "The money Mom gave us, I already bought candy," lacking a preface as in English.
Chinese does not inflect verbs for tense like English and other European languages. Instead it uses a combination of aspect markers for aspect and modality. In other words, it employs single syllables that indicate such things as (1) an action being expected or anticipated, (2) that the subject of the sentence has gone through some experience within a stated or implicit time period, (3) that a statement that was formerly not the case has now become true, i.e., that there has been a change of status, (4) that there still has not been a change in a condition previously noted, etc.[56]
The time when something happens can be given by an explicit term such as "yesterday," by relative terms such as "formerly," etc.
Another major difference between the syntax of Chinese and languages like English lies in the stacking order of modifying clauses. 昨天发脾气的外交警察取消了沒有交钱的那些人的入境证。Zuótiān fāpíqì de wàijiāo jǐngchá qǔxiāole méiyǒu jiāoqián de nàxiē rén de rùjìngzhèng. Using the Chinese order in English, that sentence would be:

"[Yesterday got angry] → foreign affairs policeman canceled [did not pay] → [those people]'s visas."

In more ordinary English order, that would be:

"The foreign affairs policeman who got angry yesterday canceled the visas of those people who did not pay."

There are a few other features of Chinese that would be unfamiliar to speakers of English, but the features mentioned above are generally the most noticeable.
Writing system
Main article: Chinese characters
Standard Chinese is written with characters corresponding to syllables of the language, most of which represent a morpheme. In most cases, these characters come from those used in Classical Chinese to write cognate morphemes of late Old Chinese, though their pronunciation, and often meaning, has shifted dramatically over two millennia.[57] However, there are several words, many of them heavily used, which have no classical counterpart or whose etymology is obscure. Two strategies have been used to write such words:[58]

An unrelated character with the same or similar pronunciation might be used, especially if its original sense was no longer common. For example, the demonstrative pronouns zhè "this" and nà "that" have no counterparts in Classical Chinese, which used 此 cǐ and 彼 bǐ respectively. Hence the character 這 (later simplified as 这) for zhè "to meet" was borrowed to write zhè "this", and the character 那 for nà, the name of a country and later a rare surname, was borrowed to write nà "that".
A new character, usually a phono-semantic or semantic compound, might be created. For example, gǎn "pursue, overtake", is written with a new character 趕, composed of the signific 走 zǒu "run" and the phonetic 旱 hàn "drought".[59] This method was used to represent many elements in the periodic table.

The government of the PRC (as well as some other governments and institutions) has promulgated a set of simplified forms. Under this system, the forms of the words zhèlǐ ("here") and nàlǐ ("there") changed from 這裏/這裡 and 那裏/那裡 to 这里 and 那里.
Chinese characters were traditionally read from top to bottom, right to left, but in modern usage it is more common to read from left to right.
Common phrases


English
Traditional characters
Simplified characters
Pinyin


Hello!
你好！
你好！
Nǐ hǎo!


What is your name?
你叫什麼名字？
你叫什么名字？
Nǐ jiào shénme míngzi?


My name is...
我叫...
我叫...
Wǒ jiào ...


How are you?
你好嗎？/ 你怎麼樣？
你好吗？/ 你怎么样？
Nǐ hǎo ma? / Nǐ zěnmeyàng?


I am fine, how about you?
我很好，你呢？
我很好，你呢？
Wǒ hěn hǎo, nǐ ne?


I don't want it / I don't want to
我不要。
我不要。
Wǒ bú yào.


Thank you!
謝謝！
谢谢！
Xièxie


Welcome! / You're welcome! (Literally: No need to thank me!) / Don't mention it! (Literally: Don't be so polite!)
歡迎！/ 不用謝！/ 不客氣！
欢迎！/ 不用谢！/ 不客气！
Huānyíng! / Búyòng xiè! / Bú kèqì!


Yes. / Correct.
是。 / 對。/ 嗯。
是。 / 对。/ 嗯。
Shì. / Duì. / M.


No. / Incorrect.
不是。/ 不對。/ 不。
不是。/ 不对。/ 不。
Búshì. / Bú duì. / Bù.


When?
什麼時候？
什么时候？
Shénme shíhou?


How much money?
多少錢？
多少钱？
Duōshǎo qián?


Can you speak a little slower?
您能說得再慢些嗎？
您能说得再慢些吗？
Nín néng shuō de zài mànxiē ma?


Good morning! / Good morning!
早上好！ / 早安！
早上好！ / 早安！
Zǎoshang hǎo! / Zǎo'ān!


Goodbye!
再見！
再见！
Zàijiàn!


How do you get to the airport?
去機場怎麼走？
去机场怎么走？
Qù jīchǎng zěnme zǒu?


I want to fly to London on the eighteenth
我想18號坐飛機到倫敦。
我想18号坐飞机到伦敦。
Wǒ xiǎng shíbā hào zuò fēijī dào Lúndūn.


How much will it cost to get to Munich?
到慕尼黑要多少錢？
到慕尼黑要多少钱？
Dào Mùníhēi yào duōshǎo qián?


I don't speak Chinese very well.
我的漢語說得不太好。
我的汉语说得不太好。
Wǒ de Hànyǔ shuō de bú tài hǎo.


Do you speak English?
你會說英語嗎？
你会说英语吗？
Nǐ huì shuō Yīngyǔ ma?


I have no money.
我沒有錢。
我没有钱。
Wǒ méiyǒu qián.


See also

Chinese speech synthesis
Comparison of national standards of Chinese
Philippine Mandarin
Malaysian Mandarin
Singaporean Mandarin
Taiwanese Mandarin
Comparison of Cantonese and Standard Chinese

References


^ Norman (1988), pp. 251.
^ Liang (2014), p. 45.
^ a b Luo, Chris (22 September 2014). "One-third of Chinese do not speak Putonghua, says Education Ministry". South China Morning Post. 
^ Only 7% of people in China speak proper Putonghua: PRC MOE, Language Log, 2014 Sept. 24
^ 台灣手語簡介 (Taiwan) (2009)
^ http://www.china-language.gov.cn/ (Chinese)
^ Kane, Daniel (2006). The Chinese Language: Its History and Current Usage. Tuttle Publishing. pp. 22–23, 93. ISBN 978-0-8048-3853-5. 
^ Chinese Central Government Official Web Portal. "Constitution Archived 26 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine.". 2012. Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ "About Hong Kong". Government of Hong Kong. April 2007. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 9 April 2013. 
^ Chinese Central Government Official Web Portal. "Spoken and Written Languages Archived 1 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine.". 2012. Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ Chinese Central Government Official Web Portal. "State Councilor urges more efforts to popularize Chinese language". 21 January 2011. Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ Chinese Central Government Official Web Portal. "Languages Archived 25 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine.". 8 November 2012. Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ Chinese Central Government Official Web Portal. "China-US relations pioneer praised in Beijing meeting". 30 August 2012. Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ Taiwanese Government Entry Point. Ministry of Foreign Affairs. "Languages". 24 May 2013. Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ Taiwan Culture Portal. Ministry of Culture. "About Taiwan". 2012. Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ Ministry of Defense Singapore. PACC PAMS Singapore. "About Singapore". 28 July 2011. Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ Singapore Tourism Board. "Singapore Culture, Language, and People". 2013. Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ Official Portal of the Government of Malaysia. "About Malaysia: Language". Accessed 6 November 2013.
^ Norman (1988), pp. 133–134.
^ Luo, Chris (2014-09-23). "One-third of Chinese do not speak Putonghua, says Education Ministry". South China Morning Post. Hon Kong. Retrieved 2017-09-18. 
^ Yuan, Zhongrui. (2008) "国语、普通话、华语 Archived 26 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine. (Guoyu, Putonghua, Huayu)". China Language National Language Committee, People's Republic of China
^ Fell, Dafydd; Klöter, Henning; Chang, Bi-yu (2006). What Has Changed?: Taiwan Before and After the Change in Ruling Parties. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. p. 213. ISBN 9783447053792. 
^ a b Norman (1988), p. 136.
^ a b Coblin (2000), p. 537.
^ Translation quoted in Coblin (2000), p. 539.
^ Liberlibri SARL. "FOURMONT, Etienne. Linguae Sinarum Mandarinicae hieroglyphicae grammatica duplex, latinè, & cum characteribus Sinensium. Item Sinicorum Regiae Bibliothecae librorum catalogus" (in French). Liberlibri.com. Archived from the original on 13 July 2011. Retrieved 8 November 2010. 
^ Coblin (2000), pp. 549–550.
^ L. Richard's comprehensive geography of the Chinese empire and dependencies translated into English, revised and enlarged by M. Kennelly, S.J. Shanghai: T'usewei Press, 1908. p. iv. (Translation of Louis Richard, Géographie de l'empire de Chine, Shanghai, 1905.)
^ Chen (1999), pp. 16–17.
^ Norman (1988), p. 134.
^ Chen (1999), p. 18.
^ Ramsey (1987), p. 10.
^ Ramsey (1987), p. 15.
^ Bradley (1992), pp. 313–314.
^ Chen (1999), p. 24.
^ "Law of the People's Republic of China on the Standard Spoken and Written Chinese Language (Order of the President No.37)". Gov.cn. 31 October 2000. Retrieved 27 April 2010. For purposes of this Law, the standard spoken and written Chinese language means Putonghua (a common speech with pronunciation based on the Beijing dialect) and the standardized Chinese characters.  Original text in Chinese: "普通话就是现代汉民族共同语，是全国各民族通用的语言。普通话以北京语音为标准音，以北方话为基础方言，以典范的现代白话文著作语法规范"
^ Chen (1999), pp. 37–38.
^ Chen (1999), pp. 27–28.
^ "More than half of Chinese can speak Mandarin". Xinhua. 7 March 2007. Retrieved 10 November 2017. 
^ "17th National Putonghua Week" (Press release) (in Chinese). Ministry of Education. 15 September 2014. 
^ "中国仍有约4亿人不能用普通话进行交流-新华网". news.xinhuanet.com. Retrieved 2017-07-26. 
^ 白宛松. "教育部、国家语委：力争"十三五"期间使所有教师的普通话水平达标_滚动新闻_中国政府网". www.gov.cn. Retrieved 2017-07-26. 
^ Standing Committee on Language Education & Research (25 March 2006). "Putonghua promotion stepped up". Hong Kong Government. Retrieved 12 February 2011. 
^ Hong Kong Police. "Online training to boost Chinese skills". Hong Kong Government. Retrieved 12 February 2011. 
^ Hong Kong LegCo (19 April 1999). "Panel on Education working reports". Hong Kong Government. Retrieved 12 February 2011. 
^ New Hokkien drama aimed at seniors to be launched on Sep 9, Channel News Asia, 1 Sep 2016
^ Lee Kuan Yew, From Third World to First: The Singapore Story: 1965–2000, HarperCollins, 2000. ISBN 0-06-019776-5.
^ Semple, Kirk (21 October 2009). "In Chinatown, Sound of the Future Is Mandarin". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 July 2011. 
^ "Greater numbers speak Mandarin". China Daily. December 26, 2004. 
^ Duanmu (2007), pp. 41–45, 236.
^ Surendran, Dinoj and Levow, Gina-Anne (2004), "The functional load of tone in Mandarin is as high as that of vowels", Proceedings of the International Conference on Speech Prosody 2004, Nara, Japan, pp. 99–102.
^ Chen (1999), pp. 39–40.
^ Norman (1988), p. 140.
^ Blum, Susan D. (2002). "Ethnic and Linguistic Diversity in Kunming". In Blum, Susan Debra; Jensen, Lionel M. China Off Center: Mapping the Margins of the Middle Kingdom. University of Hawaii Press. pp. 160–161. ISBN 978-0-8248-2577-5. 
^ Li & Thompson (1981), pp. 15–16.
^ Li & Thompson (1981), pp. 12–13.
^ Norman (1988), p. 74.
^ Norman (1988), pp. 74–75.
^ Norman (1988), p. 76.


Works cited


Bradley, David (1992), "Chinese as a pluricentric language", in Clyne, Michael G., Pluricentric Languages: Differing Norms in Different Nations, Walter de Gruyter, pp. 305–324, ISBN 978-3-11-012855-0. 
Chen, Ping (1999), Modern Chinese: History and sociolinguistics, New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-64572-0. 
Coblin, W. South (2000), "A brief history of Mandarin", Journal of the American Oriental Society, 120 (4): 537–552, doi:10.2307/606615, JSTOR 606615. 
Duanmu, San (2007), The phonology of standard Chinese (2nd ed.), Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-921579-9. 
Li, Charles N.; Thompson, Sandra A. (1981), Mandarin Chinese: A functional reference grammar, Berkeley: University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-06610-6. 
Liang, Sihua (2014), Language Attitudes and Identities in Multilingual China: A Linguistic Ethnography, Springer International, ISBN 978-3-319-12618-0. 
Norman, Jerry (1988), Chinese, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-29653-3. 
Ramsey, S. Robert (1987), The languages of China, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-01468-5. 


Further reading


Chao, Yuen Ren (1968). A Grammar of Spoken Chinese (2nd ed.). University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-00219-7. 
Hsia, T., China's Language Reforms, Far Eastern Publications, Yale University, (New Haven), 1956.
Ladefoged, Peter; & Maddieson, Ian (1996). The sounds of the world's languages. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 0-631-19814-8 (hbk); ISBN 0-631-19815-6 (pbk).
Ladefoged, Peter; Wu, Zhongji (1984). "Places of articulation: An investigation of Pekingese fricatives and affricates". Journal of Phonetics. 12: 267–278. 
Lehmann, W. P. (ed.), Language & Linguistics in the People's Republic of China, University of Texas Press, (Austin), 1975.
Lin, Y., Lin Yutang's Chinese-English Dictionary of Modern Usage, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 1972.
Milsky, C., "New Developments in Language Reform", The China Quarterly, No. 53, (January–March 1973), pp. 98–133.
Seybolt, P. J. and Chiang, G. K. (eds.), Language Reform in China: Documents and Commentary, M. E. Sharpe (White Plains), 1979. ISBN 978-0-87332-081-8.
Simon, W., A Beginners' Chinese-English Dictionary of the National Language (Gwoyeu): Fourth Revised Edition, Lund Humphries (London), 1975.


External links

 Chinese (Mandarin) at Wikibooks
 Standard Chinese travel guide from Wikivoyage







v
t
e


Chinese language(s)



Major
subdivisions




Mandarin



Northeastern

Harbin
Shenyang


Beijing

Beijing
Karamay


Ji–Lu

Tianjin
Jinan


Jiao–Liao

Dalian
Qingdao
Weihai


Central Plains

Gangou
Guanzhong
Luoyang
Xuzhou
Dungan
Dongping


Lan–Yin
Southwestern

Sichuanese
Kunming
Minjiang
Wuhan


Lower Yangtze

Nanjing







Wu



Taihu

Shanghainese
Suzhou
Wuxi
Changzhou
Hangzhou
Shaoxing
Ningbo
Jinxiang
Jiangyin
Shadi


Taizhou Wu

Taizhou


Oujiang

Wenzhou


Wuzhou

Jinhua


Chu–Qu

Quzhou
Jiangshan
Qingtian


Xuanzhou





Gan



Chang–Du
Yi–Liu
Ying–Yi
Da–Tong





Xiang



New

Changsha


Old

Shuangfeng


Ji–Xu
Yong–Quan

Qiyang







Min




Eastern



Fuzhou
Fuqing
Fu'an
Manjiang





Southern



Hokkien

Quanzhou
Zhangzhou
Amoy
Taiwanese
Philippine Hokkien
Medan Hokkien
Penang Hokkien
Singaporean Hokkien
Southern Peninsular Malaysian Hokkien


Zhenan
Longyan
Teochew

Shantou
Haifeng


Zhongshan

Nanlang
Sanxiang







other



Northern

Jian'ou
Jianyang


Central
Pu–Xian
Shao–Jiang
Leizhou

Zhanjiang


Hainan








Hakka



Meixian
Wuhua
Tingzhou

Changting


Taiwanese Hakka

Sixian dialect
Raoping dialect







Yue



Yuehai

Cantonese
Xiguan
Jiujiang
Shiqi
Weitou
Dapeng


Gao–Yang
Siyi

Taishan


Goulou
Wu–Hua
Yong–Xun
Luo–Guang
Qin–Lian





Proposed



Huizhou
Jin

Hohhot


Pinghua





Unclassified



Danzhou
Mai
Shaozhou Tuhua
Waxiang
Badong Yao
Yeheni








Standardized forms



Standard Chinese (Mandarin)

Sichuanese
Taiwanese
Philippine
Malaysian
Singaporean


Cantonese
Taiwanese Hokkien





Phonology



Historical

Old


Old National
Cantonese
Mandarin
Literary and colloquial readings





Grammar



Chinese grammar
Chinese classifier
Chinese Idiom





History



Old Chinese
Eastern Han
Middle Chinese
Old Mandarin
Middle Mandarin
Proto-Min
Ba–Shu
Gan





Literary forms




Official



Classical

Adoption
in Vietnam


Vernacular





Other varieties



Written Cantonese
Written Dungan
Written Hokkien
Written Sichuanese








Scripts




Standard



Simplified
Traditional





Historical



Oracle bone
Bronze
Seal
Clerical
Semi-cursive
Cursive





Braille



Cantonese Braille
Mainland Chinese Braille
Taiwanese Braille
Two-Cell Chinese Braille





Other



Romanization

Pinyin
Wade–Giles


Bopomofo
Xiao'erjing
Nüshu
Chinese punctuation
Taiwanese kana
Dungan Cyrillic









List of varieties of Chinese










v
t
e


 Languages of China



Official



Standard Mandarin





Regional




Provinces / SARs



CantoneseHK/MC
EnglishHK
MongolianNM
PortugueseMC
TibetanXZ
UyghurXJ
ZhuangGX





Prefecture



Hmong
Dong
Bouyei
Tujia
Korean
Qiang
Yi
Kyrgyz
Kazakh
Tai Nüa
Tai Lü
Zaiwa
Lisu
Bai
Hani
Zhuang





Counties/Banners

numerous






Indigenous









Sino-Tibetan languages







Lolo-
Burmese




Mondzish



Kathu
Maang
Manga
Mango
Maza
Mondzi
Muangphe





Burmish



Achang
Xiandao
Pela
Lashi
Chashan
Lhao Vo
Zaiwa





Loloish




Hanoish



Akeu
Akha
Amu
Angluo
Asuo
Baihong
Bisu
Budu
Bukong
Cosao
Duoni
Duota
Enu
Habei
Hani
Honi
Jino
Kabie
Kaduo
Lami
Laomian
Laopin
Mpi
Muda
Nuobi
Nuomei
Phana’
Piyo
Qidi
Sadu
Sangkong
Suobi
Tsukong
Woni
Yiche





Lisoish



Eka
Hlersu
Kua-nsi
Kuamasi
Laizisi
Lalo
Lamu
Lavu
Lawu
Limi
Lipo
Lisu
Lolopo
Mangdi
Micha
Mili
Sonaga
Toloza
Xuzhang
Yangliu
Zibusi





Nisoish



Alingpo
Alugu
Aluo
Axi
Azha
Azhe
Bokha
Gepo
Khlula
Lope
Moji
Muji
Muzi
Nasu
Nisu
Nuosu
Phala
Phola
Phowa
Phukha
Phuma
Phupa
Phupha
Phuza
Samei
Sani
Thopho
Zokhuo





Other



Gokhy
Katso
Kucong
Lahu
Naruo
Namuyi
Naxi
Nusu
Samu
Sanie
Zauzou











Qiangic



Baima
Choyo
Ersu
Guiqiong
Horpa
Japhug
Khroskyabs
Laze
Lizu
Na
Muya
Namuyi
Naxi
Pumi
Northern Qiang
Southern Qiang
Shixing
Situ
Tshobdun
Zbu
Zhaba





Tibetic



Amdo
Baima
Basum
Central
Choni
Dao
Dongwang
Drugchu
Groma
Gserpa
Khalong
Khams
Ladakhi
Tseku
Zhongu
Zitsadegu





Other



Bai
Caijia
Derung
Jingpho
Longjia
Nung
Tujia
Waxianghua
















Other languages







Austroasiatic



Bit
Blang
Bolyu
Bugan
Bumang
Hu
Kuan
Mang
Man Met
Muak Sa-aak
Palaung
Riang
U
Va
Wa





Hmong-Mien




Hmongic



A-Hmao
Bu-Nao
Gejia
Guiyang
Hm Nai
Hmong
Hmu
Huishui
Kiong Nai
Luobohe
Mashan
Pa-Hng
Pa Na
Pingtang
Qo Xiong
Raojia
She
Small Flowery
Xixiu
Younuo





Mienic



Biao Min
Dzao Min
Iu Mien
Kim Mun








Mongolic



Bonan
Buryat
Daur
Eastern Yugur
Kangjia
Khamnigan
Monguor
Oirat
Ordos
Santa
Torgut





Tai-Kadai




Zhuang



Bouyei
Dai
Min
Ningming
Nong
Tai Dam
Tai Dón
Tai Hongjin
Tai Lü
Tai Nüa
Tai Ya
Yang
Yei





Other



Ai-Cham
Biao
Buyang
Cao Miao
Chadong
Cun
Gelao
Hlai
Jiamao
Kam
Lakkja
Mak
Maonan
Mulam
Naxi Yao
Ong Be
Paha
Qabiao
Sui
Then








Tungusic



Evenki
Manchu
Nanai
Oroqen
Xibe





Turkic



Äynu
Fuyu Kyrgyz
Ili Turki
Lop
Salar
Western Yugur





Other



Sarikoli(Indo-European)
Tsat(Austronesian)
Languages with Taiwan Origin(Austronesian)














Minority



Kazakh
Korean
Kyrgyz
Russian
Tatar
Tuvan
Uzbek
Wakhi





Varieties of
Chinese



Gan
Hakka
Huizhou
Jin
Min

varieties


Pinghua
Wu
Xiang
Yue





Creole/Mixed



E
Kinh (Việt)
Hezhou
Lingling
Macanese
Maojia
Qoqmončaq
Sanqiao
Tangwang
Wutun





Extinct



Ba-Shu
Khitan
Saka
Tangut
Tocharian
Xianbei
Zhang-Zhung





Sign



Chinese Sign

Hong Kong SignHK/MC


Tibetan SignXZ








GX = Guangxi
HK = Hong Kong
MC = Macau
NM = Inner Mongolia
XJ = Xinjiang
XZ = Tibet












v
t
e


 Languages of Singapore



Official languages



English
Malay
Mandarin
Tamil





Creole languages



Baba Malay
Chitty Malay
Kristang
Singlish
Singdarin





Immigrant languages




Chinese



Cantonese
Hakka
Hokkien
Teochew





Indian



Gujarati
Hindi
Malayalam
Punjabi
Telugu
Urdu





Indonesian



Javanese
Baweanese
Minangkabau
Banjarese
Buginese





Other



Sinhalese








Indigenous languages



Orang Seletar





Sign languages



Singaporean Sign Language












v
t
e


 Languages of Taiwan



Austronesian




Formosan




Atayalic



Atayal
Seediq
Truku
Kankei





Rukaic



Rukai





Northern Formosan



Luilang
Kulon
Saisiyat
Pazeh
Kaxabu
Thao
Hoanya
Papora
Babuza
Favorlang
Taokas





East Formosan



Basay
Ketagalan
Kavalan
Qauqaut
Sakizaya
Amis
Siraya
Taivoan
Makatto





Southern Formosan



Bunun
Puyuma
Paiwan





Tsouic



Tsou
Kanakanabu
Saaroa








Malayo-Polynesian



Yami













Sino-Tibetan




Chinese




Mandarin



Taiwanese Mandarin





Min




Southern Min



Taiwanese Hokkien
Teochew dialect





Eastern Min



Fuzhounese

Matsu dialect







Pu-Xian Min



Putian dialect








Hakka



Taiwanese Hakka

Sixian dialect
Hailu dialect
Dabu dialect
Raoping dialect
Zhao'an dialect













Auxiliary



Taiwanese Sign Language
Taiwanese Braille





Other languages



English
Filipino
Japanese
Korean
Malay

Malaysian
Indonesian


Thai
Vietnamese












v
t
e


 Languages of Malaysia



Main




Official



Malaysian





Recognised



English (comparison with British English)








Significant
minority




Chinese



Sino-Tibetan

Cantonese
Eastern Min
Fuqing
Fuzhou
Hokkien
Mandarin Chinese
Malaysian Mandarin
Pu-Xian Min
Penang Hokkien
Southern Peninsular Malaysian Hokkien
Yue Chinese







Indian



Dravidian

Malayalam
Tamil

Malaysian Tamil


Telugu


Indo-European

Gujarati
Hindi
Punjabi
Urdu










Families



Austroasiatic

Aslian


Austronesian

Bornean
Land Dayak
Malayic
Philippine
Sama–Bajaw


Tai-Kadai

Tai







Creoles



Chavacano
Kristang
Manglish
Other Malay trade and creole languages





Natives &
Indigenous




Nationwide



Banjar
Buginese
Javanese
Malay (Malayan)





Peninsular
Malaysia



Baba Malay
Batek
Baweanese
Cheq Wong
Chetty Malay
Duano’
Jah Hut
Jahai
Jakun
Kedah Malay
Kelantan-Pattani Malay
Kenaboi1
Kensiu
Kintaq
Kristang
Lanoh
Mah Meri
Minriq
Mintil
Mos
Negeri Sembilan Malay
Orang Kanaq
Orang Seletar
Pahang Malay
Perak Malay
Rawa Malay
Sabüm1
Semai
Semaq Beri
Semelai
Semnam
Southern Thai
Temiar
Temoq2
Temuan
Terengganu Malay
Wila'1





East
Malaysia



Abai
Bahau
Bajaw
Balau
Belait
Berawan
Biatah
Bintulu
Bonggi
Bookan
Bruneian/Kedayan Malay
Brunei Bisaya
Bukar Sadong
Bukitan
Coastal Kadazan
Cocos Malay
Daro-Matu
Dumpas
Dusun
Eastern Kadazan
Gana’
Iban
Ida'an
Iranun
Jagoi
Jangkang
Kajaman
Kalabakan
Kanowit
Kayan
Kelabit
Kendayan
Keningau Murut
Kinabatangan
Kiput
Klias River Kadazan
Kota Marudu Talantang
Kuijau
Lahanan
Lelak1
Lengilu1
Lotud
Lun Bawang
Mainstream Kenyah
Maranao
Melanau
Molbog
Momogun
Murik Kayan
Narom
Nonukan Tidong
Okolod
Paluan
Papar
Punan Batu2
Penan
Remun
Sa'ban
Sabah Bisaya
Sabah Malay
Sama
Sarawak Malay
Sebop
Sebuyau
Sekapan
Selungai Murut
Sembakung
Seru1
Serudung
Sian
Suluk
Sungai
Tagol
Timugon
Tombonuwo
Tring
Tringgus
Tutoh
Ukit2
Uma’ Lasan








Mixed & Others



Rojak
Tanglish
Esperanto





Immigrants



African
Arab
Bangladeshi
Burmese
Cambodian
East Timorese
Filipino
Indonesian

comparison with Malaysian


Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Laotian
Nepalese
Pakistani
Sri Lankan
Thai
Vietnamese





Signs




Main



Malaysian Sign Language (Manually Coded Malay)





By states



Penang Sign Language
Selangor Sign Language









1 Extinct languages. 2 Nearly extinct languages.









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Standard_Chinese&oldid=816935512"					Categories: Standard ChineseLanguages of ChinaLanguages of TaiwanChinese languages in SingaporeStandard languagesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles containing Chinese-language textCS1 Chinese-language sources (zh)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse dmy dates from February 2011Language articles with old speaker dataLanguages without Glottolog codeDialects of languages with ISO 639-3 codeArticles containing simplified Chinese-language textArticles containing traditional Chinese-language textWikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016Pages incorrectly using the quote templateArticles containing Japanese-language textArticles with unsourced statements from February 2011Articles with unsourced statements from December 2009Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016