Standardization or standardisation is the process of implementing and developing technical standards based on the consensus of different parties that include firms, users, interest groups, standards organizations and governments[1] Standardization can help to maximize compatibility, interoperability, safety, repeatability, or quality. It can also facilitate commoditization of formerly custom processes. In social sciences, including economics,[2] the idea of standardization is close to the solution for a coordination problem, a situation in which all parties can realize mutual gains, but only by making mutually consistent decisions. This view includes the case of "spontaneous standardization processes", to produce de facto standards.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Early examples
1.2 18th century attempts
1.3 National standard
1.4 National standards body
1.5 International standards


2 Usage

2.1 Social science
2.2 Information exchange
2.3 Customer service
2.4 Supply and materials management
2.5 Defense


3 Process
4 Effects

4.1 Effect on firms
4.2 Effect on consumers
4.3 Effect on technology


5 See also
6 Further reading
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]
Early examples[edit]
Standard weights and measures were developed by the Indus Valley Civilisation.[3] The centralised weight and measure system served the commercial interest of Indus merchants as smaller weight measures were used to measure luxury goods while larger weights were employed for buying bulkier items, such as food grains etc.[4] Weights existed in multiples of a standard weight and in categories.[4] Technical standardisation enabled gauging devices to be effectively used in angular measurement and measurement for construction.[5] Uniform units of length were used in the planning of towns such as Lothal, Surkotada, Kalibangan, Dolavira, Harappa, and Mohenjo-daro.[3] The weights and measures of the Indus civilisation also reached Persia and Central Asia, where they were further modified.[6] Shigeo Iwata describes the excavated weights unearthed from the Indus civilisation:

A total of 558 weights were excavated from Mohenjodaro, Harappa, and Chanhu-daro, not including defective weights. They did not find statistically significant differences between weights that were excavated from five different layers, each measuring about 1.5 m in depth. This was evidence that strong control existed for at least a 500-year period. The 13.7-g weight seems to be one of the units used in the Indus valley. The notation was based on the binary and decimal systems. 83% of the weights which were excavated from the above three cities were cubic, and 68% were made of chert.[3]





Hindu units of time—largely of mythological and ritual importance—displayed on a logarithmic scale.


18th century attempts[edit]




Henry Maudslay's famous early screw-cutting lathes of circa 1797 and 1800.


The implementation of standards in industry and commerce became highly important with the onset of the Industrial Revolution and the need for high-precision machine tools and interchangeable parts.
Henry Maudslay developed the first industrially practical screw-cutting lathe in 1800. This allowed for the standardisation of screw thread sizes for the first time and paved the way for the practical application of interchangeability (an idea that was already taking hold) to nuts and bolts.[7]
Before this, screw threads were usually made by chipping and filing (that is, with skilled freehand use of chisels and files). Nuts were rare; metal screws, when made at all, were usually for use in wood. Metal bolts passing through wood framing to a metal fastening on the other side were usually fastened in non-threaded ways (such as clinching or upsetting against a washer). Maudslay standardized the screw threads used in his workshop and produced sets of taps and dies that would make nuts and bolts consistently to those standards, so that any bolt of the appropriate size would fit any nut of the same size. This was a major advance in workshop technology.[8]
National standard[edit]
Maudslay's work, as well as the contributions of other engineers, accomplished a modest amount of industry standardization; some companies' in-house standards spread a bit within their industries.




Graphic representation of formulae for the pitches of threads of screw bolts


Joseph Whitworth's screw thread measurements were adopted as the first (unofficial) national standard by companies around the country in 1841. It came to be known as the British Standard Whitworth, and was widely adopted in other countries.[9][10]
This new standard specified a 55° thread angle and a thread depth of 0.640327p and a radius of 0.137329p, where p is the pitch. The thread pitch increased with diameter in steps specified on a chart. An example of the use of the Whitworth thread is the Royal Navy's Crimean War gunboats. These were the first instance of "mass-production" techniques being applied to marine engineering.[7]
With the adoption of BSW by British railway lines, many of which had previously used their own standard both for threads and for bolt head and nut profiles, and improving manufacturing techniques, it came to dominate British manufacturing.
American Unified Coarse was originally based on almost the same imperial fractions. The Unified thread angle is 60° and has flattened crests (Whitworth crests are rounded). Thread pitch is the same in both systems except that the thread pitch for the ​1⁄2 in bolt is 12 threads per inch (tpi) in BSW versus 13 tpi in the UNC.
National standards body[edit]
By the end of the 19th century, differences in standards between companies, was making trade increasingly difficult and strained. For instance, an iron and steel dealer recorded his displeasure in The Times: "Architects and engineers generally specify such unnecessarily diverse types of sectional material or given work that anything like economical and continuous manufacture becomes impossible. In this country no two professional men are agreed upon the size and weight of a girder to employ for given work."
The Engineering Standards Committee was established in London in 1901 as the world's first national standards body.[11][12] It subsequently extended its standardization work and became the British Engineering Standards Association in 1918, adopting the name British Standards Institution in 1931 after receiving its Royal Charter in 1929. The national standards were adopted universally throughout the country, and enabled the markets to act more rationally and efficiently, with an increased level of cooperation.
After the First World War, similar national bodies were established in other countries. The Deutsches Institut für Normung was set up in Germany in 1917, followed by its counterparts, the American National Standard Institute and the French Commission Permanente de Standardisation, both in 1918.[7]
International standards[edit]
By the mid to late 19th century, efforts were being made to standardize electrical measurement. Lord Kelvin was an important figure in this process, introducing accurate methods and apparatus for measuring electricity. In 1857, he introduced a series of effective instruments, including the quadrant electrometer, which cover the entire field of electrostatic measurement. He invented the current balance, also known as the Kelvin balance or Ampere balance (SiC), for the precise specification of the ampere, the standard unit of electric current.[13]




R. E. B. Crompton drew up the first international standards body, the International Electrotechnical Commission, in 1906.


Another important figure was R. E. B. Crompton, who became concerned by the large range of different standards and systems used by electrical engineering companies and scientists in the early 20th century. Many companies had entered the market in the 1890s and all chose their own settings for voltage, frequency, current and even the symbols used on circuit diagrams. Adjacent buildings would have totally incompatible electrical systems simply because they had been fitted out by different companies. Crompton could see the lack of efficiency in this system and began to consider proposals for an international standard for electric engineering.[14]
In 1904, Crompton represented Britain at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition in Saint Louis as part of a delegation by the Institute of Electrical Engineers. He presented a paper on standardisation, which was so well received that he was asked to look into the formation of a commission to oversee the process.[15] By 1906 his work was complete and he drew up a permanent constitution for the first international standards organization, the International Electrotechnical Commission.[16] The body held its first meeting that year in London, with representatives from 14 countries. In honour of his contribution to electrical standardisation, Lord Kelvin was elected as the body's first President.[17]




Memorial plaque of founding ISA in Prague.


The International Federation of the National Standardizing Associations (ISA) was founded in 1926 with a broader remit to enhance international cooperation for all technical standards and specifications. The body was suspended in 1942 during World War II.
After the war, ISA was approached by the recently formed United Nations Standards Coordinating Committee (UNSCC) with a proposal to form a new global standards body. In October 1946, ISA and UNSCC delegates from 25 countries met in London and agreed to join forces to create the new International Organization for Standardization (ISO); the new organization officially began operations in February 1947.[18]
In general, each country or economy has a single recognized National Standards Body (NSB). Examples include ABNT, AENOR, AFNOR, ANSI, BSI, DGN, DIN, IRAM, JISC, KATS, SABS, SAC, SCC, SIS. An NSB is likely the sole member from that economy in ISO.
NSBs may be either public or private sector organizations, or combinations of the two. For example, the three NSBs of Canada, Mexico and the United States are respectively the Standards Council of Canada (SCC), the General Bureau of Standards (Dirección General de Normas, DGN), and the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). SCC is a Canadian Crown Corporation, DGN is a governmental agency within the Mexican Ministry of Economy, and ANSI and AENOR are a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization with members from both the private and public sectors. The determinants of whether an NSB for a particular economy is a public or private sector body may include the historical and traditional roles that the private sector fills in public affairs in that economy or the development stage of that economy.
Usage[edit]
Standards can be:

de facto standards which means they are followed by informal convention or dominant usage.
de jure standards which are part of legally binding contracts, laws or regulations.
Voluntary standards which are published and available for people to consider for use.

The existence of a published standard does not necessarily imply that it is useful or correct. Just because an item is stamped with a standard number does not, by itself, indicate that the item is fit for any particular use. The people who use the item or service (engineers, trade unions, etc.) or specify it (building codes, government, industry, etc.) have the responsibility to consider the available standards, specify the correct one, enforce compliance, and use the item correctly: validation and verification.
Standardization is implemented greatly when companies release new products to market. Compatibility is important for products to be successful; this allows consumers to use their new items along with what they already own.
Social science[edit]
In the context of social criticism and social science, standardization often means the process of establishing standards of various kinds and improving efficiency to handle people, their interactions, cases, and so forth. Examples include formalization of judicial procedure in court, and establishing uniform criteria for diagnosing mental disease. Standardization in this sense is often discussed along with (or synonymously to) such large-scale social changes as modernization, bureaucratization, homogenization, and centralization of society.
Information exchange[edit]
In the context of information exchange, standardization refers to the process of developing standards for specific business processes using specific formal languages. These standards are usually developed in voluntary consensus standards bodies such as the United Nations Center for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business (UN/CEFACT), the World Wide Web Consortium W3C, the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA), and the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS).
There are many specifications that govern the operation and interaction of devices and software on the Internet, but they are rarely referred to as standards, so as to preserve that word as the domain of relatively disinterested bodies such as ISO. The W3C, for example, publishes "Recommendations", and the IETF publishes "Requests for Comments" (RFCs). However, these publications are sometimes referred to as standards.
Customer service[edit]
In the context of customer service, standardization refers to the process of developing an international standard that enables organizations to focus on customer service, while at the same time providing recognition of success[clarification needed] through a third party organization, such as the British Standards Institution. An international standard has been developed by The International Customer Service Institute.
Supply and materials management[edit]
In the context of supply chain management and materials management, standardization covers the process of specification and use of any item the company must buy in or make, allowable substitutions, and build or buy decisions.
Defense[edit]
In the context of defense, standardization has been defined by NATO as The development and implementation of concepts, doctrines, procedures and designs to achieve and maintain the required levels of compatibility, interchangeability or commonality in the operational, procedural, material, technical and administrative fields to attain interoperability.[19]
Process[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The process of standardization can itself be standardized. There are at least four levels of standardization: compatibility, interchangeability, commonality and reference. These standardization processes create compatibility, similarity, measurement and symbol standards.
There are typically four different techniques for standardization

Simplification or variety control
Codification
Value engineering
Statistical process control.

Types of standardization process:

Emergence as de facto standard: tradition, market domination, etc.
Written by a Standards organization:

in a closed consensus process: Restricted membership and often having formal procedures for due-process among voting members
in a full consensus process: usually open to all interested and qualified parties and with formal procedures for due-process considerations[20]


Written by a government or regulatory body
Written by a corporation, union, trade association, etc.

Effects[edit]
Standardization/ Standardisation has a variety of benefits and drawbacks for firms and consumers participating in the market, and on technology and innovation.
Effect on firms[edit]
The primary effect of standardization on firms is that the basis of competition is shifted from integrated systems to individual components within the system. Prior to standardization a company's product must span the entire system because individual components from different competitors are incompatible, but after standardization each company can focus on providing an individual component of the system.[21] When the shift toward competition based on individual components takes place, firms selling tightly integrated systems must quickly shift to a modular approach, supplying other companies with subsystems or components.[22]
Effect on consumers[edit]
Standardization has a variety of benefits for consumers, but one of the greatest benefits is enhanced network effects. Standards increase compatibility and interoperability between products, allowing information to be shared within a larger network and attracting more consumers to use the new technology, further enhancing network effects.[23] Other benefits of standardization to consumers are reduced uncertainty, because consumers can be more certain that they are not choosing the wrong product, and reduced lock-in, because the standard makes it more likely that there will be competing products in the space.[24] Consumers may also get the benefit of being able to mix and match components of a system to align with their specific preferences.[25] Once these initial benefits of standardization are realized, further benefits that accrue to consumers as a result of using the standard are driven mostly by the quality of the technologies underlying that standard.[26]
Probably the greatest downside of standardization for consumers is lack of variety. There is no guarantee that the chosen standard will meet all consumers' needs or even that the standard is the best available option.[25] Another downside is that if a standard is agreed upon before products are available in the market, then consumers are deprived of the penetration pricing that often results when rivals are competing to rapidly increase market share in an attempt to increase the likelihood that their product will become the standard.[25] It is also possible that a consumer will choose a product based upon a standard that fails to become dominant.[27] In this case, the consumer will have spent resources on a product that is ultimately less useful to him or her as the result of the standardization process.
Effect on technology[edit]
Much like the effect on consumers, the effect of standardization on technology and innovation is mixed.[28] Meanwhile, the various links between research and standardization have been identified,[29] also as a platform of knowledge transfer[30] and translated into policy measures (e.g. WIPANO).
Increased adoption of a new technology as a result of standardization is important because rival and incompatible approaches competing in the marketplace can slow or even kill the growth of the technology (a state known as market fragmentation).[31] The shift to a modularized architecture as a result of standardization brings increased flexibility, rapid introduction of new products, and the ability to more closely meet individual customer's needs.[32]
The negative effects of standardization on technology have to do with its tendency to restrict new technology and innovation. Standards shift competition from features to price because the features are defined by the standard. The degree to which this is true depends on the specificity of the standard.[33] Standardization in an area also rules out alternative technologies as options while encouraging others.[34]
See also[edit]


NATO cartridge (disambiguation)
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
ASTM
Commodity
Conformity assessment
Embrace, extend and extinguish
Environmental standard
International Classification for Standards (ICS)
International standard
Interoperability
Network effect
Open format
Open standard
Open system
OpenDocument
Quality infrastructure
Standard gauge
Standards organizations
Template (disambiguation)
Transport standards organizations
United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names
Vendor lock-in
Java Community Process - The Java Community Process(SM) Program
International Organisation for Standardisation
ISO 14000 standards - a family of environmental management standards
ISO 22000 - a food safety standard


Further reading[edit]


Dickson, E. W.; Singh, S.; Cheung, D. S.; Wyatt, C. C.; Nugent, A. S. (2008). "Application of Lean Manufacturing Techniques in the Emergency Department". Journal of Emergency Medicine. 37 (2): 177–182. doi:10.1016/j.jemermed.2007.11.108. 
Langenberg, T. (2005). Standardization and Expectations. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 3-540-28112-6. 
Murphy, C. N.; Yates, J. (2008). The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) : Global Governance Through Voluntary Consensus. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-77429-1. 
Russell, Andrew L. (9 August 2013). "Standardization in History: A Review Essay With an Eye to the Future" (PDF). Retrieved 23 January 2014. [unreliable source?]
Wenzlhuemer, Roland (2010). "The History of Standardisation in Europe". European History Online. 


References[edit]



^ Xie, Zongjie; Hall, Jeremy; McCarthy, Ian P.; Skitmore, Martin; Shen, Liyin (2016-02-01). "Standardization efforts: The relationship between knowledge dimensions, search processes and innovation outcomes". Technovation. Innovation and Standardization. 48–49: 69–78. doi:10.1016/j.technovation.2015.12.002. 
^ Blind, K. (2004). The economics of standards. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. ISBN 978 1 84376 793 0. 
^ a b c Iwata, Shigeo (2008), "Weights and Measures in the Indus Valley", Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures (2nd edition) edited by Helaine Selin, pp. 2254–2255, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-4559-2.
^ a b Kenoyer, Jonathan Mark (2006), "Indus Valley Civilization", Encyclopedia of India (vol. 2) edited by Stanley Wolpert, pp. 258–266, Thomson Gale, ISBN 0-684-31351-0
^ Baber, Zaheer (1996), The Science of Empire: Scientific Knowledge, Civilization, and Colonial Rule in India, State University of New York Press, ISBN 0-7914-2919-9.
^ In the third millennium BCE the Indus measuring system was further developed in the ancient regions of Iran and Afghanistan -- Iwata, 2254.
^ a b c Wang Ping (April 2011), A Brief History of Standards and Standardization Organizations: A Chinese Perspective (PDF), EAST-WEST CENTER WORKING PAPERS 
^ Rolt, L. T. C. (1962). Great Engineers. Bell and Sons. 
^ Gilbert, K. R.; Galloway, D. F. (1978). "Machine Tools". In Singer, C.; et al. A history of technology. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
^ Lee, S., ed. (1900). Dictionary of National Biography. LXI. London: Smith Elder. 
^ "BSI Group Annual Report and Financial Statements 2010" (PDF). p. 2. Retrieved 3 April 2012. 
^ McWilliam., Robert C. (2001). BSI: The first hundred years. London: Thanet. ISBN 978-0727730206. 
^ Lindley, David (2005). Degrees Kelvin: A Tale of Genius, Invention, and Tragedy. National Academic Press. p. 293. ISBN 978-0309096188. 
^ "Colonel Crompton". www.iec.ch. International Electrotechnical Commission. Archived from the original on September 3, 2010. 
^ Johnson, J.; Randell, W. (1948). Colonel Crompton and the Evolution of the Electrical Industry. Longman Green. 
^ Dyer, Chris K.; Moseley, Patrick T.; Ogumi, Zempachi; Rand, David A. J.; Scrosati, Bruno (2010). Encyclopedia of Electrochemical Power Sources. Newnes. p. 540. ISBN 9780444527455. 
^ "Report of Preliminary Meeting" (PDF). The minutes from our first meeting. London: International Electrotechnical Commission. 1906. pp. 46–47 (25–26 in PDF). Retrieved 23 January 2014. 
^ Friendship among equals - Recollections from ISO's first fifty years (PDF). International Organization for Standardization. 1997. pp. 15–18. ISBN 92-67-10260-5. Retrieved 26 December 2013. 
^ Moreno, Juan A. (8 April 2009). "Interoperabilty and Standardization within NATO" (PDF). NATO Standards Agency. thebolingroup.com. p. 11. Retrieved 23 January 2014. 
^ ISO (2016). How does ISO develop standards? Retrieved June 22, 2016 from http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards_development.htm
^ Shapiro, Carl; Hal R. Varian (1999). Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press. pp. 232–233. 
^ Christensen, Clayton M.; Michael E. Raynor (2003). The Innovator's Solution: Creating and Sustaining Successful Growth. Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press. p. 140. 
^ Shapiro, Carl; Hal R. Varian (1999). Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press. p. 229. 
^ Shapiro, Carl; Hal R. Varian (1999). Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press. p. 230. 
^ a b c Shapiro, Carl; Hal R. Varian (1999). Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press. p. 233. 
^ J. Gregory Sidak, The Value of a Standard Versus the Value of Standardization, 68 BAYLOR L. REV. at 3 (Forthcoming 2016), https://www.criterioneconomics.com/the-value-of-a-standard-versus-the-value-of-standardization.html.
^ Cowan, Robin. "High Technology and the Economics of Standardization." Paper presented at the International Conference on Social and Institutional Factors Shaping Technological Development: Technology at the Outset, Berlin, Germany, May 27–28, 1991. p. 20.
^ Blind, K. (2013). The impact of standardisation and standards on innovation (NESTA Working Paper 13/15). Retrieved from NESTA website: https://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/the_impact_of_standardization_and_standards_on_innovation.pdf
^ Blind, K.; Gauch, S. (2009). "Research and standardisation in nanotechnology: evidence from Germany". The Journal of Technology Transfer. 34 (3): 320–342. doi:10.1007/s10961-008-9089-8. 
^ Blind, K.; Mangelsdorf, A. (2016). "Motives to standardize: Empirical evidence from Germany". Technovation. 48–49: 13–24. doi:10.1016/j.technovation.2016.01.001. 
^ Shapiro, Carl; Hal R. Varian (1999). Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press. p. 264. 
^ Christensen, Clayton M.; Michael E. Raynor (2003). The Innovator's Solution: Creating and Sustaining Successful Growth. Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press. pp. 131–132. 
^ Shapiro, Carl; Hal R. Varian (1999). Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Boston, Mass: Harvard Business School Press. p. 231. 
^ Cowan, Robin. "High Technology and the Economics of Standardization." Paper presented at the International Conference on Social and Institutional Factors Shaping Technological Development: Technology at the Outset, Berlin, Germany, May 27–28, 1991. p. 12



External links[edit]



Look up standardization or standardisation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



"Benefits of standards and standardization". COoperation Platform for Research And Standards (COPRAS project). 
"Which type of standards should my project pursue". COoperation Platform for Research And Standards (COPRAS project). 
"Why standards matter". ISO. 
"What standards do". ISO. 
"Who standards benefit". ISO. 
"Standards Myths". European Committee for Standardization (CEN). Retrieved 8 July 2009. 






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Standardization&oldid=806137799"					Categories: StandardsEngineeringHidden categories: Articles containing Spanish-language textWikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2016Articles needing additional references from January 2014All articles needing additional referencesAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from January 2014