

Play media


"The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Issues Faced by Academic Reference Works That May Be of Interest to Wikipedians" by Edward N. Zalta. Wikimania 2015, Mexico City


The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (SEP) combines an online encyclopedia of philosophy with peer reviewed publication of original papers in philosophy, freely accessible to Internet users. It is maintained by Stanford University. Each entry is written and maintained by an expert in the field, including professors from many academic institutions worldwide. Authors contributing to the encyclopedia give Stanford University the permission to publish the articles, but retain the copyright to those articles.[1]



Contents


1 Approach and history
2 See also
3 References
4 External links



Approach and history[edit]
As of January 2017, the SEP has 1,554 published entries. Apart from its online status, the encyclopedia uses the traditional academic approach of most encyclopedias and academic journals to achieve quality by means of specialist authors selected by an editor or an editorial committee that is competent (although not necessarily considered specialists) in the field covered by the encyclopedia and peer review.
The encyclopedia was created in 1995 by Edward N. Zalta, with the explicit aim of providing a dynamic encyclopedia that is updated regularly, and so does not become dated in the manner of conventional print encyclopedias. The charter for the encyclopedia allows for rival articles on a single topic to reflect reasoned disagreements among scholars. Initially, the SEP was developed with U.S. public funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Science Foundation. A long-term fundraising plan to preserve open access to the encyclopedia is supported by many university libraries and library consortia. These institutions contribute under a plan devised by the SEP in collaboration with the Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition, the International Coalition of Library Consortia, and the Southeastern Library Network, with matching funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities.
See also[edit]

Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Nelson's Perpetual Loose Leaf Encyclopaedia
Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy
List of online encyclopedias

References[edit]



^ "Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Copyright Information". Retrieved December 1, 2015. 



External links[edit]

Official website
Hammer, Eric M.; Zalta, Edward N. (1997). "A Solution to the Problem of Updating Encyclopedias" (pdf). Computers and the Humanities. Center for the Study of Language and Information. SEP. 31 (1): 47–60. doi:10.1023/A:1000418920193. We discuss our implementation of a dynamic encyclopedia and the problems that we had to solve along the way 







v
t
e


Stanford University




Located in: Stanford, California



Schools



Humanities and Sciences
Earth, Energy & Environmental Sciences
Engineering
Education
Business
Law
Medicine








Research



Libraries (Green, Branner, Lane, Lathrop)
Centers and institutes
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences
Hasso Plattner Institute of Design
Hoover Institution
Hopkins Marine Station
Institute for Economic Policy Research
Institute for Theoretical Physics
Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve
Medical Center
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource





Places



Arboretum
Arizona Cactus Garden
Bing Concert Hall
Braun Music Center
Iris & B. Gerald Cantor Center for Visual Arts
Clock Tower
Dish
Fire Truck House
Frost Amphitheater
Green Earth Sciences
Haas Center for Public Service
Hanna–Honeycomb House
Hoover House
Hoover Tower
Lake Lagunita
Main Quad
Mausoleum
Memorial Auditorium
Memorial Church
Research Park
Shopping Center





Publications



Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
HighWire Press
Stanford Law Review
Stanford University Press
Stanford Chaparral





Student life



Student housing
KZSU
Marguerite
Stanford Band
A cappella groups
Stanford Chaparral
The Stanford Daily
The Stanford Review
Stanford Tree
Business Association of Stanford Entrepreneurial Students
Stanford in popular culture
StartX





Athletics



Overview: Stanford Cardinal (Pac-12 Conference)




Teams



Baseball
Basketball

Men
Women


Football

Big Game
The Play


Soccer

Men
Women


Women's volleyball





Facilities



Laird Q. Cagan Stadium
Klein Field at Sunken Diamond
Maples Pavilion
Old Pavilion
Stanford Rowing and Sailing Center
Stanford Stadium
Taube Tennis Center





Misc.



Stanford Axe
NACDA Directors' Cup








People



President Marc Tessier-Lavigne
People
Leland Stanford Jr.
Leland Stanford
Jane Stanford





Related



History of Stanford University
Knight-Hennessy Scholars
In popular culture











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stanford_Encyclopedia_of_Philosophy&oldid=807754619"					Categories: Encyclopedias of philosophyStanford University publicationsInternet properties established in 19951995 establishments in the United StatesPhilosophy websitesFree online encyclopediasHidden categories: Official website different in Wikidata and WikipediaArticles containing video clips