For other uses, see Statue of Liberty (disambiguation).


Statue of Liberty
Liberty Enlightening the World





Location
Liberty Island
Manhattan, New York City,
New York,[1] U.S.


Coordinates
40°41′21″N 74°2′40″W﻿ / ﻿40.68917°N 74.04444°W﻿ / 40.68917; -74.04444Coordinates: 40°41′21″N 74°2′40″W﻿ / ﻿40.68917°N 74.04444°W﻿ / 40.68917; -74.04444


Height



Height of copper statue (to torch): 151 feet 1 inch (46 meters)
From ground level to torch: 305 feet 1 inch (93 meters)





Dedicated
October 28, 1886


Restored
1938, 1984–1986, 2011–2012


Sculptor
Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi


Visitors
3.2 million (in 2009)[2]


Governing body
U.S. National Park Service


Website
Statue of Liberty National Monument






UNESCO World Heritage Site



Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, vi


Designated
1984 (8th session)


Reference no.
307


State Party
United States


Region
Europe and North America









U.S. National Monument



Designated
October 15, 1924


Designated by
President Calvin Coolidge[3]









U.S. National Register of Historic Places



Official name: Statue of Liberty National Monument, Ellis Island and Liberty Island


Designated
October 15, 1966[4]


Reference no.
66000058









New Jersey Register of Historic Places



Designated
May 27, 1971


Reference no.
1535[5]









New York City Landmark



Type
Individual


Designated
September 14, 1976[6]















Location of Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor in New York City
Show map of New York City










Location of Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor in New York City
Show map of New York










Location of Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor in New York City
Show map of the US






The Statue of Liberty (Liberty Enlightening the World; French: La Liberté éclairant le monde) is a colossal neoclassical sculpture on Liberty Island in New York Harbor in New York City, in the United States. The copper statue, a gift from the people of France to the people of the United States, was designed by French sculptor Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi and built by Gustave Eiffel. The statue was dedicated on October 28, 1886.
The Statue of Liberty is a figure of a robed woman representing Libertas, a Roman liberty goddess - also incorporating some elements reminiscent of another Roman deity, Sol Invictus. She holds a torch above her head with her right hand, and in her left hand carries a tabula ansata inscribed in Roman numerals with "JULY IV MDCCLXXVI" (July 4, 1776), the date of the U.S. Declaration of Independence. A broken chain lies at her feet. The statue became an icon of freedom and of the United States, and was a welcoming sight to immigrants arriving from abroad.
Bartholdi was inspired by a French law professor and politician, Édouard René de Laboulaye, who is said to have commented in 1865 that any monument raised to U.S. independence would properly be a joint project of the French and American peoples. Because of the post-war instability in France, work on the statue did not commence until the early 1870s. In 1875, Laboulaye proposed that the French finance the statue and the U.S. provide the site and build the pedestal. Bartholdi completed the head and the torch-bearing arm before the statue was fully designed, and these pieces were exhibited for publicity at international expositions.
The torch-bearing arm was displayed at the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia in 1876, and in Madison Square Park in Manhattan from 1876 to 1882. Fundraising proved difficult, especially for the Americans, and by 1885 work on the pedestal was threatened by lack of funds. Publisher Joseph Pulitzer, of the New York World, started a drive for donations to finish the project and attracted more than 120,000 contributors, most of whom gave less than a dollar. The statue was built in France, shipped overseas in crates, and assembled on the completed pedestal on what was then called Bedloe's Island. The statue's completion was marked by New York's first ticker-tape parade and a dedication ceremony presided over by President Grover Cleveland.
The statue was administered by the United States Lighthouse Board until 1901 and then by the Department of War; since 1933 it has been maintained by the National Park Service. Public access to the balcony around the torch has been barred for safety since 1916.



Contents


1 Design and construction process

1.1 Origin
1.2 Design, style, and symbolism
1.3 Announcement and early work
1.4 Construction in France

1.4.1 Design
1.4.2 Fundraising
1.4.3 Construction


1.5 Dedication


2 After dedication

2.1 Lighthouse Board and War Department (1886–1933)
2.2 Early National Park Service years (1933–1982)
2.3 Renovation and rededication (1982–2000)
2.4 Closures and reopenings (2001–present)


3 Access and attributes

3.1 Location and tourism
3.2 Inscriptions, plaques, and dedications


4 UNESCO World Heritage Site

4.1 Physical characteristics


5 Depictions
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Design and construction process
Origin




As well as the Roman Libertas, Sol Invictus ("Unconquered Sun") also influenced the Statue of Liberty (3rd century disc found at Pessinus - British Museum).


According to the National Park Service, the idea for the Statue of Liberty was first proposed by Édouard René de Laboulaye the president of the French Anti-Slavery Society and a prominent and important political thinker of his time. The project is traced to a mid-1865 conversation between de Laboulaye, a staunch abolitionist and Frédéric Bartholdi, a sculptor. In after-dinner conversation at his home near Versailles, Laboulaye, an ardent supporter of the Union in the American Civil War, is supposed to have said: "If a monument should rise in the United States, as a memorial to their independence, I should think it only natural if it were built by united effort—a common work of both our nations."[7] The National Park Service, in a 2000 report, however, deemed this a legend traced to an 1885 fundraising pamphlet, and that the statue was most likely conceived in 1870.[8] In another essay on their website, the Park Service suggested that Laboulaye was minded to honor the Union victory and its consequences, "With the abolition of slavery and the Union's victory in the Civil War in 1865, Laboulaye's wishes of freedom and democracy were turning into a reality in the United States. In order to honor these achievements, Laboulaye proposed that a gift be built for the United States on behalf of France. Laboulaye hoped that by calling attention to the recent achievements of the United States, the French people would be inspired to call for their own democracy in the face of a repressive monarchy."[9]




Bartholdi's design patent


According to sculptor Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi, who later recounted the story, Laboulaye's comment was not intended as a proposal, but it inspired Bartholdi.[7] Given the repressive nature of the regime of Napoleon III, Bartholdi took no immediate action on the idea except to discuss it with Laboulaye. Bartholdi was in any event busy with other possible projects; in the late 1860s, he approached Isma'il Pasha, Khedive of Egypt, a plan to build Progress or Egypt Carrying the Light to Asia,[10] a huge lighthouse in the form of an ancient Egyptian female fellah or peasant, robed and holding a torch aloft, at the northern entrance to the Suez Canal in Port Said. Sketches and models were made of the proposed work, though it was never erected. There was a classical precedent for the Suez proposal, the Colossus of Rhodes: an ancient bronze statue of the Greek god of the sun, Helios. This statue is believed to have been over 100 feet (30 m) high, and it similarly stood at a harbor entrance and carried a light to guide ships.[11]
Any large project was further delayed by the Franco-Prussian War, in which Bartholdi served as a major of militia. In the war, Napoleon III was captured and deposed. Bartholdi's home province of Alsace was lost to the Prussians, and a more liberal republic was installed in France.[7] As Bartholdi had been planning a trip to the United States, he and Laboulaye decided the time was right to discuss the idea with influential Americans.[12] In June 1871, Bartholdi crossed the Atlantic, with letters of introduction signed by Laboulaye.[13]
Arriving at New York Harbor, Bartholdi focused on Bedloe's Island (now named Liberty Island) as a site for the statue, struck by the fact that vessels arriving in New York had to sail past it. He was delighted to learn that the island was owned by the United States government—it had been ceded by the New York State Legislature in 1800 for harbor defense. It was thus, as he put it in a letter to Laboulaye: "land common to all the states."[14] As well as meeting many influential New Yorkers, Bartholdi visited President Ulysses S. Grant, who assured him that it would not be difficult to obtain the site for the statue.[15] Bartholdi crossed the United States twice by rail, and met many Americans who he thought would be sympathetic to the project.[13] But he remained concerned that popular opinion on both sides of the Atlantic was insufficiently supportive of the proposal, and he and Laboulaye decided to wait before mounting a public campaign.[16]




Bartholdi's Lion of Belfort


Bartholdi had made a first model of his concept in 1870.[17] The son of a friend of Bartholdi's, U.S. artist John LaFarge, later maintained that Bartholdi made the first sketches for the statue during his U.S. visit at La Farge's Rhode Island studio. Bartholdi continued to develop the concept following his return to France.[17] He also worked on a number of sculptures designed to bolster French patriotism after the defeat by the Prussians. One of these was the Lion of Belfort, a monumental sculpture carved in sandstone below the fortress of Belfort, which during the war had resisted a Prussian siege for over three months. The defiant lion, 73 feet (22 m) long and half that in height, displays an emotional quality characteristic of Romanticism, which Bartholdi would later bring to the Statue of Liberty.[18]
Design, style, and symbolism




Detail from a fresco by Constantino Brumidi in the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C., showing two early symbols of America: Columbia (left) and the Indian princess


Bartholdi and Laboulaye considered how best to express the idea of American liberty.[19] In early American history, two female figures were frequently used as cultural symbols of the nation.[20] One of these symbols, the personified Columbia, was seen as an embodiment of the United States in the manner that Britannia was identified with the United Kingdom and Marianne came to represent France. Columbia had supplanted the earlier figure of an Indian princess, which had come to be regarded as uncivilized and derogatory toward Americans.[20] The other significant female icon in American culture was a representation of Liberty, derived from Libertas, the goddess of freedom widely worshipped in ancient Rome, especially among emancipated slaves. A Liberty figure adorned most American coins of the time,[19] and representations of Liberty appeared in popular and civic art, including Thomas Crawford's Statue of Freedom (1863) atop the dome of the United States Capitol Building.[19]
Artists of the 18th and 19th centuries striving to evoke republican ideals commonly used representations of Libertas as an allegorical symbol.[19] A figure of Liberty was also depicted on the Great Seal of France.[19] However, Bartholdi and Laboulaye avoided an image of revolutionary liberty such as that depicted in Eugène Delacroix's famed Liberty Leading the People (1830). In this painting, which commemorates France's Revolution of 1830, a half-clothed Liberty leads an armed mob over the bodies of the fallen.[20] Laboulaye had no sympathy for revolution, and so Bartholdi's figure would be fully dressed in flowing robes.[20] Instead of the impression of violence in the Delacroix work, Bartholdi wished to give the statue a peaceful appearance and chose a torch, representing progress, for the figure to hold.[21]
Crawford's statue was designed in the early 1850s. It was originally to be crowned with a pileus, the cap given to emancipated slaves in ancient Rome. Secretary of War Jefferson Davis, a Southerner who would later serve as President of the Confederate States of America, was concerned that the pileus would be taken as an abolitionist symbol. He ordered that it be changed to a helmet.[22] Delacroix's figure wears a pileus,[20] and Bartholdi at first considered placing one on his figure as well. Instead, he used a diadem, or crown, to top its head.[23] In so doing, he avoided a reference to Marianne, who invariably wears a pileus.[24] The seven rays form a halo or aureole.[25] They evoke the sun, the seven seas, and the seven continents,[26] and represent another means, besides the torch, whereby Liberty enlightens the world.[21]
Bartholdi's early models were all similar in concept: a female figure in neoclassical style representing liberty, wearing a stola and pella (gown and cloak, common in depictions of Roman goddesses) and holding a torch aloft. According to popular accounts, the face was modeled after that of Charlotte Beysser Bartholdi, the sculptor's mother,[27] but Regis Huber, the curator of the Bartholdi Museum is on record as saying that this, as well as other similar speculations, have no basis in fact.[28] He designed the figure with a strong, uncomplicated silhouette, which would be set off well by its dramatic harbor placement and allow passengers on vessels entering New York Bay to experience a changing perspective on the statue as they proceeded toward Manhattan. He gave it bold classical contours and applied simplified modeling, reflecting the huge scale of the project and its solemn purpose.[21] Bartholdi wrote of his technique:




Thomas Crawford's Statue of Freedom



The surfaces should be broad and simple, defined by a bold and clear design, accentuated in the important places. The enlargement of the details or their multiplicity is to be feared. By exaggerating the forms, in order to render them more clearly visible, or by enriching them with details, we would destroy the proportion of the work. Finally, the model, like the design, should have a summarized character, such as one would give to a rapid sketch. Only it is necessary that this character should be the product of volition and study, and that the artist, concentrating his knowledge, should find the form and the line in its greatest simplicity.[29]

Bartholdi made alterations in the design as the project evolved. Bartholdi considered having Liberty hold a broken chain, but decided this would be too divisive in the days after the Civil War. The erected statue does rise over a broken chain, half-hidden by her robes and difficult to see from the ground.[23] Bartholdi was initially uncertain of what to place in Liberty's left hand; he settled on a tabula ansata,[30] used to evoke the concept of law.[31] Though Bartholdi greatly admired the United States Constitution, he chose to inscribe "JULY IV MDCCLXXVI" on the tablet, thus associating the date of the country's Declaration of Independence with the concept of liberty.[30]
Bartholdi interested his friend and mentor, architect Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, in the project.[28] As chief engineer,[28] Viollet-le-Duc designed a brick pier within the statue, to which the skin would be anchored.[32] After consultations with the metalwork foundry Gaget, Gauthier & Co., Viollet-le-Duc chose the metal which would be used for the skin, copper sheets, and the method used to shape it, repoussé, in which the sheets were heated and then struck with wooden hammers.[28][33] An advantage of this choice was that the entire statue would be light for its volume, as the copper need be only 0.094 inches (2.4 mm) thick. Bartholdi had decided on a height of just over 151 feet (46 m) for the statue, double that of Italy's Sancarlone and the German statue of Arminius, both made with the same method.[34]
Announcement and early work
By 1875, France was enjoying improved political stability and a recovering postwar economy. Growing interest in the upcoming Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia led Laboulaye to decide it was time to seek public support.[35] In September 1875, he announced the project and the formation of the Franco-American Union as its fundraising arm. With the announcement, the statue was given a name, Liberty Enlightening the World.[36] The French would finance the statue; Americans would be expected to pay for the pedestal.[37] The announcement provoked a generally favorable reaction in France, though many Frenchmen resented the United States for not coming to their aid during the war with Prussia.[36] French monarchists opposed the statue, if for no other reason than it was proposed by the liberal Laboulaye, who had recently been elected a senator for life.[37] Laboulaye arranged events designed to appeal to the rich and powerful, including a special performance at the Paris Opera on April 25, 1876, that featured a new cantata by composer Charles Gounod. The piece was titled La Liberté éclairant le monde, the French version of the statue's announced name.[36]




Stereoscopic image of right arm and torch of the Statue of Liberty, 1876 Centennial Exposition


Despite its initial focus on the elites, the Union was successful in raising funds from across French society. Schoolchildren and ordinary citizens gave, as did 181 French municipalities. Laboulaye's political allies supported the call, as did descendants of the French contingent in the American Revolutionary War. Less idealistically, contributions came from those who hoped for American support in the French attempt to build the Panama Canal. The copper may have come from multiple sources and some of it is said to have come from a mine in Visnes, Norway,[38] though this has not been conclusively determined after testing samples.[39] According to Cara Sutherland in her book on the statue for the Museum of the City of New York, 90,800 kilos (200,000 pounds) was needed to build the statue, and the French copper industrialist Eugène Secrétan donated 58,100 kilos (128,000 pounds) of copper.[40]
Although plans for the statue had not been finalized, Bartholdi moved forward with fabrication of the right arm, bearing the torch, and the head. Work began at the Gaget, Gauthier & Co. workshop.[41] In May 1876, Bartholdi traveled to the United States as a member of a French delegation to the Centennial Exhibition,[42] and arranged for a huge painting of the statue to be shown in New York as part of the Centennial festivities.[43] The arm did not arrive in Philadelphia until August; because of its late arrival, it was not listed in the exhibition catalogue, and while some reports correctly identified the work, others called it the "Colossal Arm" or "Bartholdi Electric Light". The exhibition grounds contained a number of monumental artworks to compete for fairgoers' interest, including an outsized fountain designed by Bartholdi.[44] Nevertheless, the arm proved popular in the exhibition's waning days, and visitors would climb up to the balcony of the torch to view the fairgrounds.[45] After the exhibition closed, the arm was transported to New York, where it remained on display in Madison Square Park for several years before it was returned to France to join the rest of the statue.[45]
During his second trip to the United States, Bartholdi addressed a number of groups about the project, and urged the formation of American committees of the Franco-American Union.[46] Committees to raise money to pay for the foundation and pedestal were formed in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia.[47] The New York group eventually took on most of the responsibility for American fundraising and is often referred to as the "American Committee".[48] One of its members was 19-year-old Theodore Roosevelt, the future governor of New York and president of the United States.[46] On March 3, 1877, on his final full day in office, President Grant signed a joint resolution that authorized the President to accept the statue when it was presented by France and to select a site for it. President Rutherford B. Hayes, who took office the following day, selected the Bedloe's Island site that Bartholdi had proposed.[49]
Construction in France




The statue's head on exhibit at the Paris World's Fair, 1878


On his return to Paris in 1877, Bartholdi concentrated on completing the head, which was exhibited at the 1878 Paris World's Fair. Fundraising continued, with models of the statue put on sale. Tickets to view the construction activity at the Gaget, Gauthier & Co. workshop were also offered.[50] The French government authorized a lottery; among the prizes were valuable silver plate and a terracotta model of the statue. By the end of 1879, about 250,000 francs had been raised.[51]
The head and arm had been built with assistance from Viollet-le-Duc, who fell ill in 1879. He soon died, leaving no indication of how he intended to transition from the copper skin to his proposed masonry pier.[52] The following year, Bartholdi was able to obtain the services of the innovative designer and builder Gustave Eiffel.[50] Eiffel and his structural engineer, Maurice Koechlin, decided to abandon the pier and instead build an iron truss tower. Eiffel opted not to use a completely rigid structure, which would force stresses to accumulate in the skin and lead eventually to cracking. A secondary skeleton was attached to the center pylon, then, to enable the statue to move slightly in the winds of New York Harbor and as the metal expanded on hot summer days, he loosely connected the support structure to the skin using flat iron bars[28] which culminated in a mesh of metal straps, known as "saddles", that were riveted to the skin, providing firm support. In a labor-intensive process, each saddle had to be crafted individually.[53][54] To prevent galvanic corrosion between the copper skin and the iron support structure, Eiffel insulated the skin with asbestos impregnated with shellac.[55]
Eiffel's design made the statue one of the earliest examples of curtain wall construction, in which the exterior of the structure is not load bearing, but is instead supported by an interior framework. He included two interior spiral staircases, to make it easier for visitors to reach the observation point in the crown.[56] Access to an observation platform surrounding the torch was also provided, but the narrowness of the arm allowed for only a single ladder, 40 feet (12 m) long.[57] As the pylon tower arose, Eiffel and Bartholdi coordinated their work carefully so that completed segments of skin would fit exactly on the support structure.[58] The components of the pylon tower were built in the Eiffel factory in the nearby Parisian suburb of Levallois-Perret.[59]
The change in structural material from masonry to iron allowed Bartholdi to change his plans for the statue's assembly. He had originally expected to assemble the skin on-site as the masonry pier was built; instead he decided to build the statue in France and have it disassembled and transported to the United States for reassembly in place on Bedloe's Island.[60]
In a symbolic act, the first rivet placed into the skin, fixing a copper plate onto the statue's big toe, was driven by United States Ambassador to France Levi P. Morton.[61] The skin was not, however, crafted in exact sequence from low to high; work proceeded on a number of segments simultaneously in a manner often confusing to visitors.[62] Some work was performed by contractors—one of the fingers was made to Bartholdi's exacting specifications by a coppersmith in the southern French town of Montauban.[63] By 1882, the statue was complete up to the waist, an event Barthodi celebrated by inviting reporters to lunch on a platform built within the statue.[64] Laboulaye died in 1883. He was succeeded as chairman of the French committee by Ferdinand de Lesseps, builder of the Suez Canal. The completed statue was formally presented to Ambassador Morton at a ceremony in Paris on July 4, 1884, and de Lesseps announced that the French government had agreed to pay for its transport to New York.[65] The statue remained intact in Paris pending sufficient progress on the pedestal; by January 1885, this had occurred and the statue was disassembled and crated for its ocean voyage.[66]




Richard Morris Hunt's pedestal under construction in June 1885


The committees in the United States faced great difficulties in obtaining funds for the construction of the pedestal. The Panic of 1873 had led to an economic depression that persisted through much of the decade. The Liberty statue project was not the only such undertaking that had difficulty raising money: construction of the obelisk later known as the Washington Monument sometimes stalled for years; it would ultimately take over three-and-a-half decades to complete.[67] There was criticism both of Bartholdi's statue and of the fact that the gift required Americans to foot the bill for the pedestal. In the years following the Civil War, most Americans preferred realistic artworks depicting heroes and events from the nation's history, rather than allegorical works like the Liberty statue.[67] There was also a feeling that Americans should design American public works—the selection of Italian-born Constantino Brumidi to decorate the Capitol had provoked intense criticism, even though he was a naturalized U.S. citizen.[68] Harper's Weekly declared its wish that "M. Bartholdi and our French cousins had 'gone the whole figure' while they were about it, and given us statue and pedestal at once."[69] The New York Times stated that "no true patriot can countenance any such expenditures for bronze females in the present state of our finances."[70] Faced with these criticisms, the American committees took little action for several years.[70]
Design




Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper, June 1885, showing (clockwise from left) woodcuts of the completed statue in Paris, Bartholdi, and the statue's interior structure


The foundation of Bartholdi's statue was to be laid inside Fort Wood, a disused army base on Bedloe's Island constructed between 1807 and 1811. Since 1823, it had rarely been used, though during the Civil War, it had served as a recruiting station.[71] The fortifications of the structure were in the shape of an eleven-point star. The statue's foundation and pedestal were aligned so that it would face southeast, greeting ships entering the harbor from the Atlantic Ocean.[72] In 1881, the New York committee commissioned Richard Morris Hunt to design the pedestal. Within months, Hunt submitted a detailed plan, indicating that he expected construction to take about nine months.[73] He proposed a pedestal 114 feet (35 m) in height; faced with money problems, the committee reduced that to 89 feet (27 m).[74]
Hunt's pedestal design contains elements of classical architecture, including Doric portals, as well as some elements influenced by Aztec architecture.[28] The large mass is fragmented with architectural detail, in order to focus attention on the statue.[74] In form, it is a truncated pyramid, 62 feet (19 m) square at the base and 39.4 feet (12.0 m) at the top. The four sides are identical in appearance. Above the door on each side, there are ten disks upon which Bartholdi proposed to place the coats of arms of the states (between 1876 and 1889, there were 38 U.S. states), although this was not done. Above that, a balcony was placed on each side, framed by pillars. Bartholdi placed an observation platform near the top of the pedestal, above which the statue itself rises.[75] According to author Louis Auchincloss, the pedestal "craggily evokes the power of an ancient Europe over which rises the dominating figure of the Statue of Liberty".[74] The committee hired former army General Charles Pomeroy Stone to oversee the construction work.[76] Construction on the 15-foot-deep (4.6 m) foundation began in 1883, and the pedestal's cornerstone was laid in 1884.[73] In Hunt's original conception, the pedestal was to have been made of solid granite. Financial concerns again forced him to revise his plans; the final design called for poured concrete walls, up to 20 feet (6.1 m) thick, faced with granite blocks.[77][78] This Stony Creek granite came from the Beattie Quarry in Branford, Connecticut.[79] The concrete mass was the largest poured to that time.[78]
Norwegian immigrant civil engineer Joachim Goschen Giæver designed the structural framework for the Statue of Liberty. His work involved design computations, detailed fabrication and construction drawings, and oversight of construction. In completing his engineering for the statue's frame, Giæver worked from drawings and sketches produced by Gustave Eiffel.[80]
Fundraising




Unpacking of the face of the Statue of Liberty, which was delivered on June 17, 1885


Fundraising for the statue had begun in 1882. The committee organized a large number of money-raising events.[81] As part of one such effort, an auction of art and manuscripts, poet Emma Lazarus was asked to donate an original work. She initially declined, stating she could not write a poem about a statue. At the time, she was also involved in aiding refugees to New York who had fled anti-Semitic pogroms in eastern Europe. These refugees were forced to live in conditions that the wealthy Lazarus had never experienced. She saw a way to express her empathy for these refugees in terms of the statue.[82] The resulting sonnet, "The New Colossus", including the iconic lines "Give me your tired, your poor/Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free", is uniquely identified with the Statue of Liberty and is inscribed on a plaque in the museum in its base.[83]
Even with these efforts, fundraising lagged. Grover Cleveland, the governor of New York, vetoed a bill to provide $50,000 for the statue project in 1884. An attempt the next year to have Congress provide $100,000, sufficient to complete the project, also failed. The New York committee, with only $3,000 in the bank, suspended work on the pedestal. With the project in jeopardy, groups from other American cities, including Boston and Philadelphia, offered to pay the full cost of erecting the statue in return for relocating it.[84]
Joseph Pulitzer, publisher of the New York World, a New York newspaper, announced a drive to raise $100,000—the equivalent of $2.3 million today.[85] Pulitzer pledged to print the name of every contributor, no matter how small the amount given.[86] The drive captured the imagination of New Yorkers, especially when Pulitzer began publishing the notes he received from contributors. "A young girl alone in the world" donated "60 cents, the result of self denial."[87] One donor gave "five cents as a poor office boy's mite toward the Pedestal Fund." A group of children sent a dollar as "the money we saved to go to the circus with."[88] Another dollar was given by a "lonely and very aged woman."[87] Residents of a home for alcoholics in New York's rival city of Brooklyn—the cities would not merge until 1898—donated $15; other drinkers helped out through donation boxes in bars and saloons.[89] A kindergarten class in Davenport, Iowa, mailed the World a gift of $1.35.[87] As the donations flooded in, the committee resumed work on the pedestal.[90]
Construction
On June 17, 1885, the French steamer Isère, laden with the Statue of Liberty, reached the New York port safely. New Yorkers displayed their new-found enthusiasm for the statue, as the French vessel arrived with the crates holding the disassembled statue on board. Two hundred thousand people lined the docks and hundreds of boats put to sea to welcome the Isère.[91] [92] After five months of daily calls to donate to the statue fund, on August 11, 1885, the World announced that $102,000 had been raised from 120,000 donors, and that 80 percent of the total had been received in sums of less than one dollar.[93]
Even with the success of the fund drive, the pedestal was not completed until April 1886. Immediately thereafter, reassembly of the statue began. Eiffel's iron framework was anchored to steel I-beams within the concrete pedestal and assembled.[94] Once this was done, the sections of skin were carefully attached.[95] Due to the width of the pedestal, it was not possible to erect scaffolding, and workers dangled from ropes while installing the skin sections. Nevertheless, no one died during the construction.[96] Bartholdi had planned to put floodlights on the torch's balcony to illuminate it; a week before the dedication, the Army Corps of Engineers vetoed the proposal, fearing that ships' pilots passing the statue would be blinded. Instead, Bartholdi cut portholes in the torch—which was covered with gold leaf—and placed the lights inside them.[97] A power plant was installed on the island to light the torch and for other electrical needs.[98] After the skin was completed, renowned landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, co-designer of New York's Central Park and Brooklyn's Prospect Park, supervised a cleanup of Bedloe's Island in anticipation of the dedication.[99]
Dedication




Unveiling of the Statue of Liberty Enlightening the World (1886) by Edward Moran. Oil on canvas. The J. Clarence Davies Collection, Museum of the City of New York.


A ceremony of dedication was held on the afternoon of October 28, 1886. President Grover Cleveland, the former New York governor, presided over the event.[100] On the morning of the dedication, a parade was held in New York City; estimates of the number of people who watched it ranged from several hundred thousand to a million. President Cleveland headed the procession, then stood in the reviewing stand to see bands and marchers from across America. General Stone was the grand marshal of the parade. The route began at Madison Square, once the venue for the arm, and proceeded to the Battery at the southern tip of Manhattan by way of Fifth Avenue and Broadway, with a slight detour so the parade could pass in front of the World building on Park Row. As the parade passed the New York Stock Exchange, traders threw ticker tape from the windows, beginning the New York tradition of the ticker-tape parade.[101]
A nautical parade began at 12:45 p.m., and President Cleveland embarked on a yacht that took him across the harbor to Bedloe's Island for the dedication.[102] De Lesseps made the first speech, on behalf of the French committee, followed by the chairman of the New York committee, Senator William M. Evarts. A French flag draped across the statue's face was to be lowered to unveil the statue at the close of Evarts's speech, but Bartholdi mistook a pause as the conclusion and let the flag fall prematurely. The ensuing cheers put an end to Evarts's address.[101] President Cleveland spoke next, stating that the statue's "stream of light shall pierce the darkness of ignorance and man's oppression until Liberty enlightens the world".[103] Bartholdi, observed near the dais, was called upon to speak, but he declined. Orator Chauncey M. Depew concluded the speechmaking with a lengthy address.[104]
No members of the general public were permitted on the island during the ceremonies, which were reserved entirely for dignitaries. The only females granted access were Bartholdi's wife and de Lesseps's granddaughter; officials stated that they feared women might be injured in the crush of people. The restriction offended area suffragists, who chartered a boat and got as close as they could to the island. The group's leaders made speeches applauding the embodiment of Liberty as a woman and advocating women's right to vote.[103] A scheduled fireworks display was postponed until November 1 because of poor weather.[105]
Shortly after the dedication, The Cleveland Gazette, an African American newspaper, suggested that the statue's torch not be lit until the United States became a free nation "in reality":

"Liberty enlightening the world," indeed! The expression makes us sick. This government is a howling farce. It can not or rather does not protect its citizens within its own borders. Shove the Bartholdi statue, torch and all, into the ocean until the "liberty" of this country is such as to make it possible for an inoffensive and industrious colored man to earn a respectable living for himself and family, without being ku-kluxed, perhaps murdered, his daughter and wife outraged, and his property destroyed. The idea of the "liberty" of this country "enlightening the world," or even Patagonia, is ridiculous in the extreme.[106]

After dedication
Lighthouse Board and War Department (1886–1933)




Statue of Liberty ca. 1900






Government poster using the Statue of Liberty to promote the sale of Liberty Bonds


When the torch was illuminated on the evening of the statue's dedication, it produced only a faint gleam, barely visible from Manhattan. The World characterized it as "more like a glowworm than a beacon."[98] Bartholdi suggested gilding the statue to increase its ability to reflect light, but this proved too expensive. The United States Lighthouse Board took over the Statue of Liberty in 1887 and pledged to install equipment to enhance the torch's effect; in spite of its efforts, the statue remained virtually invisible at night. When Bartholdi returned to the United States in 1893, he made additional suggestions, all of which proved ineffective. He did successfully lobby for improved lighting within the statue, allowing visitors to better appreciate Eiffel's design.[98] In 1901, President Theodore Roosevelt, once a member of the New York committee, ordered the statue's transfer to the War Department, as it had proved useless as a lighthouse.[107] A unit of the Army Signal Corps was stationed on Bedloe's Island until 1923, after which military police remained there while the island was under military jurisdiction.[108]
The statue rapidly became a landmark. Many immigrants who entered through New York saw it as a welcoming sight. Oral histories of immigrants record their feelings of exhilaration on first viewing the Statue of Liberty. One immigrant who arrived from Greece recalled,

I saw the Statue of Liberty. And I said to myself, "Lady, you're such a beautiful! [sic] You opened your arms and you get all the foreigners here. Give me a chance to prove that I am worth it, to do something, to be someone in America." And always that statue was on my mind.[109]

Originally, the statue was a dull copper color, but shortly after 1900 a green patina, also called verdigris, caused by the oxidation of the copper skin, began to spread. As early as 1902 it was mentioned in the press; by 1906 it had entirely covered the statue.[110] Believing that the patina was evidence of corrosion, Congress authorized US$62,800 (equivalent to $1,710,486 in 2017) for various repairs, and to paint the statue both inside and out.[111] There was considerable public protest against the proposed exterior painting.[112] The Army Corps of Engineers studied the patina for any ill effects to the statue and concluded that it protected the skin, "softened the outlines of the Statue and made it beautiful."[113] The statue was painted only on the inside. The Corps of Engineers also installed an elevator to take visitors from the base to the top of the pedestal.[113]
On July 30, 1916, during World War I, German saboteurs set off a disastrous explosion on the Black Tom peninsula in Jersey City, New Jersey, in what is now part of Liberty State Park, close to Bedloe's Island. Carloads of dynamite and other explosives that were being sent to Britain and France for their war efforts were detonated, and seven people were killed. The statue sustained minor damage, mostly to the torch-bearing right arm, and was closed for ten days. The cost to repair the statue and buildings on the island was about US$100,000 (equivalent to $2,248,930 in 2017). The narrow ascent to the torch was closed for public-safety reasons, and it has remained closed ever since.[104]
That same year, Ralph Pulitzer, who had succeeded his father Joseph as publisher of the World, began a drive to raise US$30,000 (equivalent to $674,679 in 2017) for an exterior lighting system to illuminate the statue at night. He claimed over 80,000 contributors, but failed to reach the goal. The difference was quietly made up by a gift from a wealthy donor—a fact that was not revealed until 1936. An underwater power cable brought electricity from the mainland and floodlights were placed along the walls of Fort Wood. Gutzon Borglum, who later sculpted Mount Rushmore, redesigned the torch, replacing much of the original copper with stained glass. On December 2, 1916, President Woodrow Wilson pressed the telegraph key that turned on the lights, successfully illuminating the statue.[114]
After the United States entered World War I in 1917, images of the statue were heavily used in both recruitment posters and the Liberty Bond drives that urged American citizens to support the war financially. This impressed upon the public the war's stated purpose—to secure liberty—and served as a reminder that embattled France had given the United States the statue.[115]
In 1924, President Calvin Coolidge used his authority under the Antiquities Act to declare the statue a National Monument.[107] The only successful suicide in the statue's history occurred five years later, when a man climbed out of one of the windows in the crown and jumped to his death, glancing off the statue's breast and landing on the base.[116]
Early National Park Service years (1933–1982)




Bedloe's Island in 1927, showing the statue and army buildings. The eleven-pointed walls of Fort Wood, which still form the statue's base, are visible.


In 1933, President Franklin Roosevelt ordered the statue to be transferred to the National Park Service (NPS). In 1937, the NPS gained jurisdiction over the rest of Bedloe's Island.[107] With the Army's departure, the NPS began to transform the island into a park.[117] The Works Progress Administration (WPA) demolished most of the old buildings, regraded and reseeded the eastern end of the island, and built granite steps for a new public entrance to the statue from its rear. The WPA also carried out restoration work within the statue, temporarily removing the rays from the statue's halo so their rusted supports could be replaced. Rusted cast-iron steps in the pedestal were replaced with new ones made of reinforced concrete;[118] the upper parts of the stairways within the statue were replaced, as well. Copper sheathing was installed to prevent further damage from rainwater that had been seeping into the pedestal.[119] The statue was closed to the public from May until December 1938.[118]
During World War II, the statue remained open to visitors, although it was not illuminated at night due to wartime blackouts. It was lit briefly on December 31, 1943, and on D-Day, June 6, 1944, when its lights flashed "dot-dot-dot-dash", the Morse code for V, for victory. New, powerful lighting was installed in 1944–1945, and beginning on V-E Day, the statue was once again illuminated after sunset. The lighting was for only a few hours each evening, and it was not until 1957 that the statue was illuminated every night, all night.[120] In 1946, the interior of the statue within reach of visitors was coated with a special plastic so that graffiti could be washed away.[119]
In 1956, an Act of Congress officially renamed Bedloe's Island as Liberty Island, a change advocated by Bartholdi generations earlier. The act also mentioned the efforts to found an American Museum of Immigration on the island, which backers took as federal approval of the project, though the government was slow to grant funds for it.[121] Nearby Ellis Island was made part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument by proclamation of President Lyndon Johnson in 1965.[107] In 1972, the immigration museum, in the statue's base, was finally opened in a ceremony led by President Richard Nixon. The museum's backers never provided it with an endowment to secure its future and it closed in 1991 after the opening of an immigration museum on Ellis Island.[94]




September 26, 1972: President Richard Nixon visits the statue to open the American Museum of Immigration. The statue's raised right foot is visible, showing that it is depicted moving forward.


In 1970, Ivy Bottini led a demonstration at the statue where she and others from the National Organization for Women's New York chapter draped an enormous banner over a railing which read "WOMEN OF THE WORLD UNITE!"[122][123]
Beginning December 26, 1971, 15 anti-Vietnam War veterans occupied the statue, flying a US flag upside down from her crown. They left December 28 following a Federal Court order.[124] The statue was also several times taken over briefly by demonstrators publicizing causes such as Puerto Rican independence, opposition to abortion, and opposition to US intervention in Grenada. Demonstrations with the permission of the Park Service included a Gay Pride Parade rally and the annual Captive Baltic Nations rally.[125]
A powerful new lighting system was installed in advance of the American Bicentennial in 1976. The statue was the focal point for Operation Sail, a regatta of tall ships from all over the world that entered New York Harbor on July 4, 1976, and sailed around Liberty Island.[126] The day concluded with a spectacular display of fireworks near the statue.[127]
Renovation and rededication (1982–2000)




July 4, 1986: First Lady Nancy Reagan (in red) reopens the statue to the public.


Main article: Conservation-restoration of the Statue of Liberty
See also: Liberty Weekend
The statue was examined in great detail by French and American engineers as part of the planning for its centennial in 1986.[128] In 1982, it was announced that the statue was in need of considerable restoration. Careful study had revealed that the right arm had been improperly attached to the main structure. It was swaying more and more when strong winds blew and there was a significant risk of structural failure. In addition, the head had been installed 2 feet (0.61 m) off center, and one of the rays was wearing a hole in the right arm when the statue moved in the wind. The armature structure was badly corroded, and about two percent of the exterior plates needed to be replaced.[129] Although problems with the armature had been recognized as early as 1936, when cast iron replacements for some of the bars had been installed, much of the corrosion had been hidden by layers of paint applied over the years.[130]
In May 1982, President Ronald Reagan announced the formation of the Statue of Liberty–Ellis Island Centennial Commission, led by Chrysler Corporation chair Lee Iacocca, to raise the funds needed to complete the work.[131] Through its fundraising arm, the Statue of Liberty–Ellis Island Foundation, Inc., the group raised more than $350 million in donations.[132] The Statue of Liberty was one of the earliest beneficiaries of a cause marketing campaign. A 1983 promotion advertised that for each purchase made with an American Express card, the company would contribute one cent to the renovation of the statue. The campaign generated contributions of $1.7 million to the restoration project.[133]
In 1984, the statue was closed to the public for the duration of the renovation. Workers erected the world's largest free-standing scaffold,[28] which obscured the statue from view. Liquid nitrogen was used to remove layers of paint that had been applied to the interior of the copper skin over decades, leaving two layers of coal tar, originally applied to plug leaks and prevent corrosion. Blasting with baking soda powder removed the tar without further damaging the copper.[134] The restorers' work was hampered by the asbestos-based substance that Bartholdi had used—ineffectively, as inspections showed—to prevent galvanic corrosion. Workers within the statue had to wear protective gear, dubbed "moon suits", with self-contained breathing circuits.[135] Larger holes in the copper skin were repaired, and new copper was added where necessary.[136] The replacement skin was taken from a copper rooftop at Bell Labs, which had a patina that closely resembled the statue's; in exchange, the laboratory was provided some of the old copper skin for testing.[137] The torch, found to have been leaking water since the 1916 alterations, was replaced with an exact replica of Bartholdi's unaltered torch.[138] Consideration was given to replacing the arm and shoulder; the National Park Service insisted that they be repaired instead.[139] The original torch was removed and replaced in 1986 with the current one, whose flame is covered in 24-carat gold.[31] The torch reflects the sun's rays in daytime and is lighted by floodlights at night.[31]




Liberty Enlightening the World


The entire puddled iron armature designed by Gustave Eiffel was replaced. Low-carbon corrosion-resistant stainless steel bars that now hold the staples next to the skin are made of Ferralium, an alloy that bends slightly and returns to its original shape as the statue moves.[140] To prevent the ray and arm making contact, the ray was realigned by several degrees.[141] The lighting was again replaced—night-time illumination subsequently came from metal-halide lamps that send beams of light to particular parts of the pedestal or statue, showing off various details.[142] Access to the pedestal, which had been through a nondescript entrance built in the 1960s, was renovated to create a wide opening framed by a set of monumental bronze doors with designs symbolic of the renovation.[143] A modern elevator was installed, allowing handicapped access to the observation area of the pedestal.[144] An emergency elevator was installed within the statue, reaching up to the level of the shoulder.[145]
July 3–6, 1986, was designated "Liberty Weekend", marking the centennial of the statue and its reopening. President Reagan presided over the rededication, with French President François Mitterrand in attendance. July 4 saw a reprise of Operation Sail,[146] and the statue was reopened to the public on July 5.[147] In Reagan's dedication speech, he stated, "We are the keepers of the flame of liberty; we hold it high for the world to see."[146]
Closures and reopenings (2001–present)




The Statue of Liberty on September 11, 2001 as the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center burn in the background


Following the September 11 attacks, the statue and Liberty Island were immediately closed to the public. The island reopened at the end of 2001, while the pedestal and statue remained off-limits. The pedestal reopened in August 2004,[147] but the National Park Service announced that visitors could not safely be given access to the statue due to the difficulty of evacuation in an emergency. The Park Service adhered to that position through the remainder of the Bush administration.[148] New York Congressman Anthony Weiner made the statue's reopening a personal crusade.[149] On May 17, 2009, President Barack Obama's Secretary of the Interior, Ken Salazar, announced that as a "special gift" to America, the statue would be reopened to the public as of July 4, but that only a limited number of people would be permitted to ascend to the crown each day.[148]
The statue, including the pedestal and base, closed on October 29, 2011, for installation of new elevators and staircases and to bring other facilities, such as restrooms, up to code. The statue was reopened on October 28, 2012,[1][150][151] only to close again a day later due to Hurricane Sandy.[152] Although the storm did not harm the statue, it destroyed some of the infrastructure on both Liberty Island and Ellis Island, severely damaging the dock used by the ferries bearing visitors to the statue. On November 8, 2012, a Park Service spokesperson announced that both islands would remain closed for an indefinite period for repairs to be done.[153] Due to lack of electricity on Liberty Island, a generator was installed to power temporary floodlights to illuminate the statue at night. The superintendent of Statue of Liberty National Monument, David Luchsinger, whose home on the island was severely damaged, stated that it would be "optimistically ... months" before the island was reopened to the public.[154] The statue and Liberty Island reopened to the public on July 4, 2013.[155] Ellis Island remained closed for repairs for several more months but reopened in late October 2013.[156] For part of October 2013, Liberty Island was closed to the public due to the United States federal government shutdown of 2013, along with other federally funded museums, parks, monuments, construction projects and buildings.[157]
On October 7, 2016, construction started on a new Statue of Liberty museum on Liberty Island. The new $70 million, 26,000-square-foot (2,400 m2) museum will be able to accommodate all of the island's visitors when it opens in 2019, as opposed to the current museum, which only 20% of the island's visitors can visit.[158] The original torch will be relocated here, and in addition to exhibits relating to the statue's construction and history, there will be a theater where visitors can watch an aerial view of the statue.[158][159] The museum, designed by FXFOWLE Architects, will integrate with the parkland around it.[159] It is being funded privately by Diane von Fürstenberg, Michael Bloomberg, Jeff Bezos, Coca-Cola, NBCUniversal, the family of Laurence Tisch and Preston Robert Tisch, Mellody Hobson, and George Lucas.[160] Von Fürstenberg heads the fundraising for the museum, and the project had garnered more than $40 million in fundraising as of groundbreaking.[159]
Access and attributes
Location and tourism




Tourists aboard a Circle Line ferry arriving at Liberty Island, June 1973


The statue is situated in Upper New York Bay on Liberty Island south of Ellis Island, which together comprise the Statue of Liberty National Monument. Both islands were ceded by New York to the federal government in 1800.[161] As agreed in an 1834 compact between New York and New Jersey that set the state border at the bay's midpoint, the original islands remain New York territory despite their location on the New Jersey side of the state line. Liberty Island is one of the islands that are part of the borough of Manhattan in New York. Land created by reclamation added to the 2.3 acres (0.93 ha) original island at Ellis Island is New Jersey territory.[162]
No charge is made for entrance to the national monument, but there is a cost for the ferry service that all visitors must use, as private boats may not dock at the island. A concession was granted in 2007 to Statue Cruises to operate the transportation and ticketing facilities, replacing Circle Line, which had operated the service since 1953.[163] The ferries, which depart from Liberty State Park in Jersey City and Battery Park in Lower Manhattan, also stop at Ellis Island when it is open to the public, making a combined trip possible.[164] All ferry riders are subject to security screening, similar to airport procedures, prior to boarding.[165] Visitors intending to enter the statue's base and pedestal must obtain a complimentary museum/pedestal ticket along with their ferry ticket.[166] Those wishing to climb the staircase within the statue to the crown purchase a special ticket, which may be reserved up to a year in advance. A total of 240 people per day are permitted to ascend: ten per group, three groups per hour. Climbers may bring only medication and cameras—lockers are provided for other items—and must undergo a second security screening.[167]
Inscriptions, plaques, and dedications




The Statue of Liberty stands on Liberty Island.


There are several plaques and dedicatory tablets on or near the Statue of Liberty.

A plaque on the copper just under the figure in front declares that it is a colossal statue representing Liberty, designed by Bartholdi and built by the Paris firm of Gaget, Gauthier et Cie (Cie is the French abbreviation analogous to Co.). [168]
A presentation tablet, also bearing Bartholdi's name, declares the statue is a gift from the people of the Republic of France that honors "the Alliance of the two Nations in achieving the Independence of the United States of America and attests their abiding friendship."[168]
A tablet placed by the New York committee commemorates the fundraising done to build the pedestal.[168]
The cornerstone bears a plaque placed by the Freemasons.[168]
In 1903, a bronze tablet that bears the text of Emma Lazarus's sonnet, "The New Colossus" (1883), was presented by friends of the poet. Until the 1986 renovation, it was mounted inside the pedestal; today it resides in the Statue of Liberty Museum, in the base.[168]
"The New Colossus" tablet is accompanied by a tablet given by the Emma Lazarus Commemorative Committee in 1977, celebrating the poet's life.[168]

A group of statues stands at the western end of the island, honoring those closely associated with the Statue of Liberty. Two Americans—Pulitzer and Lazarus—and three Frenchmen—Bartholdi, Eiffel, and Laboulaye—are depicted. They are the work of Maryland sculptor Phillip Ratner.[169]
UNESCO World Heritage Site
In 1984, the Statue of Liberty was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The UNESCO "Statement of Significance" describes the statue as a "masterpiece of the human spirit" that "endures as a highly potent symbol—inspiring contemplation, debate and protest—of ideals such as liberty, peace, human rights, abolition of slavery, democracy and opportunity."[170]
Physical characteristics




As viewed from the ground on Liberty Island




Feature[72]
U.S.
Metric


Height of copper statue
151 ft 1 in
46 m


Foundation of pedestal (ground level) to tip of torch
305 ft 1 in
93 m


Heel to top of head
111 ft 1 in
34 m


Height of hand
16 ft 5 in
5 m


Index finger
8 ft 1 in
2.44 m


Circumference at second joint
3 ft 6 in
1.07 m


Head from chin to cranium
17 ft 3 in
5.26 m


Head thickness from ear to ear
10 ft 0 in
3.05 m


Distance across the eye
2 ft 6 in
0.76 m


Length of nose
4 ft 6 in
1.48 m


Right arm length
42 ft 0 in
12.8 m


Right arm greatest thickness
12 ft 0 in
3.66 m


Thickness of waist
35 ft 0 in
10.67 m


Width of mouth
3 ft 0 in
0.91 m


Tablet, length
23 ft 7 in
7.19 m


Tablet, width
13 ft 7 in
4.14 m


Tablet, thickness
2 ft 0 in
0.61 m


Height of pedestal
89 ft 0 in
27.13 m


Height of foundation
65 ft 0 in
19.81 m


Weight of copper used in statue
60,000 pounds
27.22 tonnes


Weight of steel used in statue
250,000 pounds
113.4 tonnes


Total weight of statue
450,000 pounds
204.1 tonnes


Thickness of copper sheeting
3/32 of an inch
2.4 mm



Depictions
See also: Replicas of the Statue of Liberty and Statue of Liberty in popular culture




A replica of the Statue of Liberty forms part of the exterior decor at the New York-New York Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip


Hundreds of replicas of the Statue of Liberty are displayed worldwide.[171] A smaller version of the statue, one-fourth the height of the original, was given by the American community in Paris to that city. It now stands on the Île aux Cygnes, facing west toward her larger sister.[171] A replica 30 feet (9.1 m) tall stood atop the Liberty Warehouse on West 64th Street in Manhattan for many years;[171] it now resides at the Brooklyn Museum.[172] In a patriotic tribute, the Boy Scouts of America, as part of their Strengthen the Arm of Liberty campaign in 1949–1952, donated about two hundred replicas of the statue, made of stamped copper and 100 inches (2,500 mm) in height, to states and municipalities across the United States.[173] Though not a true replica, the statue known as the Goddess of Democracy temporarily erected during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 was similarly inspired by French democratic traditions—the sculptors took care to avoid a direct imitation of the Statue of Liberty.[174] Among other recreations of New York City structures, a replica of the statue is part of the exterior of the New York-New York Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas.[175]




Head of Liberty, U.S. airmail stamp, 1971 issue






Reverse side of a Presidential Dollar coin


As an American icon, the Statue of Liberty has been depicted on the country's coinage and stamps. It appeared on commemorative coins issued to mark its 1986 centennial, and on New York's 2001 entry in the state quarters series.[176] An image of the statue was chosen for the American Eagle platinum bullion coins in 1997, and it was placed on the reverse, or tails, side of the Presidential Dollar series of circulating coins.[26] Two images of the statue's torch appear on the current ten-dollar bill.[177] The statue's intended photographic depiction on a 2010 forever stamp proved instead to be of the replica at the Las Vegas casino.[178]
Depictions of the statue have been used by many regional institutions. Between 1986[179] and 2000,[180] New York State issued license plates with an outline of the statue to either the front or the side of the serial number.[179][180] The Women's National Basketball Association's New York Liberty use both the statue's name and its image in their logo, in which the torch's flame doubles as a basketball.[181] The New York Rangers of the National Hockey League depicted the statue's head on their third jersey, beginning in 1997.[182] The National Collegiate Athletic Association's 1996 Men's Basketball Final Four, played at New Jersey's Meadowlands Sports Complex, featured the statue in its logo.[183] The Libertarian Party of the United States uses the statue in its emblem.[184]
The statue is a frequent subject in popular culture. In music, it has been evoked to indicate support for American policies, as in Toby Keith's song "Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue (The Angry American)", and in opposition, appearing on the cover of the Dead Kennedys' album Bedtime for Democracy, which protested the Reagan administration.[185] In film, the torch is the setting for the climax of director Alfred Hitchcock's 1942 movie Saboteur.[186] The statue makes one of its most famous cinematic appearances in the 1968 picture Planet of the Apes, in which it is seen half-buried in sand.[185][187] It is knocked over in the science-fiction film Independence Day [188] and in Cloverfield the head is ripped off.[189] In Jack Finney's time-travel novel Time and Again, the right arm of the statue, on display in the early 1880s in Madison Square Park, plays a crucial role.[190] Robert Holdstock, consulting editor of The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, wondered in 1979,

Where would science fiction be without the Statue of Liberty? For decades it has towered or crumbled above the wastelands of deserted [E]arth—giants have uprooted it, aliens have found it curious ... the symbol of Liberty, of optimism, has become a symbol of science fiction's pessimistic view of the future.[191]

See also




Approximate heights of various notable statues:
1. Spring Temple Buddha 153 m (incl. 25 m pedestal and 20 m throne)
2. Statue of Liberty 93 m (incl. 47 m pedestal)
3. The Motherland Calls 91 m (excl. pedestal)
4. Christ the Redeemer 38 m (incl. 8 m pedestal)
5. Statue of David 5.17 m (excl. 2.5 m pedestal)




New Jersey portal
New York portal
New York City portal
NRHP portal
United States portal
Visual arts portal



List of the tallest statues in the United States
Place des États-Unis, in Paris, France
The Statue of Liberty, 1985 Ken Burns documentary film
Statues and sculptures in New York City
List of statues by height


References
Notes


^ a b "Statue of Liberty National Monument". National Park Service. December 31, 2007. Retrieved October 12, 2011. 
^ Schneiderman, R.M. (June 28, 2010). "For tourists, Statue of Liberty is nice, but no Forever 21". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 12, 2011. 
^ "National Monument Proclamations under the Antiquities Act". National Park Service. January 16, 2003. Archived from the original on October 25, 2011. Retrieved October 12, 2011. 
^ National Park Service (1994). National Register of Historic Places, 1966–1994: Cumulative List Through January 1, 1994. Washington, D.C.: National Park Service. p. 502. ISBN 978-0-89133-254-1. 
^ "New Jersey and National Registers of Historic Places – Hudson County". New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection – Historic Preservation Office. Retrieved August 2, 2014. 
^ "Statue of Liberty National Monument" (PDF). New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. September 14, 1976. Retrieved October 12, 2011. 
^ a b c Harris 1985, pp. 7–9.
^ Joseph, Rebecca M.; Brooke Rosenblatt; Carolyn Kinebrew (September 2000). "The Black Statue of Liberty Rumor". National Park Service. Retrieved July 31, 2012. 
^ "Abolition". National Park Service. Retrieved July 7, 2014. 
^ "The Statue of Liberty and its Ties to the Middle East" (PDF). University of Chicago. Retrieved February 8, 2017. 
^ Harris 1985, pp. 7–8.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 60–61.
^ a b Moreno 2000, pp. 39–40.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 12–13.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 102–103.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 16–17.
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 85.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 10–11.
^ a b c d e Sutherland 2003, pp. 17–19.
^ a b c d e Bodnar, John (2006). "Monuments and Morals: The Nationalization of Civic Instruction". In Warren, Donald R.; Patrick, John J. Civic and Moral Learning in America. Macmillan. pp. 212–214. ISBN 978-1-4039-7396-2. 
^ a b c Turner, Jane (2000). The Grove Dictionary of Art: From Monet to Cézanne : Late 19th-century French Artists. Oxford University Press US. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-312-22971-9. 
^ Khan 2010, pp. 96–97.
^ a b Khan 2010, pp. 105–108.
^ Blume, Mary (July 16, 2004). "The French icon Marianne à la mode". The New York Times. Retrieved October 12, 2011. 
^ "Get the Facts (Frequently Asked Questions about the Statue of Liberty)". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Retrieved October 19, 2011. 
^ a b "Lady Liberty Reverse Statue of Liberty (1886)". Presidential $1 coin. United States Mint. Retrieved July 29, 2010. 
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 52–53, 55, 87.
^ a b c d e f g Interviewed for Watson, Corin. Statue of Liberty: Building a Colossus (TV documentary, 2001)
^ Bartholdi, Frédéric (1885). The Statue of Liberty Enlightening the World. North American Review. p. 42. 
^ a b Khan 2010, pp. 108–111.
^ a b c "Frequently asked questions". Statue of Liberty National Monument. National Park Service. Retrieved August 10, 2010. 
^ Khan 2010, p. 120.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 118, 125.
^ Harris 1985, p. 26.
^ Khan 2010, p. 121.
^ a b c Khan 2010, pp. 123–125.
^ a b Harris 1985, pp. 44–45.
^ "News of Norway". 1999. Archived from the original on September 16, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2010. 
^ "Answers about the Statue of Liberty, Part 2". The New York Times. July 2, 2009. Retrieved October 12, 2011. 
^ Sutherland 2003, p. 36.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 126–128.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 25.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 26.
^ Khan 2010, p. 130.
^ a b Harris 1985, p. 49.
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 134.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 30.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 94.
^ Khan 2010, p. 135.
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 137.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 32.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 136–137.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 22.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 139–143.
^ Harris 1985, p. 30.
^ Harris 1985, p. 33.
^ Harris 1985, p. 32.
^ Harris 1985, p. 34.
^ "La tour a vu le jour à Levallois". Le Parisien (in French). April 30, 2004. Retrieved December 8, 2012. 
^ Khan 2010, p. 144.
^ "Statue of Liberty". pbs.org. Retrieved October 19, 2011. 
^ Harris 1985, pp. 36–38.
^ Harris 1985, p. 39.
^ Harris 1985, p. 38.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 37.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 38.
^ a b Khan 2010, pp. 159–160.
^ Khan 2010, p. 163.
^ Khan 2010, p. 161.
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 160.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 91.
^ a b "Statistics". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. August 16, 2006. Retrieved October 19, 2011. 
^ a b Khan 2010, p. 169.
^ a b c Auchincloss, Louis (May 12, 1986). "Liberty: Building on the Past". New York: 87. Retrieved October 19, 2011. 
^ Bartholdi, Frédéric (1885). The Statue of Liberty Enlightening the World. North American Review. p. 62. 
^ Harris 1985, pp. 71–72.
^ Sutherland 2003, pp. 49–50.
^ a b Moreno 2000, pp. 184–186.
^ "Branford's History Is Set in Stone". Connecticut Humanities. 
^ "STRUCTUREmag – Structural Engineering Magazine, Tradeshow: Joachim Gotsche Giaver". archive.org. November 27, 2012. Archived from the original on November 27, 2012. 
^ Khan 2010, pp. 163–164.
^ Khan 2010, pp. 165–166.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 172–175.
^ Levine, Benjamin; Story, Isabelle F. (1961). "Statue of Liberty". National Park Service. Retrieved October 19, 2011. 
^ "Seven Ways to Compute the Relative Value of a U.S. Dollar Amount, 1774 to Present/". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved October 20, 2011.  (Consumer price index)
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, pp. 40–41.
^ a b c Harris 1985, p. 105.
^ Sutherland 2003, p. 51.
^ Harris 1985, p. 107.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 110–111.
^ Harris 1985, p. 112.
^ "The Isere-Bartholdi Gift Reaches the Horsehoe Safely" (PDF). The Evening Post. June 17, 1885. Retrieved February 11, 2013. 
^ Harris 1985, p. 114.
^ a b Moreno 2000, p. 19.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 49.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 64.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 36.
^ a b c Harris 1985, pp. 133–134.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 65.
^ Khan 2010, p. 176.
^ a b Khan 2010, pp. 177–178.
^ Bell & Abrams 1984, p. 52.
^ a b Harris 1985, p. 127.
^ a b Moreno 2000, p. 71.
^ Harris 1985, p. 128.
^ "Postponing Bartholdi's statue until there is liberty for colored as well". The Cleveland Gazette. Cleveland, Ohio. November 27, 1886. p. 2. 
^ a b c d Moreno 2000, p. 41.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 24.
^ Sutherland 2003, p. 78.
^ "Answers about the Statue of Liberty". The New York Times. July 1, 2009. Retrieved October 19, 2011. 
^ "To paint Miss Liberty". The New York Times. July 19, 1906. p. 1. Retrieved October 19, 2011. 
^ "How shall "Miss Liberty"'s toilet be made?". The New York Times. July 29, 1906. pp. SM2. Retrieved October 19, 2011. 
^ a b Harris 1985, p. 168.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 136–139.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 148–151.
^ Harris 1985, p. 147.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 136.
^ a b Moreno 2000, p. 202.
^ a b Harris 1985, p. 169.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 141–143.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 147–148.
^ "Honorees". Lapride.org. January 4, 2007. Archived from the original on September 6, 2012. Retrieved November 6, 2012. 
^ "The Feminist Chronicles, 1953–1993 – 1970 – Feminist Majority Foundation". Feminist.org. Retrieved November 6, 2012. 
^ 1973 World Almanac and Book of Facts, p. 996.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 72–73.
^ Harris 1985, p. 143.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 20.
^ Harris 1985, p. 165.
^ Harris 1985, pp. 169–171.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 38.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 204–205.
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 216–218.
^ Daw, Jocelyne (March 2006). Cause Marketing for Nonprofits: Partner for Purpose, Passion, and Profits. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-471-71750-8. 
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 81.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 76.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 55.
^ Harris 1985, p. 172.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 153.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 75.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, pp. 74–76.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 57.
^ Moreno 2000, p. 153.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 71.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 84.
^ Hayden & Despont 1986, p. 88.
^ a b Sutherland 2003, p. 106.
^ a b "History and Culture". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ a b Chan, Sewell (May 8, 2009). "Statue of Liberty's Crown Will Reopen July 4". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Neuman, William (July 5, 2007). "Congress to Ask Why Miss Liberty's Crown is Still Closed to Visitors". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Raja, Nina (August 10, 2010). "Liberty Island to remain open during statue's renovation". CNN. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ "Statue of Liberty interior to re-open next month". AP via Fox News. September 11, 2012. Retrieved May 6, 2016. 
^ Powlowski, A. (November 2, 2012). "Statue of Liberty closed for 'foreseeable future'". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved November 2, 2012. 
^ Mcgeehan, Patrick (November 8, 2012). "Storm leaves Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island cut off from visitors". The New York Times. Retrieved November 9, 2012. 
^ Barron, James (November 30, 2012). "Statue of Liberty was unscathed by hurricane, but its home took a beating". The New York Times. Retrieved December 1, 2012. 
^ Long, Colleen (July 4, 2013). "Statue of Liberty reopens as US marks July Fourth". Yahoo! News. Retrieved July 4, 2013. 
^ Foderaro, Lisa (October 28, 2013). "Ellis Island Welcoming Visitors Once Again, but Repairs Continue". The New York Times. Retrieved October 19, 2014. 
^ Armaghan, Sarah (October 1, 2013). "Statue of Liberty Closed in Shutdown". Wall Street Journal. 
^ a b Durkin, Erin (October 6, 2016). "Statue of Liberty getting new $70M museum set to open in 2019". NY Daily News. Retrieved October 7, 2016. 
^ a b c Plagianos, Irene (October 6, 2016). "See Designs for the New Statue of Liberty Museum". DNAinfo New York. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016. 
^ Pereira, Ivan (October 6, 2016). "Statue of Liberty Museum to open in 2019". am New York. Retrieved October 7, 2016. 
^ "Early History of Bedloe's Island". Statue of Liberty Historical Handbook. National Park Service. Archived from the original on October 21, 2011. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ "NEW JERSEY v. NEW YORK 523 U.S. 767". Supreme Court of the United States. 1998. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Ramirez, Anthony (June 29, 2007). "Circle Line Loses Pact for Ferries to Liberty Island". New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ "NPS: Liberty and Ellis Island ferry map". Ferry Map. National Park Service. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ "For Your Safety and Security". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ "Frequently asked questions: Reserving tickets to visit the crown". Statue of Liberty. National Park Service. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ a b c d e f Moreno 2000, pp. 222–223.
^ Harris 1985, p. 163.
^ "Statue of Liberty". World Heritage. UNESCO. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ a b c Moreno 2000, pp. 200–201.
^ "Collections: American Art: Replica of the Statue of Liberty, from Liberty Storage & Warehouse, 43–47 West 64th Street, NYC". Brooklyn Museum. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Attoun, Marti (October 2007). "Little Sisters of Liberty". Scouting. Retrieved August 1, 2010. 
^ Moreno 2000, pp. 103–104.
^ Goldberger, Paul (January 15, 1997). "New York-New York, it's a Las Vegas town". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ "Statue of Liberty postage stamps". Statue of Liberty–Ellis Island Foundation, Inc. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ "The redesigned $10 note". newmoney.gov. Bureau of Engraving and Printing. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Severson, Kim; Healey, Matthew (April 14, 2011). "This Lady Liberty is a Las Vegas teenager". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ a b "State to start issuing new license plates July 1". The New York Times. January 24, 1986. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ a b "State license plates to get new look". The New York Times. January 11, 2000. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ "'Liberty' for New York club". The New York Times. February 14, 1997. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Lapointe, Joe (January 12, 1997). "Lady Liberty laces up at the Garden". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Sandomir, Richard (March 29, 1996). "Final Four: States put aside their rivalry and try a little cooperation". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Axinn, Mark (October 28, 2011). "The Statue of Liberty after 125 years – by LPNY Chair Mark Axinn". Libertarian Party of the United States. Retrieved November 19, 2012. 
^ a b Morris, Tracy S. "The Statue of Liberty in Popular Culture". USA Today. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Spoto, Donald (1983). The Dark Side of Genius: The Life of Alfred Hitchcock. Ballantine. pp. 262–263. ISBN 978-0-345-31462-8. 
^ Greene, Eric; Slotkin, Richard (1998). Planet of the Apes as American myth: race, politics, and popular culture. Middletown, Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press. p. 52. ISBN 978-0-8195-6329-3. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ "10 Movies That Hated The Statue Of Liberty >> Page 6 of 10". Archived from the original on March 24, 2014. Retrieved 2014-03-24. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "'Cloverfield' Release Will Be Test of Online Hype : NPR". Archived from the original on April 14, 2008. Retrieved 2014-03-24. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ Darrach, Brad (June 26, 1970). "The spy who came in from 1882". Life. p. 16. Retrieved October 20, 2011. 
^ Nicholls, Peter (1979). The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. St Albans, Herts, UK: Granada Publishing Ltd. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-586-05380-5. 


Bibliography


Bell, James B.; Abrams, Richard L. (1984). In Search of Liberty: The Story of the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island. Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Co. ISBN 978-0-385-19624-6. 
Harris, Jonathan (1985). A Statue for America: The First 100 Years of the Statue of Liberty. New York City: Four Winds Press (a division of Macmillan Publishing Company). ISBN 978-0-02-742730-1. 
Hayden, Richard Seth; Despont, Thierry W. (1986). Restoring the Statue of Liberty. New York City: McGraw-Hill Book Company. ISBN 978-0-07-027326-9. 
Khan, Yasmin Sabina (2010). Enlightening the World: The Creation of the Statue of Liberty. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-4851-5. 
Moreno, Barry (2000). The Statue of Liberty Encyclopedia. New York City: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7385-3689-7. 
Sutherland, Cara A. (2003). The Statue of Liberty. New York City: Barnes & Noble Books. ISBN 978-0-7607-3890-0. 


External links



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Statue of Liberty





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Statue of Liberty.





Wikivoyage has a listing for Statue of Liberty.



Statue of Liberty National Monument
Statue of Liberty–Ellis Island Foundation
"A Giant's Task – Cleaning Statue of Liberty", Popular Mechanics (February 1932)
Views from the webcams affixed to the Statue of Liberty
Made in Paris The Statue of Liberty 1877–1885 – many historical photographs
Statue of Liberty at Structurae
Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) No. NY-138, "Statue of Liberty, Liberty Island, Manhattan, New York, New York County, NY", 404 photos, 59 color transparencies, 41 measured drawings, 10 data pages, 33 photo caption pages
HAER No. NY-138-A, "Statue of Liberty, Administration Building", 6 photos, 6 measured drawings, 1 photo caption page
HAER No. NY-138-B, "Statue of Liberty, Concessions Building", 12 photos, 6 measured drawings, 1 photo caption page







v
t
e


Statue of Liberty




Liberty Enlightening the World



Creators



Édouard René de Laboulaye, originator
Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi, sculptor
Gustave Eiffel, builder

Eiffel company


Eugène Secrétan, donated copper










Location



Statue of Liberty National Monument

Liberty Island


Musée des Arts et Métiers, original statue





Former
locations



Right arm and torch

Centennial Exposition, 1876
Madison Square Park, 1876-1882


Head

Paris World's Fair, 1878







Replicas



Île aux Cygnes
Flame of Liberty
Boy Scout replicas
Strengthen the Arm of Liberty

Fayetteville, Arkansas
Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Overview Park, Kansas







Legacy



In popular culture
"The New Colossus" (1883 sonnet)
Working on the Statue of Liberty (1946 painting)
Miss Liberty (1949 musical)
The Statue of Liberty (1985 documentary)
Statue of Liberty play (American football)
Liberty Weekend, 1986

Liberty Fanfare
Medal of Liberty


Statue of Liberty Forever stamp
American Platinum Eagle coin
Presidential $1 Coin Program





Related



Conservation-restoration of the Statue of Liberty
Egypt Carrying the Light to Asia
Libertas












v
t
e


National symbols of the United States



Symbols



Flag of the United States
Seal of the United States
Bald eagle
Uncle Sam
Columbia
General Grant (tree)
American's Creed
Pledge of Allegiance
Rose
Oak
American bison
Phrygian cap





Songs



"The Star-Spangled Banner"
"Dixie"
"America the Beautiful"
"The Stars and Stripes Forever"
"Hail to the Chief"
"Hail, Columbia"
"My Country, 'Tis of Thee"
"God Bless America"
"Lift Every Voice and Sing"
"The Army Goes Rolling Along"
"Anchors Aweigh"
"Marines' Hymn"
"Semper Fidelis"
"The Air Force Song"
"Semper Paratus"
"National Emblem"
"The Washington Post March"
"The Battle Hymn of the Republic"
"Yankee Doodle"
"You're a Grand Old Flag"
"When Johnny Comes Marching Home"





Mottos



In God We Trust
E Pluribus Unum
Novus ordo seclorum
Annuit cœptis





Landmarks



Statue of Liberty (Liberty Enlightening the World)
Liberty Bell
Mount Rushmore
National Mall

West Potomac Park












Other articles related to the Statue of Liberty











v
t
e


Lighthouses of New York




Main: List of lighthouses in the United States






Ambrose Tower
Aunt Phebe Rock
Barber's Point
Barcelona
Blackwell Island
Bluff Point
Braddock Point
Buffalo Light
Buffalo Harbor North and South entrance Lights
Buffalo Harbor South Entrance Light
Buffalo North breakwater East end Light
Buffalo North Breakwater South End Light
Cape Vincent
Carleton Island
Cedar Island
Charlotte–Genesee
Cold Spring Harbor
Coney Island
Coxsackie
Crossover Island
Crown Point
Cumberland Head
Dunkirk
East Charity Shoal
Eatons Neck
Elm Tree Beacon
Esopus Meadows
Execution Rocks
Fair Haven
Fire Island
Fort Niagara
Fort Lafayette
Fort Tompkins
Fort Wadsworth
Frenchman Island
Galloo Island
Gardiners Point
Horse Island
Horton Point
Hudson-Athens
Huntington Harbor
Kings Point
Latimer Reef
Little Gull Island
Little Red
Montauk Point
Moriches
New Dorp
North Brother Island
North Dumpling
Oak Orchard
Old Field Point
Old Orchard Shoal
Ogdensburg Harbor
Orient Long Beach Bar
Orient Point
Oswego Harbor West Pierhead
Plattsburgh Beacon
Plum Island
Point Aux Roches
Prince's Bay
Race Rock
Rock Island
Romer Shoal
Rondout
Sands Point
Saugerties
Selkirk
Shinnecock
Sodus Outer
Sodus Point
South Brother Island Channel Range
South Buffalo North Side
Split Rock Point
Staten Island
Statue of Liberty
Stepping Stones
Stony Point (Henderson)
Stony Point (Hudson)
Strawberry Island Upper Cut Range
Stuyvesant
Sunken Meadows
Sunken Rock
Tarrytown
Thirty Mile Point
Three Sisters Island
Throgs Neck
Tibbetts Point
Turkey Point
Watervliet
West Point
West Bank
Whitehall Narrows
Whitestone Point















v
t
e


Protected areas of New York








Federal







National Historic
Sites, Parks and Districts



Christman
Eleanor Roosevelt
Harriet Tubman
Home of Franklin D. Roosevelt
Martin Van Buren
Sagamore Hill
Saint Paul's Church
Saratoga
Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace
Theodore Roosevelt Inaugural
Women's Rights
Erie Canalway
Kate Mullany

affiliated


Thomas Cole

affiliated







National Memorials



Federal Hall
General Grant
Hamilton Grange
Statue of Liberty





National Monuments



African Burial Ground
Castle Clinton
Fort Stanwix
Governors Island
Stonewall





National Trails



Appalachian Trail
North Country Trail





National Seashores
and Recreation Areas



Fire Island
Gateway
Upper Delaware





National Wildlife
Refuges



Iroquois
Long Island Complex

Amagansett
Conscience Point
Elizabeth A. Morton
Lido Beach
Oyster Bay
Sayville
Seatuck
Target Rock
Wertheim


Montezuma
Shawangunk Grasslands
Wallkill River





National Forests



Finger Lakes





Wilderness Areas



Otis Pike Fire Island High Dune
















State parks






Allen H. Treman
Allegany
Amherst
Amsterdam Beach
Battle Island
Bayard Cutting Arboretum
Bayswater Point
Bear Mountain
Beaver Island
Beechwood
Belmont Lake
Bethpage
Betty & Wilbur Davis
Big Six Mile Creek
Blauvelt
Bonavista
Bowman Lake
Braddock Bay
Brentwood
Bristol Beach
Brookhaven
Buckhorn Island
Buffalo Harbor
Burnham Point
Buttermilk Falls
Caleb Smith
Camp Hero
Canandaigua Lake
Canoe-Picnic Point
Captree
Catharine Valley Trail
Caumsett
Cayuga Lake
Cedar Island
Cedar Point
Chenango Valley
Cherry Plain
Chimney Bluffs
Chittenango Falls
Clarence Fahnestock
Clark Reservation
Clay Pit Ponds
Cold Spring Harbor
Coles Creek
Conesus Lake
Connetquot River
Crab Island
Croil Island
Cumberland Bay
Darien Lakes
De Veaux Woods
Deans Cove
Delta Lake
Devil's Hole
Dewolf Point
Donald J. Trump
Earl W. Brydges Artpark
Eel Weir
Empire – Fulton Ferry
Evangola
Fair Haven Beach
Fillmore Glen
Fort Niagara
Four Mile Creek
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms
Franny Reese
Frenchman Island
Galop Island
Gantry Plaza
Genesee Valley Greenway
Gilbert Lake
Gilgo
Glimmerglass
Golden Hill
Goosepond Mountain
Grafton Lakes
Grass Point
Green Lakes
Hallock
Hamlin Beach
Harriet Hollister Spencer
Harriman
Hart's Brook
Haverstraw Beach
Heckscher
Helen L. McNitt
Hempstead Lake
High Tor
Highland Lakes
Higley Flow
Hither Hills
Honeoye
Hook Mountain
Hudson Highlands
Hudson River Islands
Hudson River
Hunts Pond
Iona Island
Irondequoit Bay
Jacques Cartier
James Baird
John Boyd Thacher
Jones Beach
Joseph Davis
Keewaydin
Keuka Lake
Knox Farm
Kring Point
Lake Erie
Lake Lauderdale
Lake Superior
Lake Taghkanic
Lakeside Beach
Letchworth
Lock 32
Lodi Point
Long Point - Finger Lakes
Long Point - Thousand Islands
Long Point on Lake Chautauqua
Macomb Reservation
Margaret Lewis Norrie
Mark Twain
Mary Island
Max V. Shaul
Mexico Point
Midway
Mine Kill
Minnewaska
Mohawk River
Montauk Downs
Montauk Point
Moreau Lake
Napeague
Newtown Battlefield
Niagara Falls
Nissequogue River
Nyack Beach
Oak Orchard
Ogden Mills & Ruth Livingston Mills
Old Croton Aqueduct
Old Erie Canal
Oquaga Creek
Orient Beach
Peebles Island
Pinnacle
Pixley Falls
Point Au Roche
Reservoir
Riverbank
Robert G. Wehle
Robert H. Treman
Robert Moses - Long Island
Robert Moses - Thousand Islands
Robert V. Riddell
Roberto Clemente
Rockefeller
Rock Island Lighthouse
Rockland Lake
Sampson
Sandy Island Beach
Saratoga Lake
Saratoga Spa
Schodack Island
Schunemunk Mountain
Selkirk Shores
Seneca Lake
Shadmoor
Silver Lake
Sonnenberg Gardens
Southwick Beach
St. Lawrence
State Park at the Fair
Sterling Forest
Steuben Memorial
Stony Brook
Storm King
Strawberry Island
Sunken Meadow
Taconic - Copake Falls Area
Taconic - Rudd Pond Area
Tallman Mountain
Taughannock Falls
Thompson's Lake
Two Rivers
Trail View
Valley Stream
Verona Beach
Waterson Point
Watkins Glen
Wellesley Island
Westcott Beach
Whetstone Gulf
Whirlpool
Wildwood
Wilson-Tuscarora
Wonder Lake
Woodlawn Beach













State historic sites






Bennington Battlefield
Caumsett
Clermont
Clinton House
Crailo
Crown Point
Darwin Martin House
Fort Montgomery
Fort Ontario
Ganondagan
Grant Cottage
Herkimer Home
Hyde Hall
John Brown Farm
John Burroughs Memorial (Woodchuck Lodge)
John Hay Homestead
Johnson Hall
Knox's Headquarters
Lorenzo
New Windsor Cantonment
Olana
Old Croton Aqueduct
Old Erie Canal
Old Fort Niagara
Oriskany Battlefield
Philipse Manor Hall
Plantings Fields Arboretum
Sackets Harbor Battlefield
Schoharie Crossing
Schuyler Mansion
Senate House
Sonnenberg Gardens & Mansion
Staatsburgh
Steuben Memorial
Stony Point Battlefield
Walt Whitman Birthplace
Washington's Headquarters













Preserves and sanctuaries







Public
preserves



Albany Pine Bush
Forest Preserve

Adirondack Park

Saint Regis Canoe Area
Santanoni Preserve
wilderness areas


Catskill Park


Hudson River Estuary
Long Island Pine Barrens
Reinstein Woods
Rome Sand Plains
Tahawus
Vischer Ferry
Welwyn





The Nature
Conservacy



Accabonac Harbor
Andy Warhol Visual Arts
Arthur W. Butler Memorial
Atlantic Double Dunes
Bear Swamp
Calverton Ponds
Chaumont Barrens
Clintonville Pine Barrens
Coon Mountain
Deer Lick
Denton
El Dorado Beach
Eugene and Agnes Meyer
Everton Falls
Freund
Gadway Sandstone Pavement Barrens
Hannacroix Ravine
Henry Morgenthau
Indian Brook Assemblage
Ironsides Island
Kenrose
Limestone Rise
Lisha Kill
Long Island Center for Conservation
Long Pond
Lordsland
Lower Poultney River and Saddles
Marrion Yarrow
Mashomack
Mianus River Gorge
Mildred E. Grierson Memorial
Moccasin Kill
Montauk Mountain
Moss Lake
Mount Holly
Nellie Hill
Neversink
O.D. von Engeln
Otter Creek
Pawling
Peconic Estuary Big Woods
Pine Neck
Roger Perry Memorial
Ruth Wales
Schunemunk Mountain
Shadmoor
Silver Lake Bog
Spring Pond Bog
Stewart
Lewis A. Swyer
Thompson Pond and Stissing Mountain
Uplands Farm
West Branch
Whitbeck Memorial Grove





Other
preserves



Angle Fly
Baxter
Bergen-Byron Swamp
Black Rock Forest
Brandreth Park
Calder Center
Louis C. Clark
Cornell Botanic Gardens
Ferncliff Forest
Heiberg Memorial Forest
James
Lime Hollow
Mohonk
Peabody
Plotter Kill
Sagamore Camp
Sam's Point
Teatown Lake
Turkey Mountain
Turner Brook
Theodore Roosevelt
Wallkill Valley
Woodlawn
Zurich Bog
















Other (lists)






National Historic Landmarks
National Natural Landmarks
Botanical gardens
Nature centers
New York City parks

POPS
WWI


New York state

forests

wild


historic sites
parks
wildlife management areas


Trails

rail trails













 Category
NYS DEC
NYS OPRHP












v
t
e


Protected areas of New York City








Federal







National Historic Sites



Lower East Side Tenement Museum
Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace





National Monuments
and Memorials



African Burial Ground
Castle Clinton
Federal Hall
General Grant
Governors Island
Hamilton Grange
Statue of Liberty
Stonewall





Other Protected Areas



Gateway National Recreation Area

Floyd Bennett Field
Fort Tilden
Fort Wadsworth
Great Kills
Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge
Jacob Riis
Miller Field


















State







State Parks



Bayswater Point
Clay Pit Ponds
East River
Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms
Gantry Plaza
Riverbank
Roberto Clemente
















City parks and preserves







Manhattan



79th Street Boat Basin
Abingdon Square
Albert Capsouto
Asphalt Green
Battery
Bennett
British Garden at Hanover Square
Bowling Green
Bryant
Captain Patrick J. Brown Walk
Carl Schurz
Central Park
Chelsea
City Hall
Collect
Columbus
Corlears Hook
Dag Hammarskjold Plaza
Damrosch
Dante
DeSalvio Playground
DeWitt Clinton
Drumgoole Plaza
Duane
East River Greenway

East River Esplanade
East River Park
Stuyvesant Cove


Finn Square
Foley Square
Fort Tryon
Fort Washington
Gorman
Gramercy
Greenacre Park
Hamilton Fish
Hanover Square
Harlem River
Hell's Kitchen
Herald Square
High Line
Highbridge
Holcombe Rucker
Hudson
Hudson River
Imagination Playground at Burling Slip
Inwood Hill
Isham
J. Hood Wright
Jackie Robinson
Jackson Square
John Jay
Liberty
Louis Cuvillier
Madison Square
Manhattan Waterfront Greenway
Marcus Garvey
Mill Rock
Mitchell Square
Morningside
Murphy's Brother's Playground
Muscota Marsh
Paley
Peretz Square
Peter Cooper
Plaza Lafayette
Queen Elizabeth II September 11th Garden
Ralph Bunche
Randalls Island
Richard Tucker Square
Riverside
Robert Moses Playground
Roosevelt Triangle
Rucker
Sakura
Samuel N. Bennerson 2nd Playground
Sara Delano Roosevelt
Septuagesimo Uno
Seward
Sheridan Square
Sherman Square
St. John's
St. Nicholas
St. Vartan
Straus
Stuyvesant Square
Swindler Cove
Teardrop
Theodore Roosevelt
Thomas Jefferson
Thomas Paine
Tompkins Square
Tribeca
Union Square
Verdi Square
Vesuvio Playground
Wards Island
Washington Market
Washington Square
West Side Community Garden
Winston Churchill
Zuccotti





Brooklyn



American Veterans Memorial Pier
Amersfort
Asser Levy
Bath Beach
Betsy Head
Bensonhurst
Breukelen Ballfields
Brooklyn Botanic Garden
Brooklyn Bridge
Brooklyn Heights Promenade
Brooklyn–Queens Greenway
Brower
Bushwick
Byrne
Cadman Plaza
Canarsie
Carroll
Calvert Vaux
City Line
Coffey
Columbus
Commodore Barry
Coney Island Beach & Boardwalk
Coney Island Creek
Continental Army Plaza
Cooper
Dyker Beach
Floyd Bennett Field
Fort Greene
Four Sparrow Marsh
Frank M. Charles
Fresh Creek Nature Preserve
Friends Field
Fulton
Gravesend
Green Central Knoll
Herbert Von King
Highland
Irving Square
JJ Byrne
Jamaica Bay Park
John J. Carty
John Paul Jones
Kaiser
Kelly
Leif Ericson
Leon S. Kaiser Playground
Lieutenant Joseph Petrosino
Lincoln Terrace
Linden
Lindower
Linton
Manhattan Beach
Maria Hernandez
Marine
McCarren
McGolrick
McKinley
Mt. Prospect
Owl's Head
Paerdegat Basin
Paerdegat
Prospect
Red Hook
Robert E. Venable
Saratoga
Scarangella
Seaside
Seth Low
Shore
Spring Creek
Steeplechase
Sternberg
St. Johns
Sunset
Tompkins
Trinity
Van Voorhees
Walt Whitman
Wingate
WNYC Transmitter
Zion Triangle





The Bronx



Baretto Point
Bicentennial Veterans
Bronx
Castle Hill
City Island Wetlands
Claremont
Concrete Plant
Crotona
Devoe
Ewen
Ferry Point
Givans Creek Woods
Grant
Haffen
Harding
Harris
Henry Hudson
Hunts Point
Jerome
Joseph Rodman Drake
Joyce Kilmer
Julius Richman
Macombs Dam
Mill Pond
Mullaly
New York Botanical Garden
North and South Brother Islands
Orchard Beach
Pelham Bay

Rodman's Neck


Playground 52
Poe
Pugsley Creek
Rainey
Raoul Wallenberg Forest
Richman
Riverdale
St. Mary's
Seton Falls
Seton
Soundview
Spuyten Duyvil Shorefront
St. James
St. Mary's
Starlight
Tremont
University Woods
Van Cortlandt
Vidalia
Vinmont Veteran
Washington's Walk





Queens



Admiral
Alley
Alley Pond
Andrews Grove
Astoria
Baisley Pond
Bayside Fields
Bayswater
Beach Channel
Big Bush
Bowne
Brant Point Wildlife Sanctuary
Breininger
Broad Channel American Park
Broad Channel Park
Broad Channel Wetlands
Brooklyn–Queens Greenway
Brookville
Bulova
Captain Tilly
Crocheron
Cunningham
Det. Keith L. Williams
Det. William T. Gunn
Dr. Charles R. Drew
Dubos Point Wildlife Sanctuary
Doughboy
Douglaston
Elmhurst
Evergreen
Flushing Fields
Flushing Meadows-Corona
Forest
Fort Tilden
Fort Totten
Francis Lewis
Frank Golden
Frank Principe
Haggerty
Harvey
Highland
Hinton
Hoffman
Hook Creek
Hunter's Point
Idlewild
Jamaica Bay
John Golden
Juniper Valley
Kissena
Kohlreiter Square
Libra Triangle
Linnaeus
Little Bay
Louis Pasteur
Mafera
Macneil
Marconi
Marie Curie
Montbellier
O'Donohue
Overlook
Park of the Americas
Phil "Scooter" Rizzuto
Ofc. Edward Byrne
Powell's Cove
Queens County Farm Museum
Queensbridge
Rachel Carson
Railroad
Ralph Demarco
Rochdale
Rockaway Community
Rufus King
Seagirt Avenue Wetlands
Socrates Sculpture
Spring Creek
Springfield
St. Albans
Travers
Tudor
Udall's Park Preserve
Wayanda





Staten Island



Aesop
Allison Pond
Amundsen Circle
Annadale
Arbutus Woods
Arden Woods
Austen House
Barrett
Bayview Terrace
Blood Root Valley
Bloomingdale
Blue Heron Park Preserve
Blueberry
Bradys
Bunker Ponds
Buono Beach
Carlton
Clove Lakes
Clove's Tail
Conference House
Corporal Thompson
Crescent Beach
Deere
Eibs Pond
Faber
Fairview
Father Macris
Forest Grove
Fort Hill
Fort Wadsworth
FDR Boardwalk and Beach
Freshkills
Gaeta
Great Kills
Graniteville Quarry
Graniteville Swamp
Hero
High Rock
Hoffman Island
Huguenot Ponds
Hybrid Oak Woods
Ingram Woods
Isle of Meadows
Jones Woods
Joseph Manna
King Fisher
Kingdom Pond
Last Chance
LaTourette
Lemon Creek
Long Pond
Gen. MacArthur
Maple Woods
Mariners Marsh
Meredith Woods
Midland Beach
Midland Field
Miller Field
Mount Loretto Unique Area
New Dorp Beach
New York Chinese Scholar's Garden
Northerleigh Park
Ocean Breeze
Old Place Creek
Olmstead-Beil House
Prall's Island
Reed's Basket WIllow Swamp
Richmond Terrace Wetlands
Saw Mill Creek Marsh
Schmul
Seaside Wildlife Nature
Shooters Island
Siedenburg
Silver Lake
Snug Harbor Cultural Center & Botanical Garden
Sobel Court
South Beach Wetlands
St. George
Staten Island Greenbelt
Staten Island Industrial
Swinburne Island
Tappen
Tompkinsville
Tottenville Shore
Von Briesen
Walker
Wegener
Westerleigh
Westwood
William T. Davis Wildlife Refuge
Willowbrook
Wolfe's Pond
















Other







Nature centers



Alley Pond
Belvedere Castle
Blue Heron
Crotona
Dana Discovery Center
Forest
Fort Greene
Fort Totten
Greenbelt
High Rock
Inwood Hill
Orchard Beach
Prospect
Salt Marsh
Van Cortlandt





Zoos



Bronx
Central Park
Prospect
Queens
Staten Island





Botanical gardens



Brooklyn Botanic
Conservatory
New York Botanical
Queens Botanical
Staten Island Botanical

New York Chinese Scholar's


Wave Hill





Roosevelt Island



Lighthouse
Southpoint





Other lists



World War I-related parks
Vietnam War-related parks














 Category
Department of Parks and Recreation
New York State
 Commons












v
t
e


World Heritage Sites in the United States



Northeast



Independence Hall
Statue of Liberty








Midwest



Cahokia





South



Everglades
Great Smoky Mountains
Mammoth Cave
Monticello and the University of Virginia
Poverty Point
San Antonio Missions





West



Carlsbad Caverns
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
Grand Canyon National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Kluane-Wrangell–St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek1
Mesa Verde
Olympic National Park
Pueblo de Taos
Papahānaumokuākea
Redwood
Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park1
Yellowstone National Park
Yosemite National Park





Territories



La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site






1 Shared with Canada










v
t
e


Popular visitor attractions in New York City






Times Square (35M)
Central Park (20M)
Metropolitan Museum of Art (5.2M)
High Line (5M)
Statue of Liberty (4.24M)
American Museum of Natural History (4M)
Empire State Building (4M)
Museum of Modern Art (2.67M)






See also: Tourism in New York City










v
t
e


U.S. National Register of Historic Places in New York



Topics



Contributing property
Keeper of the Register
Historic district
History of the National Register of Historic Places
National Park Service
Property types










Lists
by county



Albany
Allegany
Bronx
Broome
Cattaraugus
Cayuga
Chautauqua
Chemung
Chenango
Clinton
Columbia
Cortland
Delaware
Dutchess
Erie
Essex
Franklin
Fulton
Genesee
Greene
Hamilton
Herkimer
Jefferson
Kings (Brooklyn)
Lewis
Livingston
Madison
Monroe
Montgomery
Nassau
New York (Manhattan)
Niagara
Oneida
Onondaga
Ontario
Orange
Orleans
Oswego
Otsego
Putnam
Queens
Rensselaer
Richmond (Staten Island)
Rockland
Saratoga
Schenectady
Schoharie
Schuyler
Seneca
St. Lawrence
Steuben
Suffolk
Sullivan
Tioga
Tompkins
Ulster
Warren
Washington
Wayne
Westchester

Northern
Southern


Wyoming
Yates





Lists
by city



Albany
Buffalo
New Rochelle
New York City

Bronx
Brooklyn
Queens
Staten Island
Manhattan

Below 14th St.
14th–59th St.
59th–110th St.
Above 110th St.
Minor islands




Niagara Falls
Peekskill
Poughkeepsie
Rhinebeck
Rochester
Syracuse
Yonkers





Other lists



Bridges and tunnels
National Historic Landmarks








 Category:National Register of Historic Places in New York (state)
 Portal:National Register of Historic Places












v
t
e


Museums in Manhattan



Financial District and Battery Park
(Below Chambers St)



Castle Clinton
China Institute
Federal Hall
Fraunces Tavern
George Gustav Heye Center
Mmuseumm
Museum of American Finance
Museum of Jewish Heritage
New York City Police Museum
Skyscraper Museum
South Street Seaport





Lower Manhattan
(Chambers-14th Sts)



Asian American Arts Centre
Drawing Center
Eldridge Street Synagogue
FusionArts Museum
International Center of Photography
Lower East Side Tenement Museum
Merchant's House Museum
Museum of Chinese in America
New Museum
New York City Fire Museum
The Theatre Museum
Ukrainian Museum
Whitney Museum of American Art





Chelsea, Flatiron, Gramercy
(14th-34th Sts)



Center for Jewish History
International Print Center New York
John J. Harvey
The Museum at FIT
Museum of Mathematics
Museum of Sex
Rubin Museum of Art
Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace
Tibet House





Midtown
(34th-59th Sts)



Girl Scout Museum and Archives
Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum
Japan Society
John M. Mossman Lock Museum
Madame Tussauds
Morgan Library & Museum
Museum of Arts and Design
Museum of Modern Art
New York Public Library Main Branch
New York Transit Museum
Paley Center for Media
Scandinavia House
United Nations Art Collection





Upper West Side
(59th-125th Sts west of 5th Av)



American Folk Art Museum
American Museum of Natural History

Rose Center for Earth and Space


Children's Museum of Manhattan
Museum of Biblical Art
New York Public Library for the Performing Arts
New-York Historical Society
Nicholas Roerich Museum
Rose Museum





Upper East Side and East Harlem
(59th-125th Sts along or east of 5th Av)



Asia Society
El Museo del Barrio
Frick Collection
Gracie Mansion
Grolier Club
Guggenheim Museum
Jewish Museum
Met Breuer
Metropolitan Museum of Art
Mount Vernon Hotel Museum
Museum of Motherhood
Museum of the City of New York
National Academy Museum and School





Upper Manhattan
(Above 125th St)



American Academy of Arts and Letters
The Cloisters
Dyckman House
Hamilton Grange National Memorial
Hispanic Society of America
Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center
Morris–Jumel Mansion
National Jazz Museum in Harlem
National Track and Field Hall of Fame
Neue Galerie New York
Yeshiva University Museum
Studio Museum in Harlem





Islands



Ellis Island
Statue of Liberty





Defunct



Chelsea Art Museum
Dahesh Museum of Art
Forbes Galleries
Museum of Comic and Cartoon Art
Museum of Primitive Art








See also: Museum Mile












v
t
e


Hudson River watershed



Tributaries



Batten Kill
Black Meadow Creek
Bowery Creek
Breakneck Brook
Canajoharie Creek
Caroga Creek
Casperkill
Catskill Creek
Cayadutta Creek
Cedar River
Claverack Creek
Clove Brook
Cobleskill Creek
Coeymans Creek
Coxsackie Creek
Cross River
Croton River
East Branch Croton River
East Branch Sacandaga River
East Canada Creek
Eightmile Creek
Esopus Creek
Fall Kill
Fishkill Creek
Fonteyn Kill
Fulmer Creek
Hannacrois Creek
Honnedaga Brook
Hoosic River
Jackson Creek
Jan De Bakkers Kill
Kaaterskill Creek
Kayaderosseras
Kinderhook Creek
Kisco River
Lake Creek
Little Shawangunk Kill
Maritje Kill
Miami River
Mill Creek
Mohawk River
Moodna Creek
Moordener Kill
Moyer Creek
Muddy Kill
Neepaulakating Creek
Normans Kill
Nowadaga Creek
Onesquethaw Creek
Oriskany Creek
Otsquago Creek
Otter Kill
Papakating Creek
Peekskill Hollow Creek
Pocantico River
Pochuck Creek
Poesten Kill
Potic Creek
Quassaick Creek
Roeliff Jansen Kill
Rondout Creek
Sacandaga River
Sauquoit Creek
Saw Kill
Saw Mill River
Sawyer Kill
Schoharie Creek
Schroon River
Shawangunk Kill
Sparkill Creek
Sprout Creek
Steele Creek
Stockport Creek
Stony Clove Creek
Taghkanic Creek
Tenmile Creek
Tin Brook
Titicus River
Verkeerder Kill
Vloman Kill
Wallkill River
Walloomsac River
Wappinger Creek
Wawayanda Creek
West Branch Papakating Creek
West Branch Sacandaga River
West Canada Creek
Wynants Kill





Lakes



Alcove Reservoir
Ashokan Reservoir
Basic Creek Reservoir
Beacon Reservoir
Bog Brook Reservoir
Cedar Lake
Chadwick Lake
Chub Lake
Cross River Reservoir
Croton Falls Reservoir
Dyken Pond
East Branch Reservoir
East Caroga Lake
Fall Lake
Franklinton Vlaie
Garnet Lake
Glenmere Lake
Great Sacandaga Lake
Great Vlaie
Henderson Lake
Honnedaga Lake
Indian Lake
Lizard Pond
Lake Maratanza
Muscoot Reservoir
Lake Neepaulin
New Croton Reservoir
Notch Lake
Piseco Lake
Lake Pleasant
Queechy Lake
Rondout Reservoir
Sacandaga Lake
Saratoga Lake
Sturgeon Pool
Surprise Lake
Sylvan Lake
Lake Tear of the Clouds
Thompson Pond
Titicus Reservoir
Trout Lake
West Caroga Lake
Whaley Lake
Winnisook Lake





Towns



Albany
Alpine
Amsterdam
Bayonne
Beacon
Bedford
Beekman
Bennington
Bethlehem
Blooming Grove
Carmel
Catskill
Cliffside Park
Clifton Park
Cohoes
Colonie
Cortlandt
East Fishkill
East Greenbush
Edgewater
Englewood Cliffs
Fishkill
Fort Lee
Glenville
Gloversville
Greenburgh
Guilderland
Halfmoon
Herkimer
Hoboken
Hyde Park
Jersey City
Kingston
Kirkland
LaGrange
Lloyd
Malta
Middletown
Milton
Monroe
Montgomery
Moreau
Mount Pleasant
New Castle
New Hartford
New Paltz
New Windsor
New York City
Newburgh
Niskayuna
North Adams
North Bergen
Ossining
Peekskill
Plattekill
Poughkeepsie
Queensbury
Rome
Rotterdam
Saugerties
Schenectady
Shawangunk
Somers
Southeast
Sparta
Tenafly
Troy
Utica
Vernon
Wallkill
Wappinger
Warwick
Weehawken
West New York
Whitestown
Wilton
Yonkers
Yorktown





Landmarks



Adirondack Mountains
Adirondack Park
Ashokan Bridge
Blenheim Bridge
Buskirk Bridge
Catskill Mountains
Champlain Canal
Cohoes Falls
Copeland Bridge
Delaware and Hudson Canal
Eagleville Bridge
East River
Erie Canal
George Washington Bridge
Harlem River
Helderberg Escarpment
Hudson Highlands State Park
Kaaterskill Clove
Kaaterskill Falls
Kill Van Kull
Kingston–Rhinecliff Bridge
Mid-Hudson Bridge
Newburgh–Beacon Bridge
New Tappan Zee Bridge
The Palisades
Perrine's Bridge
Plotter Kill Preserve
Pollepel Island
Popolopen
Rexleigh Bridge
Rip Van Winkle Bridge
Salisbury Center Bridge
Schoharie Bridge
Shushan Bridge
Sleepy Hollow
Statue of Liberty
Taconic Mountains
Tappan Zee Bridge
Verkeerderkill Falls
Verrazano-Narrows Bridge
Walkway over the Hudson
Wallkill River National Wildlife Refuge
West Canada Lake Wilderness Area
West Point














Authority control



LCCN: sh85127593
GND: 4122611-2











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Statue_of_Liberty&oldid=816241027"					Categories: Statue of Liberty1886 sculptures1886 in international relations1886 in the United StatesAllegorical sculptures in the United StatesArtworks in the collection of the National Park ServiceBuildings and structures completed in 1886Colossal statues in the United StatesCopper sculptures in the United StatesFrance–United States relationsFrench architectureHistoric American Engineering Record in New York CityHistoric Civil Engineering LandmarksHistory museums in New York CitySymbols of New York CityFrench Third RepublicHistory of immigration to the United StatesLandmarks in ManhattanLiberty symbolsLighthouses on the National Register of Historic Places in New York (state)Museums in ManhattanNational Park Service National Monuments in New York CityNational personificationsNational symbols of the United StatesOutdoor sculptures in ManhattanPort of New York and New JerseyRichard Morris Hunt buildingsSculptures by Frédéric Auguste BartholdiTourist attractions in ManhattanWorld Heritage Sites in the United StatesNational Park Service areas in New York CityNew Jersey Register of Historic PlacesDiplomatic giftsNational Register of Historic Places in ManhattanAllegorical sculptures in New York CityMonuments and memorials in ManhattanTourism in New York (state)Buildings and structures in ManhattanLighthouses in New York CityTransportation in ManhattanHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from January 2017Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing French-language textStructurae ID different from WikidataFeatured articlesWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers