This article is about the ecological zone type. For other uses, see Steppe (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The Eurasian Steppe Belt (in   on the map), a path of passage for cultures — a possible origin for the Indo-European languages, the domesticated horse, the wheel and chariot






Steppe in Ukraine






Steppe in Kazakhstan






Steppe in Mongolia


In physical geography, a steppe (Russian: степь, IPA: [stʲepʲ]) is an ecoregion, in the montane grasslands and shrublands and temperate grasslands, savannas and shrublands biomes, characterized by grassland plains without trees apart from those near rivers and lakes. In South Africa, they are referred to as veld. The prairie of North America (especially the shortgrass and mixed prairie) is an example of a steppe, though it is not usually called such. A steppe may be semi-desert or covered with grass or shrubs or both, depending on the season and latitude. The term is also used to denote the climate encountered in regions too dry to support a forest but not dry enough to be a desert. The soil is typically of chernozem type.
Steppes are usually characterized by a semi-arid and continental climate. Extremes can be recorded in the summer of up to 45 °C (113 °F) and in winter, −55 °C (−67 °F). Besides this huge difference between summer and winter, the differences between day and night are also very great. In the highlands of Mongolia, 30 °C (86 °F) can be reached during the day with sub-zero °C (sub 32 °F) readings at night.




Steppe in Russia


The mid-latitude steppes can be summarized by hot summers and cold winters, averaging 250–510 mm (10–20 in) of precipitation per year. Precipitation level alone is not what defines a steppe climate; potential evapotranspiration must also be taken into account.



Contents


1 Two types
2 Locations

2.1 Cold steppe
2.2 Subtropical steppe


3 See also
4 References

4.1 Sources


5 External links



Two types[edit]




Southern Siberian steppe: windbreaker trees in the wintertime


Two types of steppe can be recorded:[1]

Temperate steppe: the "true" steppe, found in continental areas of the world; they can be further subdivided, as in the Rocky Mountains Steppes[1]
Subtropical steppe: a similar association of plants that can be found in the driest areas with a Mediterranean-like climate; it usually has a short wet period

Peculiar types of steppe include shrub-steppe and alpine-steppe.
The Eurasian Grass-Steppe of the temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands had a role in the spread of the horse, the wheel, and the Indo-European languages. The Indo-European expansion and diverse invasions of horse archer civilizations of the steppe eventually led to, e.g., the rise of Mycenaean Greece by amalgamation of Indo-Europeans with the autochthonous pre-Greek population and also its destruction during the Dorian invasion in the Late Bronze Age collapse, followed by the demise of the Achaeans, the spread of the Sea Peoples, and eventually the rise of Archaic and ultimately Classical Greece.
Locations[edit]




Cold Patagonian steppe near Fitz Roy, Argentina


Cold steppe[edit]




Flock of sheep in the Mongolian steppe


The world's largest steppe region, often referred to as "the Great Steppe", is found in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, and neighbouring countries stretching from Ukraine in the west through Russia, Kazakhstan, China, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan to the Altai, Koppet Dag and Tian Shan ranges.
The inner parts of Anatolia in Turkey, Central Anatolia and East Anatolia in particular and also some parts of Southeast Anatolia, as well as much of Armenia and Iran are largely dominated by cold steppe.
The Pannonian Plain is another steppe region in eastern Europe, primarily Hungary.




Prairie in Alberta, Canada


Another large steppe area (prairie) is located in the central United States, western Canada and northern part of Mexico. The shortgrass prairie steppe is the westernmost part of the Great Plains region. The Channeled Scablands in Southern British Columbia and Washington State is an example of a steppe region in North America outside of the Great Plains.
In South America, cold steppe can be found in Patagonia and much of the high elevation regions east of the southern Andes.
Relatively small steppe areas can be found in the interior of the South Island of New Zealand.




Sagebrush steppe in northeastern Nevada along US 93


Subtropical steppe[edit]
In Europe, some Mediterranean areas have a steppe-like vegetation, such as central Sicily in Italy, southern Portugal, parts of Greece in the southern Athens area,[2] and central-eastern Spain, especially the southeastern coast (around Murcia), and places cut off from adequate moisture due to rain shadow effects such as Zaragoza.
In Asia, a subtropical steppe can be found in semi-arid lands that fringe the Thar Desert of the Indian subcontinent and the Badia of the Arabian peninsula.
In Australia, "subtropical steppe" can be found in a belt surrounding the most severe deserts of the continent and around the Musgrave Ranges.
In North America this environment is typical of transition areas between zones with a Mediterranean climate and true deserts, such as Reno, Nevada, the inner part of California, and much of West Texas and adjacent areas in Mexico.
See also[edit]


Badia
Canadian Prairies
Coastal plain
Coastal prairie
Desert
Eurasian Steppe
Field (agriculture)
Flooded grasslands and savannas
Flood-meadow
Forest steppe
Grassland
Great Hungarian Plain
High Plains
Kazakh Steppe
Mammoth steppe
Meadow
Mongolian-Manchurian grassland
Pasture
Plain
Pontic-Caspian steppe
Puszta
Rangeland
Savanna
Steppe Route
Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands
Tundra
Water-meadow
Wet meadow
Veld


References[edit]



^ a b "Ecoregions of the United States-Ecological Subregions of the United States". fs.fed.us. U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. Retrieved 25 October 2016. 
^ "Hellinikon". HNMS.gr. Greece: Hellenic National Meteorological Service. Retrieved 2013-09-08. 



Sources[edit]

Ecology and Conservation of Steppe-land Birds by Manuel B.Morales, Santi Mañosa, Jordi Camprodón, Gerard Bota. International Symposium on Ecology and Conservation of steppe-land birds. Lleida, Spain. December 2004.ISBN 84-87334-99-7

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Steppes.



"The Steppes". barramedasoft.com.ar. 1998–2008. Retrieved 2008-04-04. 







v
t
e


Phytogeography: Vegetation classification



Physiognomy



Forests, woodlands, arboretum
Shrublands, scrubs, thickets, fruticetum
Dwarf-shrubland, subshrublands, dwarf-scrubs, suffruticetum
Herbaceous communities, grasslands, steppes, prairies, herbetum
Savannas, parklands
Scarcely vegetated areas, desert vegetation





Latitude



Tropical
Subtropical
Temperate
Subpolar
Polar





Climatic
regime



Pluvial, rainy, ombrophilous
Cloudy
Seasonal
Drought





Altitude



Montane
Submontane
Lowland
Coastal





Leaves



Loss of leaves

Deciduous, caducifolious
Semi-deciduous, semicaducifolious
Evergreen, perennifolious


Leaf hardness

Sclerophyll, stiff leaves
Orthophyll, hyptiophyll leaves


Leaf form

Aciculifolious, needle-leaved
Latifolious, broad-leaved







Substrate



Terrestrial vegetation
Aquatic vegetation

Riparian
Mangrove
Swampy







See also



Biogeographic realms
Biomes
Floristic kingdoms
Plant habits
Plant life-forms
Vegetation











Authority control



GND: 4057302-3











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Steppe&oldid=815937264"					Categories: GrasslandsMontane grasslands and shrublandsTemperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublandsEcoregionsPlainsPrairiesClimateHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2014All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Russian-language textPages using div col with small parameterRussia articles missing geocoordinate dataAll articles needing coordinatesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers