"Spielberg" redirects here. For other uses, see Spielberg (disambiguation).


Steven Spielberg
KBE OMRI



Spielberg at the 2017 San Diego Comic-Con



Born
(1946-12-18) December 18, 1946 (age 71)
Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.


Residence
East Hampton, New York, U.S.
Naples, Florida, U.S.
New York City, U.S.
Pacific Palisades, California, U.S.


Occupation
Director, producer, screenwriter


Years active
1959–present


Net worth
 US$3.7 billion (2016)[1]


Spouse(s)
Amy Irving
(m. 1985;  div. 1989)
Kate Capshaw
(m. 1991)


Children
7, including Jessica Capshaw and Sasha Spielberg


Relatives
Arnold Spielberg (father)
Anne Spielberg (sister)


Signature





Steven Allan Spielberg, KBE OMRI (born December 18, 1946) is an American director, producer, and screenwriter. He is considered one of the founding pioneers of the New Hollywood era, as well as being viewed as one of the most popular directors and producers in film history.[2] He is also one of the co-founders of DreamWorks Studios.
In a career spanning more than four decades, Spielberg's films have spanned many themes and genres. Spielberg's early science-fiction and adventure films, such as Jaws (1975), Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977), Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981), and E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982), were seen as archetypes of modern Hollywood escapist filmmaking.[3] In later years, his films began addressing numerous humanistic issues such as the Holocaust, the transatlantic slave trade, civil rights, war, and terrorism in such films as The Color Purple (1985), Empire of the Sun (1987), Schindler's List (1993), Amistad (1997), Saving Private Ryan (1998), Munich (2005), War Horse (2011), Lincoln (2012), Bridge of Spies (2015), and The Post (2017). His other films include Jurassic Park (1993), A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001), and War of the Worlds (2005).
Spielberg won the Academy Award for Best Director for Schindler's List and Saving Private Ryan, as well as receiving five other nominations.[4] Three of Spielberg's films—Jaws, E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, and Jurassic Park—achieved box office records, originated and came to epitomize the blockbuster film.[5] The unadjusted gross of all Spielberg-directed films exceeds $9 billion worldwide, making him the highest-grossing director in history. His personal net worth is estimated to be more than $3 billion.[1] He is also known for his long-standing associations with several actors, producers, and technicians, most notably composer John Williams, who has composed music for all but three of Spielberg's films (The Color Purple, Bridge of Spies, and Ready Player One).



Contents


1 Early life
2 Career

2.1 1970s
2.2 1980s
2.3 1990s
2.4 2000s
2.5 2010s
2.6 Upcoming projects

2.6.1 Projects on hold


2.7 Production credits
2.8 Onscreen appearances
2.9 Involvement in video games


3 Themes
4 Frequent collaborators

4.1 Actors
4.2 Other collaborations


5 Personal life

5.1 Marriages and children
5.2 Religion
5.3 Wealth
5.4 Yachting
5.5 Recognition
5.6 Politics
5.7 Hobbies
5.8 Stalking


6 Awards and honors
7 Filmography
8 Praise and criticism

8.1 Other


9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Early life
Spielberg was born to an Orthodox Jewish family.[6] in Cincinnati, Ohio, on December 18, 1946.[7][8] His mother, Leah Posner (later Adler; January 12, 1920 – February 21, 2017),[9] was a restaurateur and concert pianist, and his father, Arnold Spielberg (born 1917), was an electrical engineer involved in the development of computers.[10] Spielberg's paternal grandparents were Ukrainian immigrants who settled in Cincinnati in the 1900s; his grandmother was from Sudylkiv, while his grandfather was from Kamianets-Podilskyi.[11][12] In 1950, his family moved to Haddon Township, New Jersey, when his father took a job with RCA. Three years later, the family moved to Phoenix, Arizona.[13]:548 Spielberg attended Hebrew school from 1953 to 1957, in classes taught by Rabbi Albert L. Lewis.[14]
As a child, Spielberg faced difficulty reconciling being an Orthodox Jew with the perception of him by other children he played with. "It isn't something I enjoy admitting," he once said, "but when I was seven, eight, nine years old, God forgive me, I was embarrassed because we were Orthodox Jews. I was embarrassed by the outward perception of my parents' Jewish practices. I was never really ashamed to be Jewish, but I was uneasy at times."[15] Spielberg also said he suffered from acts of anti-Semitic prejudice and bullying: "In high school, I got smacked and kicked around. Two bloody noses. It was horrible."[16] His first home movie was of a train wreck involving his toy Lionel trains, then age 12.[17] Throughout his early teens, and after entering high school, Spielberg continued to make amateur 8 mm "adventure" films.[18]
In 1958, he became a Boy Scout and fulfilled a requirement for the photography merit badge by making a nine-minute 8 mm film entitled The Last Gunfight.[19] Years later, Spielberg recalled to a magazine interviewer, "My dad's still-camera was broken, so I asked the scoutmaster if I could tell a story with my father's movie camera. He said yes, and I got an idea to do a Western. I made it and got my merit badge. That was how it all started."[20] At age thirteen, while living in Phoenix, Spielberg won a prize for a 40-minute war film he titled Escape to Nowhere, using a cast composed of other high school friends. That motivated him to make 15 more amateur 8mm films.[13]:548 In 1963, at age sixteen, Spielberg wrote and directed his first independent film, a 140-minute science fiction adventure called Firelight, which would later inspire Close Encounters. The film was made for $500, most of which came from his father, and was shown in a local cinema for one evening, which earned back its cost.[21]
After attending Arcadia High School in Phoenix for three years, his family next moved to Saratoga, California, where he later graduated from Saratoga High School in 1965. He attained the rank of Eagle Scout. His parents divorced while he was still in school,[22] and soon after he graduated Spielberg moved to Los Angeles, staying initially with his father. His long-term goal was to become a film director. His three sisters and mother remained in Saratoga. In Los Angeles, he applied to the University of Southern California's film school, but was turned down because of his "C" grade average.[13]:548 He then applied and was admitted to California State University, Long Beach, where he became a brother of Theta Chi Fraternity.[23]
While still a student, he was offered a small unpaid intern job at Universal Studios with the editing department.[24][25] He was later given the opportunity to make a short film for theatrical release, the 26-minute, 35mm, Amblin', which he wrote and directed. Studio vice president Sidney Sheinberg was impressed by the film, which had won a number of awards, and offered Spielberg a seven-year directing contract. It made him the youngest director ever to be signed for a long-term deal with a major Hollywood studio.[13]:548 He subsequently dropped out of college to begin professionally directing TV productions with Universal.[26][27] Spielberg later returned to Cal State Long Beach and completed his BA degree in Film and Electronic Arts in 2002.[28]
Career
1970s
His first professional TV job came when he was hired to direct one of the segments for the 1969 pilot episode of Night Gallery, written by Rod Serling and would star Joan Crawford.[29] Crawford, however, was "speechless, and then horrified" at the thought of a twenty-one-year-old newcomer directing her, one of Hollywood's leading stars. "Why was this happening to me?" she asked the producer.[30] Her attitude changed after they began working on her scenes:


“
When I began to work with Steven, I understood everything. It was immediately obvious to me, and probably everyone else, that here was a young genius. I thought maybe more experience was important, but then I thought of all of those experienced directors who didn't have Steven's intuitive inspiration and who just kept repeating the same old routine performances. That was called "experience." I knew then that Steven Spielberg had a brilliant future ahead of him. Hollywood doesn't always recognize talent, but Steven's was not going to be overlooked. I told him so in a note I wrote him. I wrote to Rod Serling, too. I was so grateful that he had approved Steven as the director. I told him he had been totally right.[30]
”


She and Spielberg were reportedly close friends until her death. The episode is unusual in his body of work, in that the camerawork is more highly stylized than his later, more "mature" films. After this, and an episode of Marcus Welby, M.D., Spielberg got his first feature-length assignment: an episode of The Name of the Game called "L.A. 2017". This futuristic science fiction episode impressed Universal Studios and they signed him to a short contract. He did another segment on Night Gallery and did some work for shows such as Owen Marshall: Counselor at Law and The Psychiatrist, before landing the first series episode of Columbo (previous episodes were actually TV films).
Based on the strength of his work, Universal signed Spielberg to do four TV films. The first was a Richard Matheson adaptation called Duel. The film is about a psychotic Peterbilt 281 tanker truck driver who chases the terrified driver (Dennis Weaver) of a small Plymouth Valiant and tries to run him off the road. Special praise of this film by the influential British critic Dilys Powell was highly significant to Spielberg's career. Another TV film (Something Evil) was made and released to capitalize on the popularity of The Exorcist, then a major best-selling book which had not yet been released as a film. He fulfilled his contract by directing the TV film-length pilot of a show called Savage, starring Martin Landau. Spielberg's debut full-length feature film was The Sugarland Express, about a married couple who are chased by police as the couple tries to regain custody of their baby. Spielberg's cinematography for the police chase was praised by reviewers, and The Hollywood Reporter stated that "a major new director is on the horizon."[7]:223 However, the film fared poorly at the box office and received a limited release.
Studio producers Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown offered Spielberg the director's chair for Jaws, a thriller-horror film based on the Peter Benchley novel about an enormous killer shark. Spielberg has often referred to the gruelling shoot as his professional crucible. Despite the film's ultimate, enormous success, it was nearly shut down due to delays and budget over-runs. But Spielberg persevered and finished the film. It was an enormous hit, winning three Academy Awards (for editing, original score and sound) and grossing more than $470 million worldwide at the box office. It also set the domestic record for box office gross, leading to what the press described as "Jawsmania."[7]:248 Jaws made Spielberg a household name and one of America's youngest multi-millionaires, allowing him a great deal of autonomy for his future projects.[7]:250 It was nominated for Best Picture and featured Spielberg's first of three collaborations with actor Richard Dreyfuss.
Rejecting offers to direct Jaws 2,[31] King Kong and Superman, Spielberg and actor Richard Dreyfuss re-convened to work on a film about UFOs, which became Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977). One of the rare films both written and directed by Spielberg, Close Encounters was a critical and box office hit, giving Spielberg his first Best Director nomination from the Academy as well as earning six other Academy Awards nominations. It won Oscars in two categories (Cinematography, Vilmos Zsigmond, and a Special Achievement Award for Sound Effects Editing, Frank E. Warner). This second blockbuster helped to secure Spielberg's rise. His next film, 1941, a big-budgeted World War II farce, was not nearly as successful and though it grossed over $92.4 million worldwide (and did make a small profit for co-producing studios Columbia and Universal) it was seen as a disappointment, mainly with the critics.[32]
Spielberg then revisited his Close Encounters project and, with financial backing from Columbia Pictures, released Close Encounters: The Special Edition in 1980. For this, Spielberg fixed some of the flaws he thought impeded the original 1977 version of the film and also, at the behest of Columbia, and as a condition of Spielberg revising the film, shot additional footage showing the audience the interior of the mothership seen at the end of the film (a decision Spielberg would later regret as he felt the interior of the mothership should have remained a mystery). Nevertheless, the re-release was a moderate success, while the 2001 DVD release of the film restored the original ending.
1980s




Steven Spielberg in the 1980s.


Next, Spielberg teamed with Star Wars creator and friend George Lucas on an action adventure film, Raiders of the Lost Ark, the first of the Indiana Jones films. The archaeologist and adventurer hero Indiana Jones was played by Harrison Ford (whom Lucas had previously cast in his Star Wars films as Han Solo). The film was considered an homage to the cliffhanger serials of the Golden Age of Hollywood. It became the biggest film at the box office in 1981, and the recipient of numerous Oscar nominations including Best Director (Spielberg's second nomination) and Best Picture (the second Spielberg film to be nominated for Best Picture). Raiders is still considered a landmark example of the action-adventure genre. The film also led to Ford's casting in Ridley Scott's Blade Runner.[33]
A year later, Spielberg returned to the science fiction genre with E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial. It was the story of a young boy and the alien he befriends, who was accidentally left behind by his companions and is attempting to return home. E.T. went on to become the top-grossing film of all time. It was also nominated for nine Academy Awards including Best Picture and Best Director and it won 4 out of them.[34]
Between 1982 and 1985, Spielberg produced three high-grossing films: Poltergeist (for which he also co-wrote the screenplay), a big-screen adaptation of The Twilight Zone (for which he directed the segment "Kick The Can"),[35] and The Goonies (Spielberg, executive producer, also wrote the story on which the screenplay was based).[36] Spielberg appeared in a cameo on Cyndi Lauper's music video for the movie's theme song, "The Goonies 'R' Good Enough".[37]




Steven Spielberg and Chandran Rutnam on a location in Sri Lanka during the filming of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom.


His next directorial feature was the Raiders prequel Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom. Teaming up once again with Lucas and Ford, the film was plagued with uncertainty for the material and script. This film and the Spielberg-produced Gremlins led to the creation of the PG-13 rating due to the high level of violence in films targeted at younger audiences. In spite of this, Temple of Doom is rated PG by the MPAA, even though it is the darkest and, possibly, most violent Indy film. Nonetheless, the film was still a huge blockbuster hit in 1984. It was on this project that Spielberg also met his future wife, actress Kate Capshaw.[38]
In 1985, Spielberg released The Color Purple, an adaptation of Alice Walker's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel of the same name, about a generation of empowered African-American women during depression-era America. Starring Whoopi Goldberg and future talk-show superstar Oprah Winfrey, the film was a box office smash and critics hailed Spielberg's successful foray into the dramatic genre. Roger Ebert proclaimed it the best film of the year and later entered it into his Great Films archive. The film received eleven Academy Award nominations, including two for Goldberg and Winfrey. However, Spielberg did not get a Best Director nomination.
In 1987, as China began opening to Western capital investment, Spielberg shot the first American film in Shanghai since the 1930s, an adaptation of J. G. Ballard's autobiographical novel Empire of the Sun, starring John Malkovich and a young Christian Bale. The film garnered much praise from critics and was nominated for several Oscars, but did not yield substantial box office revenues. Reviewer Andrew Sarris called it the best film of the year and later included it among the best films of the decade.[39] Spielberg was also a co-producer of the 1987 film *batteries not included.
After two forays into more serious dramatic films, Spielberg then directed the third Indiana Jones film, 1989's Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade. Once again teaming up with Lucas and Ford, Spielberg also cast actor Sean Connery in a supporting role as Indy's father. The film earned generally positive reviews and was another box office success, becoming the highest-grossing film worldwide that year; its total box office receipts even topped those of Tim Burton's much-anticipated film Batman, which had been the bigger hit domestically. Also in 1989, he re-united with actor Richard Dreyfuss for the romantic comedy-drama Always, about a daredevil pilot who extinguishes forest fires. Spielberg's first romantic film, Always was only a moderate success and had mixed reviews.
1990s
In 1991, Spielberg directed Hook, about a middle-aged Peter Pan, played by Robin Williams, who returns to Neverland. Despite innumerable rewrites and creative changes coupled with mixed reviews, the film proved popular with audiences, making over $300 million worldwide (from a $70 million budget).
In 1993, Spielberg returned to the adventure genre with the film version of Michael Crichton's novel Jurassic Park, about a theme park with genetically engineered dinosaurs. With revolutionary special effects provided by friend George Lucas's Industrial Light & Magic company, the film would eventually become the highest-grossing film of all time (at the worldwide box office) with $914.7 million. This would be the third time that one of Spielberg's films became the highest-grossing film ever.
Spielberg's next film, Schindler's List, was based on the true story of Oskar Schindler, a man who risked his life to save 1,100 Jews from the Holocaust.[40] Schindler's List earned Spielberg his first Academy Award for Best Director (it also won Best Picture). With the film a huge success at the box office, Spielberg used the profits to set up the Shoah Foundation, a non-profit organization that archives filmed testimony of Holocaust survivors. In 1997, the American Film Institute listed it among the 10 Greatest American Films ever Made (#9) which moved up to (#8) when the list was remade in 2007.




Spielberg in March 1990


In 1994, Spielberg took a hiatus from directing to spend more time with his family and build his new studio, DreamWorks,[41] with partners Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen. In 1996, he directed the sequel to 1993's Jurassic Park with The Lost World: Jurassic Park, which generated over $618 million worldwide despite mixed reviews, and was the second biggest film of 1997 behind James Cameron's Titanic (which topped the original Jurassic Park to become the new recordholder for box office receipts).
His next film, Amistad, was based on a true story (like Schindler's List), specifically about an African slave rebellion. Despite decent reviews from critics, it did not do well at the box office. Spielberg released Amistad under DreamWorks Pictures,[42] which has produced all of his films from Amistad onwards with the exception of Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, The Adventures of Tintin and Ready Player One.[43]
His 1998 theatrical release was the World War II film Saving Private Ryan, about a group of U.S. soldiers led by Capt. Miller (Tom Hanks) sent to bring home a paratrooper whose three older brothers were killed in the same twenty-four hours, June 5–6, of the Normandy landing. The film was a huge box office success, grossing over $481 million worldwide and was the biggest film of the year at the North American box office (worldwide it made second place after Michael Bay's Armageddon). Spielberg won his second Academy Award for his direction. The film's graphic, realistic depiction of combat violence influenced later war films such as Black Hawk Down and Enemy at the Gates. The film was also the first major hit for DreamWorks, which co-produced the film with Paramount Pictures (as such, it was Spielberg's first release from the latter that was not part of the Indiana Jones series). Later, Spielberg and Tom Hanks produced a TV mini-series based on Stephen Ambrose's book Band of Brothers. The ten-part HBO mini-series follows Easy Company of the 101st Airborne Division's 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment. The series won a number of awards at the Golden Globes and the Emmys.
2000s
In 2001, Spielberg filmed fellow director and friend Stanley Kubrick's final project, A.I. Artificial Intelligence which Kubrick was unable to begin during his lifetime. A futuristic film about a humanoid android longing for love, A.I. featured groundbreaking visual effects and a multi-layered, allegorical storyline, adapted by Spielberg himself. Though the film's reception in the US was relatively muted, it performed better overseas for a worldwide total box office gross of $236 million.
Spielberg and actor Tom Cruise collaborated for the first time for the futuristic neo-noir Minority Report, based upon the science fiction short story written by Philip K. Dick about a Washington D.C. police captain in the year 2054 who has been foreseen to murder a man he has not yet met. The film received strong reviews with the review tallying website Rotten Tomatoes giving it a 92% approval rating, reporting that 206 out of the 225 reviews they tallied were positive.[44] The film earned over $358 million worldwide. Roger Ebert, who named it the best film of 2002, praised its breathtaking vision of the future as well as for the way Spielberg blended CGI with live-action.[45]
Spielberg's 2002 film Catch Me If You Can is about the daring adventures of a youthful con artist (played by Leonardo DiCaprio). It earned Christopher Walken an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. The film is known for John Williams' score and its unique title sequence. It was a hit both commercially[46] and critically.[47]
Spielberg collaborated again with Tom Hanks along with Catherine Zeta-Jones and Stanley Tucci in 2004's The Terminal, a warm-hearted comedy about a man of Eastern European descent who is stranded in an airport. It received mixed reviews but performed relatively well at the box office. In 2005, Empire magazine ranked Spielberg number one on a list of the greatest film directors of all time.
Also in 2005, Spielberg directed a modern adaptation of War of the Worlds (a co-production of Paramount and DreamWorks), based on the H. G. Wells book of the same name (Spielberg had been a huge fan of the book and the original 1953 film). It starred Tom Cruise and Dakota Fanning, and, as with past Spielberg films, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) provided the visual effects. Unlike E.T. and Close Encounters of the Third Kind, which depicted friendly alien visitors, War of the Worlds featured violent invaders. The film was another huge box office smash, grossing over $591 million worldwide.
Spielberg's film Munich, about the events following the 1972 Munich Massacre of Israeli athletes at the Olympic Games, was his second film essaying Jewish relations in the world (the first being Schindler's List). The film is based on Vengeance, a book by Canadian journalist George Jonas. It was previously adapted into the 1986 made-for-TV film Sword of Gideon. The film received strong critical praise, but underperformed at the U.S. and world box-office; it remains one of Spielberg's most controversial films to date.[48] Munich received five Academy Awards nominations, including Best Picture, Film Editing, Original Music Score (by John Williams), Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Director for Spielberg. It was Spielberg's sixth Best Director nomination and fifth Best Picture nomination.
In June 2006, Steven Spielberg announced he would direct a scientifically accurate film about "a group of explorers who travel through a worm hole and into another dimension",[49] from a treatment by Kip Thorne and producer Lynda Obst.[50] In January 2007, screenwriter Jonathan Nolan met with them to discuss adapting Obst and Thorne's treatment into a narrative screenplay. The screenwriter suggested the addition of a "time element" to the treatment's basic idea, which was welcomed by Obst and Thorne.[50] In March of that year, Paramount hired Nolan, as well as scientists from Caltech, forming a workshop to adapt the treatment under the title Interstellar.[51] The following July, Kip Thorne said there was a push by people for him to portray himself in the film.[52] Spielberg later abandoned Interstellar, which was eventually directed by Christopher Nolan.[53]
Spielberg directed Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, which wrapped filming in October 2007 and was released on May 22, 2008.[54][55] This was his first film not to be released by DreamWorks since 1997. The film received generally positive reviews from critics,[56] and was financially successful, grossing $786 million worldwide.
2010s




Spielberg at his masterclass at the Cinémathèque Française in January 2012.


In early 2009, Spielberg shot the first film in a planned trilogy of motion capture films based on The Adventures of Tintin, written by Belgian artist Hergé,[57] with Peter Jackson. The Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn, was not released until October 2011, due to the complexity of the computer animation involved. The world premiere took place on October 22, 2011 in Brussels, Belgium.[58] The film was released in North American theaters on December 21, 2011, in Digital 3D and IMAX.[59] It received generally positive reviews from critics,[60] and grossed over $373 million worldwide.[61] The Adventures of Tintin won the award for Best Animated Feature Film at the Golden Globe Awards that year.[62] It is the first non-Pixar film to win the award since the category was first introduced.[63][64] Jackson has been announced to direct the second film.[65]
Spielberg followed with War Horse, shot in England in the summer of 2010.[66] It was released just four days after The Adventures of Tintin, on December 25, 2011. The film, based on the novel of the same name written by Michael Morpurgo and published in 1982, follows the long friendship between a British boy and his horse Joey before and during World War I – the novel was also adapted into a hit play in London which is still running there, as well as on Broadway. Distributed by Walt Disney Studios, with whom DreamWorks made a distribution deal in 2009, War Horse was the first of four consecutive Spielberg films released by Disney. War Horse received generally positive reviews from critics,[67] and was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture.[68]
Spielberg next directed the historical drama film Lincoln, starring Daniel Day-Lewis as United States President Abraham Lincoln and Sally Field as Mary Todd Lincoln.[69] Based on Doris Kearns Goodwin's bestseller Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln, the film covered the final four months of Lincoln's life. Written by Tony Kushner, the film was shot in Richmond, Virginia, in late 2011,[70] and was released in the United States in November 2012.[71][72] Upon release, Lincoln received widespread critical acclaim,[73] and was nominated for twelve Academy Awards (the most of any film that year) including Best Picture and Best Director for Spielberg.[74] It won the award for Best Production Design and Day-Lewis won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Lincoln, becoming the first three-time winner in that category as well as the first to win for a performance directed by Spielberg.
It was announced on May 2, 2013, that Spielberg would direct the film about the story of U.S. sniper Chris Kyle, titled American Sniper.[75] However, on August 5, 2013, it was announced that Spielberg had decided not to direct the film, which was instead directed by Clint Eastwood.[76]




Spielberg promoting The BFG at the 2016 Cannes Film Festival.


Spielberg directed 2015's Bridge of Spies, a Cold War thriller based on the 1960 U-2 incident, and focusing on James B. Donovan's negotiations with the Soviets for the release of pilot Gary Powers after his aircraft was shot down over Soviet territory. The film starred Tom Hanks as Donovan, as well as Mark Rylance, Amy Ryan, and Alan Alda, with a script by the Coen brothers.[77] The film was shot from September to December 2014 on location in New York City, Berlin and Wroclaw, Poland (which doubled for East Berlin), and was released on October 16, 2015.[78][79] Bridge of Spies received positive reviews from critics, and was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture; Rylance won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, becoming the second actor to win for a performance directed by Spielberg.
Spielberg's The BFG is an adaptation of Roald Dahl's celebrated children's story, starring newcomer Ruby Barnhill, and Rylance as the titular Big Friendly Giant. DreamWorks bought the rights in 2010, originally intending John Madden to direct.[80] The film was the last to be written by E.T. screenwriter Melissa Mathison before she died. It was co-produced and released by Walt Disney Pictures, marking the first Disney-branded film to be directed by Spielberg. The BFG premiered out of competition at the Cannes Film Festival[81] on May 14, 2016[82] and received a wide release in the US on July 1, 2016.[77]
Upcoming projects
Spielberg began filming an adaptation of the popular sci-fi novel Ready Player One by Ernest Cline in London in July 2016,[83] starring Tye Sheridan,[84] Olivia Cooke,[85] Ben Mendelsohn, Simon Pegg and Mark Rylance.[86] It was originally slated to be released on December 15, 2017[87] by Warner Bros.,[88] but was pushed back to March 30, 2018, to avoid competition with Star Wars Episode VIII.[89]
With Ready Player One still in its lengthy, effects-heavy post-production, Spielberg is directing Tom Hanks and Meryl Streep in The Post, an account of The Washington Post's uncovering of the Pentagon Papers.[90] Production began in New York on May 30, 2017.[91] The film will get a limited release on December 22, 2017, with a wide release following on January 12, 2018.[92]
Spielberg will follow that with a fifth installment in the Indiana Jones series. The untitled film is set to star Harrison Ford and will be produced by Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall. It is being written by David Koepp, who has written numerous other films for Spielberg, including the last Indiana Jones film.[93] It was originally set for release by Disney on July 19, 2019,[94] but will now come out on July 10, 2020.[95]
Spielberg had planned to film his long-planned adaptation of David Kertzer's acclaimed The Kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara in 2017 for release at the end of that year,[96] but production has been postponed. The book follows the true story of a young Jewish boy in 1858 Italy who was secretly baptized by a family servant and then kidnapped from his family by the Papal States, where he was raised and trained as a priest, causing international outrage and becoming a media sensation. First announced in 2014,[97] the book has been adapted by Tony Kushner and the film will again star Mark Rylance, in his fourth consecutive collaboration with Spielberg, in the role of Pope Pius IX. Oscar Isaac was set to star as Mortara's father, but eventually dropped out.[98]
Spielberg plans to direct a film remake of the musical West Side Story.[99] Tony Kushner stated in July 2017 that he is currently adapting the classic show's book for Spielberg, though the musical score will remain unchanged, as will the late-1950s setting.[100]
Spielberg is attached to direct Cortes, a historical epic written by Steven Zaillian about the Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire, and Cortes's relationship with Aztec ruler Montezuma.[101] The script is based on an earlier one from 1965 by Oscar-winner Dalton Trumbo.[102] The project at one time had Javier Bardem attached to play the lead role of explorer Hernán Cortés.
Spielberg is attached to direct an adaptation of American photojournalist Lynsey Addario's memoir It's What I Do. Jennifer Lawrence is attached to star in the lead role.[103]
Projects on hold
Spielberg was scheduled to shoot a $200 million adaptation of Daniel H. Wilson's novel Robopocalypse, adapted for the screen by Drew Goddard.[104] The film would follow a global human war against a robot uprising about 15–20 years in the future.[105] Like Lincoln, it was to be released by Disney in the United States and Fox overseas.[106] It was set for release on April 25, 2014,[107] with Anne Hathaway and Chris Hemsworth set to star,[108] but Spielberg postponed production indefinitely in January 2013, just before it had been set to begin.[109]
In 2009, Spielberg reportedly tried to obtain the screen rights to make a film based on Microsoft's Halo series.[110] In September 2008, Steven Spielberg bought film rights for John Wyndham's novel Chocky and is interested in directing it. He is also interested in making an adaptation of A Steady Rain,[111] Pirate Latitudes,[112] The 39 Clues,[113] and a remake of When Worlds Collide.
In May 2009, Steven Spielberg bought the rights to the life story of Martin Luther King, Jr. Spielberg will be involved not only as producer but also as a director.[114] However, the purchase was made from the King estate, led by son Dexter, while the two other surviving children, the Reverend Bernice and Martin III, immediately threatened to sue, not having given their approvals to the project.[115]
Production credits
Since the mid-1980s, Spielberg has increased his role as a film producer. He headed up the production team for several cartoons, including the Warner Bros. hits Tiny Toon Adventures, Animaniacs, Pinky and the Brain, Toonsylvania, and Freakazoid!, for which he collaborated with Jean MacCurdy and Tom Ruegger. Due to his work on these series, in the official titles, most of them say, "Steven Spielberg presents" as well as making numerous cameos on the shows. Spielberg also produced the Don Bluth animated features, An American Tail and The Land Before Time, which were released by Universal Studios. He also served as one of the executive producers of Who Framed Roger Rabbit and its three related shorts (Tummy Trouble, Roller Coaster Rabbit, Trail Mix-Up), which were all released by Disney, under both the Walt Disney Pictures and the Touchstone Pictures banners. He was furthermore, for a short time, the executive producer of the long-running medical drama ER. In 1989, he brought the concept of The Dig to LucasArts. He contributed to the project from that time until 1995 when the game was released. He also collaborated with software publishers Knowledge Adventure on the multimedia game Steven Spielberg's Director's Chair, which was released in 1996. Spielberg appears, as himself, in the game to direct the player. The Spielberg name provided branding for a Lego Moviemaker kit, the proceeds of which went to the Starbright Foundation.




Spielberg speaking at the Pentagon on August 11, 1999 after receiving the Department of Defense Medal for Distinguished Public Service from Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen


In 1993, Spielberg acted as executive producer for the highly anticipated television series seaQuest DSV; a science fiction series set "in the near future" starring Roy Scheider (who Spielberg had directed in Jaws) and Jonathan Brandis that aired on NBC. While the first season was moderately successful, the second season did less well. Spielberg's name no longer appeared in the third season and the show was cancelled midway through it.
Spielberg served as an uncredited executive producer on The Haunting, The Prince of Egypt, Just Like Heaven,[116] Shrek, Road to Perdition,[117] and Evolution. He served as an executive producer for the 1997 film Men in Black, and its sequels, Men in Black II and Men in Black III. In 2005, he served as a producer of Memoirs of a Geisha, an adaptation of the novel by Arthur Golden, a film to which he was previously attached as director. In 2006, Spielberg co-executive produced with famed filmmaker Robert Zemeckis a CGI children's film called Monster House, marking their eighth collaboration since 1990's Back to the Future Part III. He also teamed with Clint Eastwood for the first time in their careers, co-producing Eastwood's Flags of Our Fathers and Letters from Iwo Jima with Robert Lorenz and Eastwood himself. He earned his twelfth Academy Award nomination for the latter film as it was nominated for Best Picture. Spielberg served as executive producer for Disturbia and the Transformers live action film with Brian Goldner, an employee of Hasbro. The film was directed by Michael Bay and written by Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman, and Spielberg continued to collaborate on the sequels, Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen, Transformers: Dark of the Moon, Transformers: Age of Extinction, and Transformers: The Last Knight. In 2011, he produced the J. J. Abrams science fiction thriller film Super 8 for Paramount Pictures.[118]
Other major television series Spielberg produced were Band of Brothers, Taken and The Pacific. He was an executive producer on the critically acclaimed 2005 TV miniseries Into the West which won two Emmy awards, including one for Geoff Zanelli's score. For his 2010 miniseries The Pacific he teamed up once again with co-producer Tom Hanks, with Gary Goetzman also co-producing'. The miniseries is believed to have cost $250 million and is a 10-part war miniseries centered on the battles in the Pacific Theater during World War II. Writer Bruce McKenna, who penned several installments of (Band of Brothers), was the head writer.
In 2007, Steven Spielberg and Mark Burnett co-produced On the Lot a short-lived TV reality show about filmmaking. Despite this, he never gave up working on television. He currently serves as one of the executive producers on United States of Tara, a show created by Academy Award winner Diablo Cody which they developed together (Spielberg is uncredited as creator).
In 2011, Spielberg launched Falling Skies, a science fiction television series, on the TNT network. He developed the series with Robert Rodat and is credited as an executive producer. Spielberg is also producing the Fox TV series Terra Nova. Terra Nova begins in the year 2149 when all life on the planet Earth is threatened with extinction resulting in scientists opening a door that allows people to travel back 85 million years to prehistoric times.[119][120] Spielberg also produced The River,[121] Smash,[122] Under the Dome,[123] Extant,[124] The Whispers,[125] a TV adaptation of Minority Report,[126] and Bull.[127]
In 2008, Spielberg and DreamWorks acquired the rights to produce a live-action film adaptation of the original Ghost in the Shell manga. Avi Arad and Steven Paul were later confirmed as producers, Rupert Sanders directed, and Scarlett Johansson stars in the lead role.[128][129][130]
In March 2013, Spielberg announced that he was "developing a Stanley Kubrick screenplay for a miniseries, not for a motion picture, about the life of Napoleon."[131] In May 2016, it was announced that Cary Fukunaga is in talks to direct the miniseries for HBO, from a script by David Lenland based on extensive research materials accumulated by Kubrick over many years.[132]
Onscreen appearances
Spielberg had cameo roles in The Blues Brothers, Gremlins, Vanilla Sky, and Austin Powers in Goldmember, as well as small uncredited cameos in a handful of other films, such as a life-station worker in Jaws. He also made numerous cameo roles in the Warner Bros. cartoons he produced, such as Animaniacs, and even made reference to some of his films. Spielberg voiced himself in the film Paul, and in one episode of Tiny Toon Adventures titled Buster and Babs Go Hawaiian.
In 2017, Spielberg, along with fellow directors Francis Ford Coppola, Guillermo del Toro, Paul Greengrass and Lawrence Kasdan were featured in the Netflix documentary series Five Came Back, which discussed the contributions of film directors Frank Capra, John Ford, John Huston, George Stevens and William Wyler towards recording the events of World War II. Spielberg also served as an executive producer on the series.[133]
Involvement in video games
Apart from being an ardent gamer Spielberg has had a long history of involvement in video games.[134] He has been giving thanks to his games of his division DreamWorks Interactive most notable as Someone's in the Kitchen with script written by Animaniacs' Paul Rugg, Goosebumps: Escape from HorrorLand, The Neverhood (all in 1996), Skullmonkeys, Dilbert's Desktop Games, Goosebumps: Attack of the Mutant (all 1997), Boombots (1999), T'ai Fu: Wrath of the Tiger (1999), and Clive Barker's Undying (2001). In 2005 the director signed with Electronic Arts to collaborate on three games including an action game and an award-winning puzzle game for the Wii called Boom Blox (and its 2009 sequel: Boom Blox Bash Party).[135] Previously, he was involved in creating the scenario for the adventure game The Dig.[136] In 1996, Spielberg worked on and shot original footage for a movie-making simulation game called Steven Spielberg's Director's Chair. He is the creator of the Medal of Honor series by Electronic Arts.[137] He is credited in the special thanks section of the 1998 video game Trespasser.[138] In 2013, Spielberg has announced he is collaborating with 343 Industries for a live-action TV show of Halo.[139]
Themes






This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (April 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Spielberg's films often deal with several recurring themes. Most of his films deal with ordinary characters searching for or coming in contact with extraordinary beings or finding themselves in extraordinary circumstances. In an AFI interview in August 2000 Spielberg commented on his interest in the possibility of extraterrestrial life and how it has influenced some of his films. Spielberg described himself as feeling like an alien during childhood,[7] and his interest came from his father, a science fiction fan, and his opinion that aliens would not travel light years for conquest, but instead curiosity and sharing of knowledge.[140]
A strong consistent theme in his family-friendly work is a childlike sense of wonder and faith, as attested by works such as Close Encounters of the Third Kind, E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, Hook, A.I. Artificial Intelligence and The BFG. According to Warren Buckland,[141] these themes are portrayed through the use of low height camera tracking shots, which have become one of Spielberg's directing trademarks. In the cases when his films include children (E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, Empire of the Sun, Jurassic Park, etc.), this type of shot is more apparent, but it is also used in films like Munich, Saving Private Ryan, The Terminal, Minority Report, and Amistad. If one views each of his films, one will see this shot utilized by the director, notably the water scenes in Jaws are filmed from the low-angle perspective of someone swimming. Another child oriented theme in Spielberg's films is that of loss of innocence and coming-of-age. In Empire of the Sun, Jim, a well-groomed and spoiled English youth, loses his innocence as he suffers through World War II China. Similarly, in Catch Me If You Can, Frank naively and foolishly believes that he can reclaim his shattered family if he accumulates enough money to support them.
The most persistent theme throughout his films is tension in parent-child relationships. Parents (often fathers) are reluctant, absent or ignorant. Peter Banning in Hook starts off in the beginning of the film as a reluctant married-to-his-work parent who through the course of the film regains the respect of his children. The notable absence of Elliott's father in E.T., is the most famous example of this theme. In Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, it is revealed that Indy has always had a very strained relationship with his father, who is a professor of medieval literature, as his father always seemed more interested in his work, specifically in his studies of the Holy Grail, than in his own son, although his father does not seem to realize or understand the negative effect that his aloof nature had on Indy (he even believes he was a good father in the sense that he taught his son "self reliance," which is not how Indy saw it). Even Oskar Schindler, from Schindler's List, is reluctant to have a child with his wife. In The Color Purple, the main character, Celie, has been impregnated by her father multiple times. Munich depicts Avner as a man away from his wife and newborn daughter. There are of course exceptions; Brody in Jaws is a committed family man, while John Anderton in Minority Report is a shattered man after the disappearance of his son. This theme is arguably the most autobiographical aspect of Spielberg's films, since Spielberg himself was affected by his parents' divorce as a child and by the absence of his father. Furthermore, to this theme, protagonists in his films often come from families with divorced parents, most notably E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (protagonist Elliot's mother is divorced) and Catch Me If You Can (Frank Abagnale's mother and father split early on in the film). Little known also is Tim in Jurassic Park (early in the film, another secondary character mentions Tim and Lex's parents' divorce). The family often shown divided is often resolved in the ending as well. Following this theme of reluctant fathers and father figures, Tim looks to Dr. Alan Grant as a father figure. Initially, Dr. Grant is reluctant to return those paternal feelings to Tim. However, by the end of the film, he has changed, and the kids even fall asleep with their heads on his shoulders.
Most of his films are generally optimistic in nature. Though some critics accuse his films of being a little overly sentimental, Spielberg feels it is fine as long as it is disguised. He is still a highly praised director as well as being credited as one of the most influential directors of all time. The influence comes from directors Frank Capra and John Ford.[142]
Frequent collaborators
Actors
In terms of casting and production itself, Spielberg has a known penchant for working with actors and production members from his previous films. For instance, he has cast Richard Dreyfuss in several films: Jaws, Close Encounters of the Third Kind, and Always. Aside from his role as Indiana Jones, Spielberg also cast Harrison Ford as a headteacher in E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (though the scene was ultimately cut). Although Spielberg directed veteran voice actor Frank Welker only once (in Raiders of the Lost Ark, for which he voiced many of the animals), Welker has lent his voice in a number of productions Spielberg has executive produced from Gremlins to its sequel Gremlins 2: The New Batch, as well as The Land Before Time, Who Framed Roger Rabbit, and television shows such as Tiny Toons, Animaniacs, and SeaQuest DSV. Spielberg has used Tom Hanks on several occasions and has cast him in Saving Private Ryan, Catch Me If You Can, The Terminal, Bridge of Spies and the upcoming The Papers . Spielberg has collaborated with Tom Cruise twice on Minority Report and War of the Worlds, and cast Shia LaBeouf in five films: Transformers, Eagle Eye, Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen, and Transformers: Dark of the Moon. Spielberg cast Mark Rylance in Bridge of Spies and The BFG, as well as the upcoming Kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara and Ready Player One.
Other collaborations
Spielberg prefers working with production members with whom he has developed an existing working relationship. An example of this is his production relationship with Kathleen Kennedy who has served as producer on all his major films from E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial to the recent Lincoln. For cinematography, Allen Daviau, a childhood friend and cinematographer, shot the early Spielberg film Amblin and most of his films up to Empire of the Sun; Janusz Kamiński who has shot every Spielberg film since Schindler's List (see List of film director and cinematographer collaborations); and the film editor Michael Kahn who has edited every film directed by Spielberg from Close Encounters to Munich (except E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial). Most of the DVDs of Spielberg's films have documentaries by Laurent Bouzereau.
A famous example of Spielberg working with the same professionals is his long-time collaboration with John Williams and the use of his musical scores in all of his films since The Sugarland Express (except for Bridge of Spies, Ready Player One, The Color Purple, and Twilight Zone: The Movie). One of Spielberg's trademarks is his use of music by Williams to add to the visual impact of his scenes and to try and create a lasting picture and sound of the film in the memories of the film audience. These visual scenes often uses images of the sun (e.g. Empire of the Sun, Saving Private Ryan, the final scene of both Jurassic Park and War Horse, and the end credits of Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (where they ride into the sunset)), of which the last three feature a Williams score at that end scene. Spielberg is a contemporary of filmmakers George Lucas, Francis Ford Coppola, Martin Scorsese, John Milius, and Brian De Palma, collectively known as the "Movie Brats". Aside from his principal role as a director, Spielberg has acted as a producer for a considerable number of films, including early hits for Joe Dante and Robert Zemeckis. Spielberg has often never worked with the same screenwriter in his films, beside Tony Kushner and David Koepp, who have written a few of his films more than once.
Personal life
Marriages and children
Spielberg first met actress Amy Irving in 1976 at the suggestion of director Brian De Palma, who knew he was looking for an actress to play in Close Encounters. After meeting her, Spielberg told his co-producer Julia Phillips, "I met a real heartbreaker last night."[7]:293 Although she was too young for the role, she and Spielberg began dating and she eventually moved into what she described as his "bachelor funky" house.[7]:294 They lived together for four years, but the stresses of their professional careers took a toll on their relationship. Irving wanted to be certain that whatever success she attained as an actress would be her own: "I don't want to be known as Steven's girlfriend," she said, and chose not to be in any of his films during those years.[7]:295
As a result, they broke up in 1979, but remained close friends. Then in 1984 they renewed their romance, and in November 1985, they married, already having had a son, Max Samuel. After three and a half years of marriage, however, many of the same competing stresses of their careers caused them to divorce in 1989. They agreed to maintain homes near each other as to facilitate the shared custody and parenting of their son.[7]:403 Their divorce was recorded as the third most costly celebrity divorce in history.[143]
Spielberg subsequently developed a relationship with actress Kate Capshaw, whom he met when he cast her in Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom. They married on October 12, 1991. Capshaw is a convert to Judaism.[144] They currently move among their four homes in Pacific Palisades, California; Quelle Farm, Georgica Pond in East Hampton, New York;[145] New York City; and Naples, Florida.
There are seven children in the Spielberg-Capshaw family:

Jessica Capshaw (born August 9, 1976) – daughter from Kate Capshaw's previous marriage to Robert Capshaw
Max Samuel Spielberg (born June 13, 1985) – son from Spielberg's previous marriage to actress Amy Irving
Theo Spielberg (born August 21, 1988) – son adopted by Capshaw before her marriage to Spielberg, who later also adopted him[146]
Sasha Rebecca Spielberg (born May 14, 1990, Los Angeles)
Sawyer Avery Spielberg (born March 10, 1992, Los Angeles)
Mikaela George (born February 28, 1996) – adopted with Kate Capshaw
Destry Allyn Spielberg (born December 1, 1996)

Religion
Spielberg grew up in a Jewish household, including having a bar mitzvah ceremony in Phoenix when he turned 13. He grew away from Judaism after his family moved to various cities during his high school years, where they became the only Jews in the neighborhood.[147]:29 Before those years, his family was involved in the synagogue and had many Jewish friends and nearby relatives.
He remembers his grandparents telling him about their life in Russia, where they were subjected to religious persecution, causing them to eventually flee to the United States. He was made aware of the Holocaust by his parents, who he says “talked about it all the time, and so it was always on my mind.”[147]:30 His father had lost between sixteen and twenty relatives during the Holocaust.[7]:21
Spielberg "rediscovered the honor of being a Jew," he says, before he made Schindler's List, when he married Kate Capshaw.[147]:25 Until then, having become a filmmaker, he only felt his connection to Judaism when he visited his parents. He says he made the film partly to create “something that would confirm my Judaism to my family and myself.”[148]


“
Kate is Protestant and she insisted on converting to Judaism. She spent a year studying, did the "mikveh," the whole thing. She chose to do a full conversion before we were married in 1991, and she married me after becoming a Jew. I think that, more than anything else, brought me back to Judaism.[147]:25
”


He credits her with fueling his family's current level of observance and for keeping the "momentum flowing" in their lives, as they now observe Jewish holidays, light candles on Friday nights, and give their children Bar and Bat Mitzvahs.[147]:26 "This shiksa goddess has made me a better Jew than my own parents."[147]:27
Producing Schindler's List in 1993 also renewed his faith, Spielberg says, but "it really was the fact that my wife took a profound interest in Judaism."[147]:25 He waited ten years after being given the story in 1982 to make the film, as he did not yet feel "mature" enough.[147]:32 He first wanted to have a family, "to figure out what my place was in the world... . When my first son, [Max] was born, it greatly affected me... . A spirit began to ignite in me, and I became a Jewish dad..."[7]:21
He said that making the film became a “natural experience” for him, adding, "I had to tell the story. I've lived on its outer edges."[7] The film, writes biographer Joseph McBride, thereby became the "culmination" of Spielberg's long personal struggle with his Jewish identity.[149]:18 Some claim the film has made Spielberg "the one true heir to the great Jewish moguls who created Hollywood," most of whom had actively avoided depicting Jews or the Holocaust in their films.[148]
Wealth
Forbes magazine places Spielberg's personal net worth at $3.7 billion.[1]
Yachting
In 2013, Spielberg purchased the 282-foot (86 m) mega-yacht Seven Seas for US$182 million. He has since put it up for sale and in the meantime has made it available for charter. At US$1.2 million per month, it is one of the most expensive charters on the market. He has ordered a new 300-foot (91 m) yacht costing a reported US$250 million.[150]
Recognition
In 2002, Spielberg was one of eight flagbearers who carried the Olympic Flag into Rice-Eccles Stadium at the Opening Ceremonies of the 2002 Winter Olympic Games in Salt Lake City. In 2006, Premiere listed him as the most powerful and influential figure in the motion picture industry. Time listed him as one of the 100 Most Important People of the Century. At the end of the 20th century, Life named him the most influential person of his generation.[151] In 2009, Boston University presented him an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree.[152]
According to Forbes' Most Influential Celebrities 2014 list, Spielberg was listed as the most influential celebrity in America. The annual list is conducted by E-Poll Market Research and it gave more than 6,600 celebrities on 46 different personality attributes a score representing "how that person is perceived as influencing the public, their peers, or both." Spielberg received a score of 47, meaning 47% of the US believes he is influential. Gerry Philpott, president of E-Poll Market Research, supported Spielberg's score by stating, "If anyone doubts that Steven Spielberg has greatly influenced the public, think about how many will think for a second before going into the water this summer."[153][154][155]
Politics
Spielberg usually supports U.S. Democratic Party candidates. He has donated over $800,000 to the Democratic party and its nominees. He has been a close friend of former President Bill Clinton and worked with the President for the USA Millennium celebrations. He directed an 18-minute film for the project, scored by John Williams and entitled The American Journey. It was shown at America's Millennium Gala on December 31, 1999, in the National Mall at the Reflecting Pool at the base of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.[156]




Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen escorts Spielberg through a military honor cordon into the Pentagon.


Spielberg resigned as a member of the national advisory board of the Boy Scouts of America in 2001 because of his disapproval of the organization's anti-homosexuality stance.[157][158] In 2007 the Arab League voted to boycott Spielberg's movies after he donated $1 million for relief efforts in Israel during the 2006 Lebanon War.[159][160] On February 20, 2007, Spielberg, Jeffrey Katzenberg, and David Geffen invited Democrats to a fundraiser for Barack Obama.[161] In February 2008, Spielberg pulled out of his role as advisor to the 2008 Summer Olympics in response to the Chinese government's inaction over the War in Darfur.[162] Spielberg said in a statement that "I find that my conscience will not allow me to continue business as usual." It also said that "Sudan's government bears the bulk of the responsibility for these on-going crimes, but the international community, and particularly China, should be doing more.."[163] The International Olympic Committee respected Spielberg's decision, but IOC president Jacques Rogge admitted in an interview that "[Spielberg] certainly would have brought a lot to the opening ceremony in terms of creativity."[164] Spielberg's statement drew criticism from Chinese officials and state-run media calling his criticism "unfair".[165] In September 2008, Spielberg and his wife offered their support to same-sex marriage, by issuing a statement following their donation of $100,000 to the "No on Proposition 8" campaign fund, a figure equal to the amount of money Brad Pitt donated to the same campaign less than a week prior.[166]
Spielberg supported Hillary Clinton for President of the United States in the 2016 election. He donated US$1 million to Priorities USA, a pro-Clinton Super PAC.[167]
Hobbies
A collector of film memorabilia, Spielberg purchased a balsa Rosebud sled from Citizen Kane (1941) in 1982.[168] He bought Orson Welles's own directorial copy of the script for the radio broadcast The War of the Worlds (1938) in 1994.[169] Spielberg has purchased Academy Award statuettes being sold on the open market and donated them to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, to prevent their further commercial exploitation. His donations include the Oscars that Bette Davis received for Dangerous (1935) and Jezebel (1938), and Clark Gable's Oscar for It Happened One Night (1934).[170]
Spielberg is a major collector of the work of American illustrator and painter Norman Rockwell. A collection of 57 Rockwell paintings and drawings owned by Spielberg and fellow Rockwell collector and film director George Lucas were displayed at the Smithsonian American Art Museum July 2, 2010 – January 2, 2011, in an exhibition titled Telling Stories.[171]
Spielberg is an avid film buff, and, when not shooting a picture, he will watch many films in a single weekend.[172] He sees almost every major summer blockbuster in theaters if not preoccupied and enjoys most of them.[173]
Since playing Pong while filming Jaws in 1974, Spielberg has been an avid video gamer. Spielberg played many of LucasArts adventure games, including the first Monkey Island games.[174][175] He owns a Wii, a PlayStation 3, a PSP and Xbox 360, and enjoys playing first-person shooters such as the Medal of Honor series and Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare. He has also criticized the use of cutscenes in games, calling them intrusive, and feels making story flow naturally into the gameplay is a challenge for future game developers.[176]
Stalking
In 2001, Spielberg was stalked by conspiracy theorist and former social worker Diana Napolis. She accused him, along with actress Jennifer Love Hewitt, of controlling her thoughts through "cybertronic" technology and being part of a satanic conspiracy against her. Napolis was committed to a mental institution before pleading guilty to stalking, and released on probation with a condition that she have no contact with either Spielberg or Hewitt.[177][178][179]
Jonathan Norman was arrested after making two attempts to enter Spielberg's Pacific Palisades home in June and July 1997. Norman was jailed for 25 years in California. Spielberg told the court: "Had Jonathan Norman actually confronted me, I genuinely, in my heart of hearts, believe that I would have been raped or maimed or killed."[180][181]
Awards and honors
See also: List of awards and nominations received by Steven Spielberg




Spielberg receiving a public service award presented by United States Secretary of Defense William Cohen, 1999






Steven Spielberg's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame






Footprints and handprints of Steven Spielberg in front of the Grauman's Chinese Theatre






Former President Clinton with Spielberg as he accepts the 2009 Liberty Award in Philadelphia


Spielberg has won three Academy Awards. He has been nominated for seven Academy Awards for the category of Best Director, winning two of them (Schindler's List and Saving Private Ryan), and ten of the films he directed were up for the Best Picture Oscar (Schindler's List won). In 1987, he was awarded the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award for his work as a creative producer.
Drawing from his own experiences in Scouting, Spielberg helped the Boy Scouts of America develop a merit badge in cinematography in order to help promote filmmaking as a marketable skill. The badge was launched at the 1989 National Scout Jamboree, which Spielberg attended, and where he personally counseled many boys in their work on requirements.[182] That same year, 1989, saw the release of Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade. The opening scene shows a teenage Indiana Jones in scout uniform bearing the rank of a Life Scout. Spielberg stated he made Indiana Jones a Boy Scout in honor of his experience in Scouting. For his career accomplishments, service to others, and dedication to a new merit badge Spielberg was awarded the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award.[183]
Steven Spielberg received the AFI Life Achievement Award in 1995.
In 1998, he was awarded the Federal Cross of Merit with Ribbon of the Federal Republic of Germany. The Award was presented to him by President Roman Herzog in recognition of his film Schindler's List and his Shoa-Foundation.[184]
In 1999, Spielberg received an honorary degree from Brown University. Spielberg was also awarded the Department of Defense Medal for Distinguished Public Service by Secretary of Defense William Cohen at the Pentagon on August 11, 1999; Cohen presented the award in recognition of Spielberg's film Saving Private Ryan.
In 2001, he was appointed as an honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE) by Queen Elizabeth II for services to the entertainment industry of the United Kingdom.[185]
In 2004, he was admitted as knight of the Légion d'honneur by president Jacques Chirac.[186] On July 15, 2006, Spielberg was also awarded the Gold Hugo Lifetime Achievement Award at the Summer Gala of the Chicago International Film Festival,[187] and also was awarded a Kennedy Center honour on December 3. The tribute to Spielberg featured a short, filmed biography narrated by Tom Hanks and included thank-yous from World War II veterans for Saving Private Ryan, as well as a performance of the finale to Leonard Bernstein's Candide, conducted by John Williams (Spielberg's frequent composer).[citation needed]
The Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted Spielberg in 2005, the first year it considered non-literary contributors.[188][189] In November 2007, he was chosen for a Lifetime Achievement Award to be presented at the sixth annual Visual Effects Society Awards in February 2009. He was set to be honored with the Cecil B. DeMille Award at the January 2008 Golden Globes; however, due to the new, watered-down format of the ceremony resulting from conflicts in the 2007–08 writers strike, the HFPA postponed his honor to the 2009 ceremony.[190][191] In 2008, Spielberg was awarded the Légion d'honneur.[192]
In June 2008, Spielberg received Arizona State University's Hugh Downs Award for Communication Excellence.[193]
Spielberg received an honorary degree at Boston University's 136th Annual Commencement on May 17, 2009. In October 2009 Steven Spielberg received the Philadelphia Liberty Medal; presenting him with the medal was former US president and Liberty Medal recipient Bill Clinton. Special guests included Whoopi Goldberg, Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell and Philadelphia Mayor Michael Nutter.
On October 22, 2011 he was admitted as a Commander of the Belgian Order of the Crown. He was given the badge on a red neck ribbon by the Belgian Federal Minister of Finance Didier Reynders. The Commander is the third highest rank of the Order of the Crown. He was the president of the jury for the 2013 Cannes Film Festival.[194]
On November 19, 2013, Spielberg was honored by the National Archives and Records Administration with its Records of Achievement Award. Spielberg was given two facsimiles of the 13th Amendment to the United States Constitution, one passed but not ratified in 1861, as well as a facsimile of the actual 1865 amendment signed into law by President Abraham Lincoln. The amendment and the process of passing it were the subject of his film Lincoln.[195]
In November 24, 2015, Spielberg was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama in a ceremony at the White House.[196]
On May 26, 2016, Spielberg was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Arts by Harvard University.
In July 2016, Spielberg was awarded a gold Blue Peter badge on the BBC children's television programme Blue Peter.[197]
Filmography
Main article: Steven Spielberg filmography
Praise and criticism

In 2005, Steven Spielberg was rated the greatest film director of all time by Empire magazine.[198] In 1997, a Wall Street sell-side analyst said, "There are only two brand names in the business: Disney and Spielberg".[199]
After watching the unconventional, off-center camera techniques of Jaws, Alfred Hitchcock praised "young Spielberg," for thinking outside of the visual dynamics of the theater, saying "He's the first one of us who doesn't see the proscenium arch".[7][200]
Some of Spielberg's most notable admirers include Robert Aldrich,[201] Ingmar Bergman,[202] Werner Herzog,[203] Stanley Kubrick,[204] David Lean,[205] Sidney Lumet,[206] Roman Polanski,[207] Martin Scorsese,[208] François Truffaut,[209] David Lynch[210] and Zhang Yimou.[211]
Spielberg's movies have also influenced many directors that followed, including Adam Green, J. J. Abrams,[212] Paul Thomas Anderson,[213] Neill Blomkamp,[214] James Cameron,[215] Guillermo del Toro,[216] Roland Emmerich,[217] David Fincher, Peter Jackson,[218] Kal Ng,[219] Robert Rodriguez,[220] John Sayles,[221] Ridley Scott,[222] John Singleton,[223] Kevin Smith,[224] Steven Soderbergh, Quentin Tarantino,[225] and Gareth Edwards.[226] In 2016, Jeffrey Katzenberg said of Spielberg: "You can take James Cameron, Chris Nolan or Martin Scorsese - all brilliant and in many ways his peers, but look at quality and consistency, and no one compares."[227]
British film critic Tom Shone has said of Spielberg, "If you have to point to any one director of the last twenty-five years in whose work the medium of film was most fully itself – where we found out what it does best when left to its own devices, it has to be that guy."[228] Jess Cagle, the managing editor of Entertainment Weekly, called Spielberg "...arguably (well, who would argue?) the greatest filmmaker in history."[229]
Spielberg's critics complain that his films are overly sentimental and tritely moralistic.[230][231][232] In his book Easy Riders, Raging Bulls: How the Sex 'n' Drugs 'n' Rock 'n' Roll Generation Saved Hollywood, Peter Biskind summarized the views of Spielberg's detractors, accusing the director of "infantilizing the audience, reconstituting the spectator as child, then overwhelming him and her with sound and spectacle, obliterating irony, aesthetic self-consciousness, and critical reflection."[233]
Critics of mainstream film such as Ray Carney and American artist and actor Crispin Glover (who starred in the Spielberg-produced Back to the Future and who sued Spielberg for using his likeness in Back to the Future Part II)[234] claim that Spielberg's films lack depth and do not take risks.[235][236]
French New Wave filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard stated that he holds Spielberg partly responsible for the lack of artistic merit in mainstream cinema and accused Spielberg of using his film Schindler's List to make a profit off tragedy while Schindler's wife, Emilie Schindler, lived in poverty in Argentina.[237] In defense of Spielberg, critic Roger Ebert said "Has Godard or any other director living or dead done more than Spielberg, with his Holocaust Project, to honor and preserve the memories of the survivors?"[238] Author Thomas Keneally has also disputed claims that Emilie Schindler was never paid for her contributions to the film, "not least because I had recently sent Emilie a check myself."[239]
Film critic Pauline Kael, who had championed Spielberg's films in the 1970s, expressed disappointment in his later development, stating that "he's become, I think, a very bad director.... And I'm a little ashamed for him, because I loved his early work.... [H]e turned to virtuous movies. And he's become so uninteresting now.... I think that he had it in him to become more of a fluid, far-out director. But, instead, he's become a melodramatist."[240]
Imre Kertész, Hungarian Jewish author, Nazi concentration camp survivor, and winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature, criticized Spielberg's depiction of the Holocaust in Schindler's List as kitsch, saying "I regard as kitsch any representation of the Holocaust that is incapable of understanding or unwilling to understand the organic connection between our own deformed mode of life and the very possibility of the Holocaust."[241] Veteran documentary filmmaker and professor Claude Lanzmann also labeled Schindler's List "pernicious in its impact and influence" and "very sentimental".[242]
Stephen Rowley wrote an extensive essay about Spielberg and his career in Senses of Cinema. In it, he discussed Spielberg's strengths as a filmmaker, saying "there is a welcome complexity of tone and approach in these later films that defies the lazy stereotypes often bandied about his films" and that "Spielberg continues to take risks, with his body of work continuing to grow more impressive and ambitious", concluding that he has only received "limited, begrudging recognition" from critics.[232]
Shia LaBeouf, who worked with Spielberg on a number of films including Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull and various DreamWorks productions (notably the Transformers film series), described his experiences working with the director in a wide-ranging interview with Variety in 2016. He stated, "I grew up with this idea, [that] if you got to Spielberg, that’s where it is – I’m not talking about fame, and I’m not talking about money. You get there, and you realize you’re not meeting the Spielberg you dream of. You’re meeting a different Spielberg, who is in a different stage in his career. He’s less a director than he is a fucking company." He went on to discuss his on-set actor/director relationship with Spielberg, as well as the films they made together, "Spielberg’s sets are very different – everything has been so meticulously planned. You got to get this line out in 37 seconds. You do that for five years, you start to feel like not knowing what you’re doing for a living." He concluded his point by stating: "I don’t like the movies that I made with Spielberg. The only movie that I liked that we made together was [the first] Transformers [film]." Later in the interview, LaBeouf recited and criticised the advice given to him by Spielberg following the mixed reaction to both Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, and LaBeouf's performance in the film. He claims Spielberg told him not to read about himself in the media, but LaBeouf felt irritated by what he perceived to be non-advice and a lack of understanding, saying "There’s no way to not do that. For me to not read that means I need to not take part in society. The generation previous to mine didn’t have the immediate response [of the internet]. If you were Mark Hamill [in Star Wars], you could lie to yourself. You could find the pockets of joy, and turn a blind eye to the shit over there."[243]

Other

In 1999, Spielberg, then a co-owner of DreamWorks, was involved in a heated debate in which the studio proposed building on wetlands near Los Angeles, though development was later dropped for economic reasons.[244]
In August 2007, Ai Weiwei, artistic consultant for the Beijing Olympic Stadium, known as the "Bird's Nest", accused those choreographing the Olympic opening ceremony, including Spielberg, of failing to live up to their responsibility as artists by allowing their work to be used by the Chinese government, which has suppressed human rights in China, including those of Ai's family, for the purpose of "propaganda". Ai said, "It's disgusting. I don't like anyone who shamelessly abuses their profession, who makes no moral judgment."[245]

See also


Film in the United States portal
Biography portal
Speculative fiction portal


References


^ a b c "Steven Spielberg". Forbes. Retrieved December 9, 2016.
^ The cinema of Steven Spielberg: Empire of light. Nigel Morris. Wallflower Press. 2007
^ "Steven Spielberg to Harvard grads: Be the movie heroes of real life". The Economic Times. 
^ Directors with two or more Oscars
^ Higgins, Bill (April 7, 2012). "'Jaws': Revisiting Hollywood's First Summer Blockbuster". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 10, 2016. 
^ Steven Spielberg: A Biography. Da Capo Press. 1999. ISBN 978-0-306-80900-2. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m McBride, Joseph (1997). Steven Spielberg. Faber and Faber. ISBN 0-571-19177-0. 
^ American Film Institute. "AFI Life Achievement Award". Afi.com. Retrieved October 20, 2013. 
^ "Fred A. Bernstein". Fredbernstein.com. Archived from the original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved May 25, 2012. 
^ "Steven Spielberg Biography (1947?–)". filmreference.com. Retrieved January 15, 2008. 
^ Illingworth, Shaun (May 12, 2006). "Interview:Spielberg, Arnold". Rutgers University. Retrieved October 25, 2015. 
^ Tugend, Tom (June 13, 2012). "A close encounter with Steven Spielberg's dad". The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles. Retrieved October 25, 2015. 
^ a b c d Fischer, Dennis. Science Fiction Film Directors, 1895-1998, McFarland & Co. (2000)
^ Steven Spielberg: A Biography. Da Capo Press. 1999. ISBN 978-0-306-80900-2. 
^ "Steven Spielberg: 'We Can't Just Sit Back and Hope'". Parade Magazine. March 27, 1994. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. 
^ Weinraub, Bernard (December 12, 1993). "Steven Spielberg Faces the Holocaust". The New York Times. 
^ Sanello, Frank (2002). Spielberg: The Man, the Movies, the Mythology. Taylor Trade Publications. p. 14. Retrieved April 21, 2015. 
^ Jackson, Kathi (2007). Steven Spielberg: A Biography. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 5. Retrieved April 21, 2015. 
^ "Steven Spielberg Sighted in Arizona". Retrieved November 19, 2007. 
^ "Nickelodeon Magazine Interviews Steven Spielberg". Nickelodeon Magazine. Retrieved July 29, 2008. 
^ From Inside the Actor's Studio with James Lipton interviewing Steven Spielberg.
^ Weisman, Aly (October 22, 2012). "Meet Steven Spielberg's Parents In This Revealing '60 Minutes' Profile". Business Insider. Retrieved 29 September 2016. 
^ "Notable Theta Chis" Archived April 18, 2015, at the Wayback Machine., Theta Chi Fraternity alumni
^ "Board of Trustees - About USC". usc.edu. Archived from the original on July 26, 2011. 
^ "CSU Newsline – Steven Spielberg To Graduate from California State University, Long Beach With Bachelor's Degree in Film and Electronic Arts". Calstate.edu. May 14, 2002. Archived from the original on March 9, 2010. Retrieved March 2, 2010. 
^ Stephanie Chavez (May 31, 2002). "Spielberg to Add B.A. to His Resume". Los Angeles Times. 
^ Mark Bulik (June 26, 2014). "1969: Spielberg and Snow White". The New York Times. 
^ Hiscock, John (June 30, 2002). "Spielberg: why I went back to college". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ "Night Gallery". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved July 21, 2014. 
^ a b Chandler, Charlotte. Not the Girl Next Door: Joan Crawford, a Personal Biography, Hal Leonard Corp. (2008) p. 261
^ Baxter, John (1997). Steven Spielberg: The Unauthorised Biography. London: Harper Collins. p. 145. ISBN 0-00-638444-7. 
^ "1941, Box Office Information." The Numbers, September 27, 2012.
^ "Blade Runner". Archived from the original on August 20, 2011. 
^ Wise, Damon (2010-10-21). "ET: The Extra-Terrestrial: No 7 best sci-fi and fantasy film of all time". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2017-10-18. 
^ Heitmueller, Karl (April 3, 2007). "Rewind: Major-Studio flicks that belong in the Grind House". MTV. Retrieved January 2, 2009. Ultimate A-lister Steven Spielberg co-produced this big-budget adaptation of Rod Serling's classic '60s TV show.... 
^ Corliss, Richard (January 7, 1985). "This way to the children's crusade". Time. Retrieved January 2, 2009. he wrote the story and served as an executive producer of The Goonies.... 
^ Cyndi Lauper – The Goonies 'R' Good Enough on YouTube
^ "Steven Spielberg Biography". Biography.com. December 18, 1947. Archived from the original on May 14, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "Andrew Sarris' Top 10 lists 1958–2005". Retrieved October 21, 2006. 
^ The screenplay, adapted from Thomas Keneally's novel, was originally in the hands of fellow director Martin Scorsese, but Spielberg negotiated with Scorsese to trade scripts. (At the time, Spielberg held the script for a remake of Cape Fear.)
^ Army Archered (June 17, 1993). "Spielberg to take break after completing 'List'". Variety. Retrieved February 11, 2007. 
^ (formed with former Disney animation exec Jeffrey Katzenberg and media mogul David Geffen, providing the other letters in the company name)
^ Masters, Kim (June 15, 2016). "Steven Spielberg on DreamWorks' Past, Amblin's Present and His Own Future". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 11, 2016. 
^ Rotten Tomatoes. "Minority Report". Retrieved March 11, 2007. 
^ Ebert, Roger (June 21, 2002). "Minority Report". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved October 21, 2006. 
^ "Box office collection of Catch Me If You Can". Retrieved November 19, 2012. 
^ "Reviews of Catch Me If You Can". Retrieved November 19, 2012. 
^ Yossi Melman and Steven Hartov (January 17, 2006). "Munich: Fact and Fantasy". The Guardian Unlimited. Retrieved October 21, 2006. 
^ Michael Fleming (June 14, 2006). "Space chase pic on Par launch pad". Variety. Retrieved October 29, 2006. 
^ a b Jay A. Fernandez (March 28, 2007). "Jonah Nolan turns science into a film script". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved March 28, 2007. 
^ Michael Fleming (March 22, 2007). "Nolan to write Spielberg film". Variety. Retrieved March 23, 2007. 
^ Leigh Dayton (July 14, 2007). "Warped in La La Land". The Australian. Retrieved July 20, 2007. 
^ Child, Ben (January 10, 2013). "Christopher Nolan's next film mission to go Interstellar". The Guardian. 
^ "New Indy Adventure Begins Shooting". IndianaJones.com. June 18, 2007. Archived from the original on June 21, 2007. Retrieved June 18, 2007. 
^ "Spielberg, Ford and Lucas on Indy IV". Empire. August 21, 2006. Retrieved October 21, 2006. 
^ "Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008)". Retrieved April 12, 2012. 
^ "The Man Behind Boy, Dog and Their Adventures" Book review by Charles McGrath, The New York Times, December 22, 2009 (December 23, 2009, p. C1 NY ed.). Book reviewed: Hergé: The Man Who Created Tintin, by Pierre Assouline; translated by Charles Ruas, 276 pages. Oxford University Press. Retrieved December 24, 2009.
^ "Tintin Has World Premiere in His Hometown". NPR. Associated Press. October 22, 2011. Retrieved October 22, 2011. 
^ "The Adventures of Tintin Official Movie Site". Paramount Pictures. Archived from the original on October 13, 2011. Retrieved October 13, 2011. 
^ "The Adventures of Tintin (Rotten Tomatoes)". Retrieved April 12, 2012. 
^ "The Adventures of Tintin (Box office)". Retrieved April 12, 2012. 
^ "2012 GOLDEN GLOBES Nominees and Winners – Complete List!". Retrieved April 15, 2012. 
^ "Tintin Takes Golden Globe". Retrieved April 12, 2012. 
^ "The Adventures of Tintin (Trivia)". Retrieved April 12, 2012. 
^ Wigler, Josh (October 26, 2011). "Jackson To Direct 'Tintin' Sequel". MTV. Archived from the original on October 28, 2011. Retrieved October 26, 2011. 
^ "Steven Spielberg starts filming War Horse on Dartmoor" Archived April 25, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. by Tristan Nichols, The Herald August 3, 2010
^ "War Horse (Rotten Tomatoes)". Retrieved April 12, 2012. 
^ "Nominees and Winners for the 84th Academy Awards". oscars.org. Retrieved April 12, 2012. 
^ Breznican, Anthony (April 13, 2011). "Steven Spielberg's 'Lincoln' gets its Mary Todd: Sally Field". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 28, 2011. 
^ Garbarek, Ben (May 9, 2011). "First casting calls for Steven Spielberg movie". WWBT (Richmond). Retrieved July 20, 2011. 
^ "This Week in the Civil War". This Week in the Civil War. Archived from the original on April 11, 2014. 
^ Fischer, Russ (November 19, 2010). "Daniel Day-Lewis to Star in Steven Spielberg's 'Lincoln'". /Film. 
^ "Lincoln". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved November 15, 2012. 
^ "Nominees for the 85th Academy Awards". oscars.org. Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "Steven Spielberg, Bradley Cooper to team for 'American Sniper'". LA Times. Retrieved May 3, 2013. 
^ Kroll, Justin (August 5, 2013). "Steven Spielberg, DreamWorks Part Ways With 'American Sniper'". Variety. 
^ a b Bahr, Lindsey (June 16, 2014). "Steven Spielberg's Cold War thriller and 'The BFG' snag release dates". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 16, 2014. 
^ McNary, Dave (June 16, 2014). "Tom Hanks-Steven Spielberg Cold War Thriller Set for Oct. 16, 2015". Variety. Retrieved June 6, 2014. 
^ "Amy Ryan, Alan Alda Join Tom Hanks in Steven Spielberg's Cold War Thriller". variety.com. July 21, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2014. 
^ Andrew Pulver. "Steven Spielberg to tackle The BFG movie". the Guardian. 
^ Jaafar, Nancy Tartaglione,Ali (April 14, 2016). "Cannes Film Festival 2016 Lineup: 'The BFG', 'Nice Guys', Penn, Refn, Almodóvar & More Confirmed; No Closing-Night Pic". Deadline.com. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ "Programme". Festival de Cannes. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ "New BFFs Spielberg, Rylance team up for 'The BFG' and big things beyond". Retrieved 2016-07-04. 
^ Kevin Jagernauth (February 25, 2016). "Tye Sheridan Lands Lead In Steven Spielberg's 'Ready Play - The Playlist". The Playlist. Retrieved March 10, 2016. 
^ Oliver Lyttelton (September 11, 2015). "'Me, Earl & The Dying Girl' & 'Bates Motel' Star Olivia C - The Playlist". The Playlist. 
^ McNary, Dave (2016-04-13). "Mark Rylance Joins Steven Spielberg's 'Ready Player One'". Retrieved 2016-07-04. 
^ Mike Fleming Jr. "Steven Spielberg's 'Ready Player One' Release Date December 2017 - Deadline". Deadline. 
^ Anita Busch. "Steven Spielberg To Direct Sci-Fi Cult Favorite 'Ready Player One'; Back At Warner Bros". Deadline Hollywood. 
^ Lang, Brent (February 9, 2016). "Steven Spielberg's 'Ready Player One' Pushed Back to Avoid 'Star Wars: Episode VIII'". Variety. Retrieved February 9, 2016. 
^ Fleming, Jr., Mike (March 10, 2017). "Spielberg, Hanks & Streep's Pentagon Papers Pic A Contender In Next Oscar Race". Deadline.com. Retrieved March 30, 2017. 
^ "Production Underway on Spielberg's THE PAPERS, Starring Meryl Streep & Tom Hanks". Broadwayworld.com. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ "Steven Spielberg, Bryan Singer's Queen Film Land Awards Season Releases". Ew.com. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ Kroll, Justin (2016-03-18). "'Indiana Jones 5' Taps Writer David Koepp, a Steven Spielberg Regular". Retrieved 2016-07-04. 
^ D'Alessandro, Anthony (2016-03-15). "Steven Spielberg & Harrison Ford Team Up For 'Indiana Jones 5'; Disney Sets July 2019 Release". Retrieved 2016-07-04. 
^ "Star Wars: Episode IX and Next Indiana Jones Get Release Dates". Starwars.com. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ Jr, Mike Fleming (2016-04-11). "Steven Spielberg Sets 'The Kidnapping Of Edgardo Mortara' Next; Tony Kushner Script, Mark Rylance Is Pope Pius IX". Retrieved 2016-07-04. 
^ Kroll, Justin (2014-04-18). "Steven Spielberg Boards Religious Drama 'Edgardo Mortara' (Exclusive)". Retrieved 2016-07-04. 
^ "Oscar Isaac Starring in Nazi Hunt Thriller Operation Finale". Screenrant.com. March 29, 2017. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ Mike Fleming Jr. "'West Side Story' Remake For Steven Spielberg In Works At Fox - Deadline". Deadline. 
^ Teeman, Tim (July 19, 2017). "Tony Kushner: Why I'm Writing a Play About Donald Trump". Thedailybeast.com. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ Sexenio.com.mx. "Steven Spielberg grabará cinta sobre Moctezuma y Hernán Cortés | 1Fila". Retrieved 2016-07-04. 
^ "Steven Spielberg May Direct Montezuma-Cortes Film Starring Javier Bardem". 2014-01-06. Retrieved 2016-07-04. 
^ "Steven Spielberg to Direct Jennifer Lawrence in War Memoir Adaptation IT'S WHAT I DO". 
^ "Steven Spielberg Commits To Next Direct 'Robopocalypse'". Retrieved June 8, 2011. 
^ "Steven Spielberg Says 'Robopocalypse' Will Be Set 15–20 Years in the Future, Center on Man Vs. Machine War | The Playlist". Blogs.indiewire.com. Retrieved May 25, 2012. 
^ "DreamWorks, Fox To Co-Finance Steven Spielberg's 'Robopocalypse'". Retrieved September 7, 2011. 
^ "'X-Men: First Class' & 'Rise Of The Planet Of The Apes' Sequels Set For Summer 2014; 'Independence Day 3D' Hits July 3, 2013". Retrieved May 31, 2012. 
^ Oliver Lyttelton (January 10, 2013). "Steven Spielberg Indefinitely Postpones 'Robopocalypse' W - The Playlist". The Playlist. 
^ Kim Masters. "Steven Spielberg's 'Robopocalypse' Postponed Indefinitely - Hollywood Reporter". The Hollywood Reporter. 
^ "The New Halo Game Is a Hit – So What's the Status of the Halo Movie?". 
^ "SDCC: Spielberg Interested in A Steady Rain Movie". ComingSoon. Retrieved July 21, 2011. 
^ Spielberg to make pirates movie – Yahoo! Movies UK & Ireland "Archived copy". Archived from the original on September 17, 2009. Retrieved August 28, 2009. 
^ Michael Fleming (June 24, 2008). "Steven Spielberg follows '39 Clues'". Variety. Retrieved September 3, 2008. 
^ "Steven Spielberg to direct Martin Luther King film" Daily Telegraph, May 19, 2009. Footnote format December 24, 2009.
^ -sue-over-planned-biographical-film/ "King's Children May Sue Over Planned Biographical Film" by Dave Itzkoff, The New York Times ArtsBeat blog, May 20, 2009. Retrieved December 24, 2009.
^ "If Only It Were True by Marc Levy – Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved May 25, 2012. 
^ Jeff Jensen (July 19, 2002). "Killer Instinct". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 6, 2007. 
^ "NEW 'Super 8' Teaser Details, Spielberg/Abrams Collaboration Confirmed!". Bloody-disgusting.com. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ Schneider, Michael (December 11, 2006). "Spielberg takes development role in Fox TV projects". Variety. Retrieved December 11, 2006. 
^ James Hibberd (March 11, 2011). "Fox pushes back 'Terra Nova' to fall". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 23, 2011. 
^ "ABC's 'The River' offers scary mystery". USA Today. July 22, 2011. Retrieved July 22, 2011. 
^ "'Smash': It has Steven Spielberg, Katharine McPhee, Marilyn Monroe". Archived from the original on May 20, 2011. Retrieved May 15, 2011. 
^ "Stephen King, Steven Spielberg Go 'Under the Dome'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ Brian Lowry. "Steven Spielberg's 'Extant' Only One of Many Alien TV Shows - Variety". Variety. 
^ Brian Lowry. "'The Whispers' Review Steven Spielberg Series ABC - Variety". Variety. 
^ Whitney Friedlander. "'Minority Report': Producers on Show Based on Tom Cruise Movie - Variety". Variety. 
^ Andreeva, Nellie (March 20, 2017). "Glenn Gordon Caron Tapped As New 'Bull' Showrunner Under CBS TV Studios Deal". Deadline.com. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ Siegel, Tatiana; Fleming, Michael (April 14, 2008). "DreamWorks to make 'Ghost' in 3-D". Variety.com. Retrieved November 9, 2011. 
^ Kroll, Justin (January 5, 2015). "Scarlett Johansson Signs on to Star in DreamWorks' 'Ghost in the Shell' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved January 5, 2015. 
^ Bishop, Bryan. "Live-action 'Ghost in the Shell' movie signs the director of 'Snow White and the Huntsman'". The Verge. Retrieved 2014-03-03. 
^ "Steven Spielberg developing Stanley Kubrick". The Hollywood Reporter. 
^ "Cary Fukunaga in Talks to Direct HBO Stanley Kubrick Mini 'Napoleon,' From Steven Spielberg". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ Busch, Anita (February 28, 2017). "'Netflix's 'Five Came Back' With Spielberg, Coppola, Del Toro, Greengrass & Kasdan Drops Trailer – Watch". Deadline.com. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ Waters, Darren (February 23, 2008). "Making games with Steven Spielberg". BBC News. Retrieved January 6, 2010. 
^ "Spielberg's Boom Blox Revealed". Kotaku.com. February 6, 2008. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "The Dig: in the deep of space, a curse is alive.." Adventure Classic Gaming. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "Medal of Honor: Allied Assault (2002) Windows credits". MobyGames. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "Trespasser – Credits". allgame. Retrieved March 2, 2010. 
^ Watercutter, Angela (March 28, 2013). "Steven Spielberg Working on Live-Action Halo Series for Xbox | Underwire". Wired.com. Retrieved June 18, 2013. 
^ E.T. DVD Production Notes Booklet. Universal. 2002. 
^ Directed by Steven Spielberg: Poetics of the Contemporary Hollywood Blockbuster
^ The Culture Show (TV). BBC. November 4, 2006. 
^ "'Most costly' celebrity divorces". BBC News. April 13, 2007. 
^ Pogrebin, Abigail (October 2005). Stars of David: Prominent Jews Talk About Being Jewish. Bantam Dell Pub Group. ISBN 0-7679-1612-3. 
^ "Billionaires on vacation: No. 80: Steven Spielberg" by Christina Valhouli, Forbes magazine, September 19, 2002. Retrieved December 24, 2009.
^ "Spielberg, Steven – Fun Facts, Answers, Factoids, Info, Information". Funtrivia.com. Retrieved March 2, 2010. 
^ a b c d e f g h Pogrebin, Abigail. Stars of David, Broadway Books, NY, (2005)
^ a b Loshitzky, Yosefa. Spielberg's Holocaust: Critical Perspectives on “Schindler's List”, Indiana Univ. Press (1997) p. 162
^ McBride, Joseph. Steven Spielberg: A Biography (3rd edition)
^ "Steven Spielberg is selling his $184 million mega-yacht because he needs a bigger boat". Businessinsider.com. Retrieved December 1, 2017. 
^ "The 50 most influential baby boomers: Top 10". Life. Archived from the original on December 23, 2005. Retrieved October 21, 2006. 
^ "Honoring Steven Spielberg: Talking about old-school filmmaking, the virtues of TV, and the scent of film". BU Today. May 13, 2009. Retrieved August 2, 2013. 
^ Selby, Jenn (January 16, 2014). "Steven Spielberg tops Forbes Most Influential Celebrities of 2014 list". The Independent. Retrieved January 18, 2014. 
^ "Forbes' Most Influential Celebrities 2014 List Led By Steven Spielberg, Naturally". The Huffington Post. January 16, 2014. Retrieved January 18, 2014. 
^ Pomerantz, Dorothy (January 15, 2014). "Steven Spielberg Tops Our List of the Most Influential Celebrities". Forbes. Retrieved January 18, 2014. 
^ "The Clintons' Showbiz Celebration". BBC News. January 1, 2000. Retrieved October 21, 2006. 
^ "Spielberg quits scouts 'over gay ban'". BBC News. April 17, 2001. Retrieved October 30, 2006. 
^ "Spielberg resigns from Boy Scouts board". Hollywood.com. Retrieved March 10, 2006. 
^ "Spielberg movies banned by Arab League, WikiLeaks cable reveals." Haaretz, December 18, 2010.
^ "Spielberg donates $US1m to Israeli relief". The Age. Melbourne. Associated Press. August 10, 2006. Retrieved December 18, 2010. 
^ Obama excites entertainment community By JOCELYN NOVECK, AP National Writer[dead link]
^ Rachel Abramowitz (2008). "Spielberg drops out as Beijing Olympics advisor". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 3, 2008. Retrieved February 13, 2007. 
^ "Spielberg in Darfur snub to China". BBC News. February 13, 2008. Retrieved May 16, 2008. 
^ "Rogge respect for Spielberg move". BBC News. February 15, 2008. Retrieved May 16, 2008. 
^ Bristow, Michael (February 20, 2008). "China hits back over Olympics row". BBC News. Retrieved May 16, 2008. 
^ "Spielberg Makes Like Pitt, Supports Same-Sex Marriage – E! Online". Uk.eonline.com. September 23, 2008. Retrieved March 2, 2010. 
^ "The Top Donors Backing Hillary Clinton's Super PAC". Forbes. May 27, 2016. 
^ "Hidden Treasures: Prop Art". The New York Times. June 13, 1982. Retrieved 2016-02-11. 
^ Sale 7565 / Lot 149, Orson Welles. Typescript radioplay The War of the Worlds. Christie's, June 2, 1994
^ Associated Press (December 21, 2002). "Spielberg saves Bette Davis Oscar". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 2016-02-11. 
^ Smithsonian American Art Museum. "Exhibitions: Telling Stories". Washington, D.C. 
^ Face to Face. BBC Two. January 31, 1994. 
^ Ian Freer (August 2005). "Death from Above". Empire. p. 99. 
^ GameSpot, "Storytime with Ron Gilbert - PAX Australia 2013 Keynote", Ron Gilbert, 7 July 2013, accessed 21 March 2015
^ DoubleFineProd, "Tim Schafer Plays Day of the Tentacle Part 1", Tim Schafer, 9 May 2014, accessed 22 March 2015
^ Tom Chick (December 8, 2008). "A Close Encounter with Steven Spielberg". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved December 11, 2008. 
^ "Spielberg wins order banning cult stalker". The Australian. October 23, 2002. p. 12. 
^ Sauer, M (December 31, 2002). "Stalking suspect to undergo more psychological tests". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on September 6, 2008. Retrieved October 30, 2008. 
^ De Young, Mary (2004). The day care ritual abuse moral panic. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland. pp. 234–5. ISBN 0-7864-1830-3. 
^ "Spielberg stalker jailed". BBC News. June 17, 1998. Retrieved December 11, 2011. 
^ Sylvester, Sherri (February 26, 1998). "Spielberg recounts fears, anguish over alleged stalker". CNN. Retrieved December 11, 2011. 
^ Boys' Life, September 1989
^ "Distinguished Eagle Scout Award". National Capital Area Council – Boy Scouts of America. Archived from the original on October 5, 2006. Retrieved October 21, 2006. 
^ "Steven Spielberg erhält das Bundesverdienstkreuz". Berlin Online. September 11, 1998. Retrieved December 19, 2008. 
^ "Spielberg receives Royal honour". BBC News. January 30, 2001. 
^ "Le Président de la République remet les insignes de chevalier de la Légion d'Honneur à M. Steven Spielberg" (in French). Palais de l'Élysée. September 5, 2004. Archived from the original on December 6, 2007. Retrieved September 29, 2007. 
^ "Spielberg receives Lifetime Achievement Award". Chicago Film Festival. July 17, 2006. Archived from the original on October 16, 2006. Retrieved October 21, 2006. 
^ ""It's Official! Inductees Named for 2005 Hall of Fame Class"". Archived from the original on March 26, 2005. Retrieved March 26, 2005. . Press release March 24, 2005. Science Fiction Museum (sfhomeworld.org). Archived 2005-03-26. Retrieved 2013-03-22.
^ "Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame" Archived May 21, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Mid American Science Fiction and Fantasy Conventions, Inc. Retrieved 2013-04-07. This was the official website of the hall of fame to 2004.
^ "Spielberg to Receive Cecil B. DeMille Award". ComingSoon.net. November 14, 2007. Retrieved November 14, 2007. 
^ "Spielberg Globe honour 'deferred'". BBC News. January 9, 2008. 
^ "French honour for Steven Spielberg". Press Association. May 21, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2008. [dead link]
^ Spielberg Receives Arizona State University Communication Award Newswise. Retrieved June 22, 2008.
^ "Steven Spielberg to head up Cannes Film Festival jury". BBC News. Retrieved February 28, 2013. 
^ Ted Johnson. "Spielberg Honored by National Archives - Variety". Variety. 
^ "President Obama Names Recipients of the Presidential Medal of Freedom". The White House. November 16, 2015. Retrieved November 16, 2015. 
^ Burns, Catherine (22 July 2016) Steven Spielberg has just won at life. He's got a Gold Blue Peter badge BBC Newsbeat website
^ "Film Site-AMC.com". Filmsite.org. April 19, 1996. Archived from the original on March 31, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ Fabrikant, Geraldine (January 20, 1997). "Despite a Sluggish Beginning, Dreamworks Is Viewed as a Potential Hollywood Power". The New York Times. Retrieved July 20, 2012. 
^ Owen Gleiberman (August 1, 2007). "The Bourne Ultimatum Review By Owne Gleiberman". EW.com. Retrieved March 2, 2010. 
^ Aldrich, Robert; Arnold, Edwin T; Miller, Eugene L (2004). Robert Aldrich: interviews. ISBN 978-1-57806-602-5. 
^ "När Bergman går på bio". Archived from the original on December 4, 2007. Retrieved August 27, 2007. 
^ "INTERVIEW: Strong Man on a Mission; Werner Herzog Talks About 'Invincible'". indieWIRE. September 23, 2002. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "On Kubrick – A Talk With Kubrick Documentarian Jan Harlan". Dvdtalk.com. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ Organ, Steven (2009). David Lean Interviews. ISBN 978-1-60473-235-1. 
^ "The Hollywood Interview: Sidney Lumet". Thehollywoodinterview.blogspot.com. January 7, 2008. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ Polanski, Roman; Cronin, Paul (October 2005). "Roman Polanski: Interviews". ISBN 978-1-57806-799-2. 
^ "Golden Globes 2009: Steven Spielberg Cecil B. DeMille Award". YouTube. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ Stephen Rowley. "Genre, Auteurism, and Spielberg". Home.mira.net. Archived from the original on May 4, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "David Lynch interview New Musical Express, 21st August, 1982". Davidlynch.de. August 21, 1982. Retrieved May 25, 2012. 
^ "Zhang Yimou, Spielberg to Join Hands for Olympic Ceremonies". Henan.china.cn. Retrieved January 31, 2011. [permanent dead link]
^ Five Favorite Films with J.J. Abrams. Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved June 21, 2011.
^ Useless Beauty: Ecclesiastes Through The Lens Of Contemporary Film – Robert K. Johnston. Google Books. November 1, 2004. ISBN 9780801027857. Retrieved May 25, 2012. 
^ "District 9 (2009) – Neill Blomkamp Interview". Sci-Fi Movie Page. August 18, 2009. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "James Cameron Interview! Talks AVATAR Re-release, Sequels, 3D Conversions & Working With Del Toro!". Marketsaw.blogspot.com. August 7, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ http://www.deltorofilms.com/GDT_Favorites.php Archived February 9, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Five Favorite Films with Roland Emmerich". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "Five Favorite Films With Peter Jackson". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "Interview with Kal Ng". Archive.sensesofcinema.com. Archived from the original on December 25, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ "Five Favorite Films with Robert Rodriguez". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ Sayles, John; Carson, Diane (1999). John Sayles: interviews. ISBN 978-1-57806-138-9. 
^ Scott, Ridley; Knapp, Laurence F; Kulas, Andrea F (February 2005). Ridley Scott: interviews. ISBN 978-1-57806-726-8. 
^ Barboza, Craigh (January 2009). John Singleton: interviews. ISBN 978-1-60473-116-3. 
^ "Five Favorite Films with Kevin Smith". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ Tarantino, Quentin; Peary, Gerald (1998). Quentin Tarantino: interviews. ISBN 978-1-57806-051-1. 
^ Kevin Jagernauth (May 1, 2014). "Watch: Gareth Edwards Names His 3 Filmmaking Heroes Plus - The Playlist". The Playlist. 
^ Kim Masters (June 15, 2016). "Steven Spielberg on DreamWorks' Past, Amblin's Present and His Own Future". The Hollywood Reporter. 
^ Shone, Tom. Blockbuster: how Hollywood learned to stop worrying and love the summer. p. 80. Simon and Schuster, 2004. ISBN 0-7432-3568-1.
^ "Spielberg and You" – Entertainment Weekly. Pg. 6. 12/9/11.
^ Glenn Heath, Jr. (April 14, 2011). "A.I. Artificial Intelligence". Slant Magazine. Retrieved May 1, 2011. 
^ Thorsen, Tor. "A.I.: Artificial Intelligence". Archived from the original on March 5, 2008. 
^ a b Rowley, Stephen. "Steven Spielberg on Senses of Cinema". Archived from the original on March 5, 2008. Retrieved March 16, 2007. 
^ Easy Riders, Raging Bulls: How the Sex 'n' Drugs 'n' Rock 'n' Roll Generation Saved Hollywood by Peter Biskind, Bloomsbury, London, 1999, pp. 343–344.
^ Whitney Matheson (August 7, 2002). "The amazingly true tales of Crispin Glover". USA Today. Pop Candy. Retrieved March 8, 2011. 
^ Carney, Ray. "There's no Business like Show Business". Retrieved March 16, 2007. 
^ Glover, Crispin. "What Is It?". Archived from the original on May 3, 2006. Retrieved September 1, 2007. 
^ Gibron, Bill (April 21, 2007). "Short Cuts – Forgotten Gems: In Praise of Love". Pop Matters. Archived from the original on April 24, 2007. Retrieved April 28, 2007. 
^ Roger Ebert (October 18, 2002). "In Praise of Love". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved April 28, 2007. 
^ Keneally, Thomas (2007). "Searching for Schindler: A Memoir". ISBN 978-0-385-52617-3. 
^ Afterglow: A Last Conversation with Pauline Kael by Francis Davis, Da Capo Press, 2003, p. 50.
^ "Holocaust Reflections". English.illinois.edu. Retrieved January 31, 2011. 
^ The New York Times, December 6, 2010 Maker of 'Shoah' Stresses Its Lasting Value
^ Setoodeh, Ramin. "How Shia LaBeouf Stopped Drinking and Found the Career He Wanted". Variety. Variety Media, LLC. Retrieved 27 December 2016. 
^ "Entertainment Spielberg Studio Plan axed". BBC. July 22, 1999. Retrieved October 30, 2006. 
^ Watts, Jonathan (August 11, 2007). "Olympic artist lashes out over PRC propaganda". The Taipei Times. Retrieved July 6, 2008. 


Further reading


Steven Spielberg; Lester D. Friedman; Brent Notbohm (2000). Steven Spielberg: interviews. Univ. Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-57806-113-6. 
Laura Bufano Edge (2008). Steven Spielberg: Director of Blockbuster Films. Enslow Publishers, Inc. ISBN 978-0-7660-2888-3. 
Nigel Morris (2007). The cinema of Steven Spielberg: empire of light. Wallflower Press. ISBN 978-1-904764-88-5. 
Sue Vander Hook (2009). Steven Spielberg: Groundbreaking Director. ABDO. ISBN 978-1-60453-704-8. 
Haskell, Molly (January 3, 2017). Steven Spielberg: A Life in Films. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-18693-2. 


External links

Find more aboutSteven Spielbergat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Data from Wikidata



Steven Spielberg at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Steven Spielberg on IMDb
Steven Spielberg at the TCM Movie Database 
Steven Spielberg at AllMovie
"Steven Spielberg collected news and commentary". The New York Times. 
"Steven Spielberg biography". Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame. 
Steven Spielberg gives a tour of Universal Studios on YouTube







v
t
e


Steven Spielberg






Filmography
Awards and nominations





Films directed



Firelight (1964)
Slipstream (1967)
Amblin' (1968)
Night Gallery ("Eyes" segment, 1969)
L.A. 2017 (1971)
Duel (1971)
Something Evil (1972)
Savage (1973)
The Sugarland Express (1974, also wrote)
Jaws (1975)
Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977, also wrote)
1941 (1979)
Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981)
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982)
Twilight Zone: The Movie ("Kick the Can" segment, 1983)
Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom (1984)
The Color Purple (1985)
Empire of the Sun (1987)
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989)
Always (1989)
Hook (1991)
Jurassic Park (1993)
Schindler's List (1993)
The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997)
Amistad (1997)
Saving Private Ryan (1998)
A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001, also wrote)
Minority Report (2002)
Catch Me If You Can (2002)
The Terminal (2004)
War of the Worlds (2005)
Munich (2005)
Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008)
The Adventures of Tintin (2011)
War Horse (2011)
Lincoln (2012)
Bridge of Spies (2015)
The BFG (2016)
The Post (2017)
Ready Player One (2018)





Films written



Ace Eli and Rodger of the Skies (1973)
Poltergeist (1982, also produced)
The Goonies (1985)





Films produced



An American Tail: Fievel Goes West (1991)
Memoirs of a Geisha (2005)
Flags of Our Fathers (2006)
Letters from Iwo Jima (2006)
Super 8 (2011)
The Hundred-Foot Journey (2014)





Television



Amazing Stories (1985–87)
High Incident (1996–97)
Invasion America (1998)





See also



Steven Spielberg bibliography
Amblin Partners

Amblin Entertainment
Amblin Television

DreamWorks Television


Amblimation
DreamWorks


USC Shoah Foundation Institute for Visual History and Education










Awards for Steven Spielberg











v
t
e


Academy Award for Best Director



1927–1950



Frank Borzage (1927)
Lewis Milestone (1928)
Frank Lloyd (1929)
Lewis Milestone (1930)
Norman Taurog (1931)
Frank Borzage (1932)
Frank Lloyd (1933)
Frank Capra (1934)
John Ford (1935)
Frank Capra (1936)
Leo McCarey (1937)
Frank Capra (1938)
Victor Fleming (1939)
John Ford (1940)
John Ford (1941)
William Wyler (1942)
Michael Curtiz (1943)
Leo McCarey (1944)
Billy Wilder (1945)
William Wyler (1946)
Elia Kazan (1947)
John Huston (1948)
Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1949)
Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1950)





1951–1975



George Stevens (1951)
John Ford (1952)
Fred Zinnemann (1953)
Elia Kazan (1954)
Delbert Mann (1955)
George Stevens (1956)
David Lean (1957)
Vincente Minnelli (1958)
William Wyler (1959)
Billy Wilder (1960)
Jerome Robbins and Robert Wise (1961)
David Lean (1962)
Tony Richardson (1963)
George Cukor (1964)
Robert Wise (1965)
Fred Zinnemann (1966)
Mike Nichols (1967)
Carol Reed (1968)
John Schlesinger (1969)
Franklin J. Schaffner (1970)
William Friedkin (1971)
Bob Fosse (1972)
George Roy Hill (1973)
Francis Ford Coppola (1974)
Miloš Forman (1975)





1976–2000



John G. Avildsen (1976)
Woody Allen (1977)
Michael Cimino (1978)
Robert Benton (1979)
Robert Redford (1980)
Warren Beatty (1981)
Richard Attenborough (1982)
James L. Brooks (1983)
Miloš Forman (1984)
Sydney Pollack (1985)
Oliver Stone (1986)
Bernardo Bertolucci (1987)
Barry Levinson (1988)
Oliver Stone (1989)
Kevin Costner (1990)
Jonathan Demme (1991)
Clint Eastwood (1992)
Steven Spielberg (1993)
Robert Zemeckis (1994)
Mel Gibson (1995)
Anthony Minghella (1996)
James Cameron (1997)
Steven Spielberg (1998)
Sam Mendes (1999)
Steven Soderbergh (2000)





2001–present



Ron Howard (2001)
Roman Polanski (2002)
Peter Jackson (2003)
Clint Eastwood (2004)
Ang Lee (2005)
Martin Scorsese (2006)
Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007)
Danny Boyle (2008)
Kathryn Bigelow (2009)
Tom Hooper (2010)
Michel Hazanavicius (2011)
Ang Lee (2012)
Alfonso Cuarón (2013)
Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2014)
Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2015)
Damien Chazelle (2016)












v
t
e


Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award






Darryl F. Zanuck (1938)
Hal B. Wallis (1939)
David O. Selznick (1940)
Walt Disney (1942)
Sidney Franklin (1943)
Hal B. Wallis (1944)
Darryl F. Zanuck (1945)
Samuel Goldwyn (1947)
Jerry Wald (1949)
Darryl F. Zanuck (1951)
Arthur Freed (1952)
Cecil B. DeMille (1953)
George Stevens (1954)
Buddy Adler (1957)
Jack L. Warner (1959)
Stanley Kramer (1962)
Sam Spiegel (1964)
William Wyler (1966)
Robert Wise (1967)
Alfred Hitchcock (1968)
Ingmar Bergman (1971)
Lawrence Weingarten (1974)
Mervyn LeRoy (1976)
Pandro S. Berman (1977)
Walter Mirisch (1978)
Ray Stark (1980)
Albert R. Broccoli (1982)
Steven Spielberg (1986)
Billy Wilder (1988)
David Brown and Richard D. Zanuck (1991)
George Lucas (1992)
Clint Eastwood (1995)
Saul Zaentz (1997)
Norman Jewison (1999)
Warren Beatty (2000)
Dino De Laurentiis (2001)
John Calley (2009)
Francis Ford Coppola (2010)












v
t
e


AFI Life Achievement Award






John Ford (1973)
James Cagney (1974)
Orson Welles (1975)
William Wyler (1976)
Bette Davis (1977)
Henry Fonda (1978)
Alfred Hitchcock (1979)
James Stewart (1980)
Fred Astaire (1981)
Frank Capra (1982)
John Huston (1983)
Lillian Gish (1984)
Gene Kelly (1985)
Billy Wilder (1986)
Barbara Stanwyck (1987)
Jack Lemmon (1988)
Gregory Peck (1989)
David Lean (1990)
Kirk Douglas (1991)
Sidney Poitier (1992)
Elizabeth Taylor (1993)
Jack Nicholson (1994)
Steven Spielberg (1995)
Clint Eastwood (1996)
Martin Scorsese (1997)
Robert Wise (1998)
Dustin Hoffman (1999)
Harrison Ford (2000)
Barbra Streisand (2001)
Tom Hanks (2002)
Robert De Niro (2003)
Meryl Streep (2004)
George Lucas (2005)
Sean Connery (2006)
Al Pacino (2007)
Warren Beatty (2008)
Michael Douglas (2009)
Mike Nichols (2010)
Morgan Freeman (2011)
Shirley MacLaine (2012)
Mel Brooks (2013)
Jane Fonda (2014)
Steve Martin (2015)
John Williams (2016)
Diane Keaton (2017)
George Clooney (2018)












v
t
e


BAFTA Award for Best Direction






Mike Nichols (1968)
John Schlesinger (1969)
George Roy Hill (1970)
John Schlesinger (1971)
Bob Fosse (1972)
François Truffaut (1973)
Roman Polanski (1974)
Stanley Kubrick (1975)
Miloš Forman (1976)
Woody Allen (1977)
Alan Parker (1978)
Francis Ford Coppola (1979)
Akira Kurosawa (1980)
Louis Malle (1981)
Richard Attenborough (1982)
Bill Forsyth (1983)
Wim Wenders (1984)
no award (1985)
Woody Allen (1986)
Oliver Stone (1987)
Louis Malle (1988)
Kenneth Branagh (1989)
Martin Scorsese (1990)
Alan Parker (1991)
Robert Altman (1992)
Steven Spielberg (1993)
Mike Newell (1994)
Michael Radford (1995)
Joel Coen (1996)
Baz Luhrmann (1997)
Peter Weir (1998)
Pedro Almodóvar (1999)
Ang Lee (2000)
Peter Jackson (2001)
Roman Polanski (2002)
Peter Weir (2003)
Mike Leigh (2004)
Ang Lee (2005)
Paul Greengrass (2006)
Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007)
Danny Boyle (2008)
Kathryn Bigelow (2009)
David Fincher (2010)
Michel Hazanavicius (2011)
Ben Affleck (2012)
Alfonso Cuarón (2013)
Richard Linklater (2014)
Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2015)
Damien Chazelle (2016)












v
t
e


BAFTA Fellowship recipients



1971–2000



Alfred Hitchcock (1971)
Freddie Young (1972)
Grace Wyndham Goldie (1973)
David Lean (1974)
Jacques Cousteau (1975)
Charlie Chaplin (1976)
Laurence Olivier (1976)
Denis Forman (1977)
Fred Zinnemann (1978)
Lew Grade (1979)
Huw Wheldon (1979)
David Attenborough (1980)
John Huston (1980)
Abel Gance (1981)
Michael Powell & Emeric Pressburger (1981)
Andrzej Wajda (1982)
Richard Attenborough (1983)
Hugh Greene (1984)
Sam Spiegel (1984)
Jeremy Isaacs (1985)
Steven Spielberg (1986)
Federico Fellini (1987)
Ingmar Bergman (1988)
Alec Guinness (1989)
Paul Fox (1990)
Louis Malle (1991)
John Gielgud (1992)
David Plowright (1992)
Sydney Samuelson (1993)
Colin Young (1993)
Michael Grade (1994)
Billy Wilder (1995)
Jeanne Moreau (1996)
Ronald Neame (1996)
John Schlesinger (1996)
Maggie Smith (1996)
Woody Allen (1997)
Steven Bochco (1997)
Julie Christie (1997)
Oswald Morris (1997)
Harold Pinter (1997)
David Rose (1997)
Sean Connery (1998)
Bill Cotton (1998)
Eric Morecambe & Ernie Wise (1999)
Elizabeth Taylor (1999)
Michael Caine (2000)
Stanley Kubrick (2000)
Peter Bazalgette (2000)





2001–present



Albert Finney (2001)
John Thaw (2001)
Judi Dench (2001)
Warren Beatty (2002)
Merchant Ivory Productions (2002)
Andrew Davies (2002)
John Mills (2002)
Saul Zaentz (2003)
David Jason (2003)
John Boorman (2004)
Roger Graef (2004)
John Barry (2005)
David Frost (2005)
David Puttnam (2006)
Ken Loach (2006)
Anne V. Coates (2007)
Richard Curtis (2007)
Will Wright (2007)
Anthony Hopkins (2008)
Bruce Forsyth (2008)
Dawn French & Jennifer Saunders (2009)
Terry Gilliam (2009)
Nolan Bushnell (2009)
Vanessa Redgrave (2010)
Shigeru Miyamoto (2010)
Melvyn Bragg (2010)
Christopher Lee (2011)
Peter Molyneux (2011)
Trevor McDonald (2011)
Martin Scorsese (2012)
Rolf Harris (2012)
Alan Parker (2013)
Gabe Newell (2013)
Michael Palin (2013)
Helen Mirren (2014)
Rockstar Games (2014)
Julie Walters (2014)
Mike Leigh (2015)
David Braben (2015)
Jon Snow (2015)
Sidney Poitier (2016)
John Carmack (2016)
Ray Galton & Alan Simpson (2016)
Mel Brooks (2017)
Joanna Lumley (2017)












v
t
e


BAFTA Los Angeles Britannia Awards



Excellence in Film



Albert R. Broccoli (1989)
Michael Caine (1990)
Peter Ustinov (1992)
Martin Scorsese (1993)
Anthony Hopkins (1995)
Bob Weinstein and Harvey Weinstein (1996)
Dustin Hoffman (1997)
John Travolta (1998)
Stanley Kubrick (1999)
Steven Spielberg (2000)
George Lucas (2002)
Hugh Grant (2003)
Tom Hanks (2004)
Tom Cruise (2005)
Clint Eastwood (2006)
Denzel Washington (2007)
Sean Penn (2008)
Robert De Niro (2009)
Jeff Bridges (2010)
Warren Beatty (2011)
Daniel Day-Lewis (2012)
George Clooney (2013)
Robert Downey Jr. (2014)
Meryl Streep (2015)
Jodie Foster (2016)
Matt Damon (2017)





Excellence in Directing



Peter Weir (2003)
Jim Sheridan (2004)
Mike Newell (2005)
Anthony Minghella (2006)
Martin Campbell (2007)
Stephen Frears (2008)
Danny Boyle (2009)
Christopher Nolan (2010)
David Yates (2011)
Quentin Tarantino (2012)
Kathryn Bigelow (2013)
Mike Leigh (2014)
Sam Mendes (2015)
Ang Lee (2016)
Ava DuVernay (2017)





Worldwide Contribution to
Entertainment



Howard Stringer (2003)
Kirk Douglas (2009)
Ridley Scott & Tony Scott (2010)
John Lasseter (2011)
Will Wright (2012)
Ben Kingsley (2013)
Judi Dench (2014)
Harrison Ford (2015)
Samuel L. Jackson (2016)
Kenneth Branagh (2017)





British Artist of the Year



Rachel Weisz (2006)
Kate Winslet (2007)
Tilda Swinton (2008)
Emily Blunt (2009)
Michael Sheen (2010)
Helena Bonham Carter (2011)
Daniel Craig (2012)
Benedict Cumberbatch (2013)
Emma Watson (2014)
James Corden (2015)
Felicity Jones (2016)
Claire Foy (2017)





Excellence in Comedy



Betty White (2010)
Ben Stiller (2011)
Trey Parker and Matt Stone (2012)
Sacha Baron Cohen (2013)
Julia Louis-Dreyfus (2014)
Amy Schumer (2015)
Ricky Gervais (2016)
Aziz Ansari (2017)





Excellence in Television



Aaron Spelling (1999)
HBO Original Programming (2002)
Dick Van Dyke (2017)





Humanitarian Award



Richard Curtis (2007)
Don Cheadle (2008)
Colin Firth (2009)
Idris Elba (2013)
Mark Ruffalo (2014)
Orlando Bloom (2015)
Ewan McGregor (2016)





Retired Awards



BBC (1999)
Tarsem Singh (1999)
Angela Lansbury (2003)
Helen Mirren (2004)
Elizabeth Taylor (2005)
Ronald Neame (2005)
Sidney Poitier (2006)
Bob Shaye and Michael Lynne (2007)












v
t
e


Cecil B. DeMille Award






Cecil B. DeMille (1952)
Walt Disney (1953)
Darryl F. Zanuck (1954)
Jean Hersholt (1955)
Jack L. Warner (1956)
Mervyn LeRoy (1957)
Buddy Adler (1958)
Maurice Chevalier (1959)
Bing Crosby (1960)
Fred Astaire (1961)
Judy Garland (1962)
Bob Hope (1963)
Joseph E. Levine (1964)
James Stewart (1965)
John Wayne (1966)
Charlton Heston (1967)
Kirk Douglas (1968)
Gregory Peck (1969)
Joan Crawford (1970)
Frank Sinatra (1971)
Alfred Hitchcock (1972)
Samuel Goldwyn (1973)
Bette Davis (1974)
Hal B. Wallis (1975)
Walter Mirisch (1977)
Red Skelton (1978)
Lucille Ball (1979)
Henry Fonda (1980)
Gene Kelly (1981)
Sidney Poitier (1982)
Laurence Olivier (1983)
Paul Newman (1984)
Elizabeth Taylor (1985)
Barbara Stanwyck (1986)
Anthony Quinn (1987)
Clint Eastwood (1988)
Doris Day (1989)
Audrey Hepburn (1990)
Jack Lemmon (1991)
Robert Mitchum (1992)
Lauren Bacall (1993)
Robert Redford (1994)
Sophia Loren (1995)
Sean Connery (1996)
Dustin Hoffman (1997)
Shirley MacLaine (1998)
Jack Nicholson (1999)
Barbra Streisand (2000)
Al Pacino (2001)
Harrison Ford (2002)
Gene Hackman (2003)
Michael Douglas (2004)
Robin Williams (2005)
Anthony Hopkins (2006)
Warren Beatty (2007)
Steven Spielberg (2009)
Martin Scorsese (2010)
Robert De Niro (2011)
Morgan Freeman (2012)
Jodie Foster (2013)
Woody Allen (2014)
George Clooney (2015)
Denzel Washington (2016)
Meryl Streep (2017)
Oprah Winfrey (2018)












v
t
e


Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film



1948–1975



Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1948)
Robert Rossen (1949)
Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1950)
George Stevens (1951)
John Ford (1952)
Fred Zinnemann (1953)
Elia Kazan (1954)
Delbert Mann (1955)
George Stevens (1956)
David Lean (1957)
Vincente Minnelli (1958)
William Wyler (1959)
Billy Wilder (1960)
Jerome Robbins and Robert Wise (1961)
David Lean (1962)
Tony Richardson (1963)
George Cukor (1964)
Robert Wise (1965)
Fred Zinnemann (1966)
Mike Nichols (1967)
Anthony Harvey (1968)
John Schlesinger (1969)
Franklin J. Schaffner (1970)
William Friedkin (1971)
Francis Ford Coppola (1972)
George Roy Hill (1973)
Francis Ford Coppola (1974)
Miloš Forman (1975)





1976–2000



John G. Avildsen (1976)
Woody Allen (1977)
Michael Cimino (1978)
Robert Benton (1979)
Robert Redford (1980)
Warren Beatty (1981)
Richard Attenborough (1982)
James L. Brooks (1983)
Miloš Forman (1984)
Steven Spielberg (1985)
Oliver Stone (1986)
Bernardo Bertolucci (1987)
Barry Levinson (1988)
Oliver Stone (1989)
Kevin Costner (1990)
Jonathan Demme (1991)
Clint Eastwood (1992)
Steven Spielberg (1993)
Robert Zemeckis (1994)
Ron Howard (1995)
Anthony Minghella (1996)
James Cameron (1997)
Steven Spielberg (1998)
Sam Mendes (1999)
Ang Lee (2000)





2001–present



Ron Howard (2001)
Rob Marshall (2002)
Peter Jackson (2003)
Clint Eastwood (2004)
Ang Lee (2005)
Martin Scorsese (2006)
Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007)
Danny Boyle (2008)
Kathryn Bigelow (2009)
Tom Hooper (2010)
Michel Hazanavicius (2011)
Ben Affleck (2012)
Alfonso Cuarón (2013)
Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2014)
Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2015)
Damien Chazelle (2016)












v
t
e


Empire Award for Best Director






Danny Boyle (1996)
Terry Gilliam (1997)
Cameron Crowe (1998)
Steven Spielberg (1999)
M. Night Shyamalan (2000)
Bryan Singer (2001)
Baz Luhrmann (2002)
Steven Spielberg (2003)
Quentin Tarantino (2004)
Sam Raimi (2005)
Nick Park and Steve Box (2006)
Christopher Nolan (2007)
David Yates (2008)
Christopher Nolan (2009)
James Cameron (2010)
Edgar Wright (2011)
David Yates (2012)
Sam Mendes (2013)
Alfonso Cuarón (2014)
Christopher Nolan (2015)
J. J. Abrams (2016)
Gareth Edwards (2017)












v
t
e


Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film






Cars – John Lasseter (2006)
Ratatouille – Brad Bird (2007)
WALL-E – Andrew Stanton (2008)
Up – Pete Docter (2009)
Toy Story 3 – Lee Unkrich (2010)
The Adventures of Tintin – Steven Spielberg (2011)
Brave – Mark Andrews & Brenda Chapman (2012)
Frozen – Chris Buck & Jennifer Lee (2013)
How to Train Your Dragon 2 – Dean DeBlois (2014)
Inside Out – Pete Docter and Ronnie del Carmen (2015)
Zootopia – Byron Howard and Rich Moore (2016)












v
t
e


Golden Globe Award for Best Director






Henry King (1943)
Leo McCarey (1944)
Billy Wilder (1945)
Frank Capra (1946)
Elia Kazan (1947)
John Huston (1948)
Robert Rossen (1949)
Billy Wilder (1950)
László Benedek (1951)
Cecil B. DeMille (1952)
Fred Zinnemann (1953)
Elia Kazan (1954)
Joshua Logan (1955)
Elia Kazan (1956)
David Lean (1957)
Vincente Minnelli (1958)
William Wyler (1959)
Jack Cardiff (1960)
Stanley Kramer (1961)
David Lean (1962)
Elia Kazan (1963)
George Cukor (1964)
David Lean (1965)
Fred Zinnemann (1966)
Mike Nichols (1967)
Paul Newman (1968)
Charles Jarrott (1969)
Arthur Hiller (1970)
William Friedkin (1971)
Francis Ford Coppola (1972)
William Friedkin (1973)
Roman Polanski (1974)
Miloš Forman (1975)
Sidney Lumet (1976)
Herbert Ross (1977)
Michael Cimino (1978)
Francis Ford Coppola (1979)
Robert Redford (1980)
Warren Beatty (1981)
Richard Attenborough (1982)
Barbra Streisand (1983)
Miloš Forman (1984)
John Huston (1985)
Oliver Stone (1986)
Bernardo Bertolucci (1987)
Clint Eastwood (1988)
Oliver Stone (1989)
Kevin Costner (1990)
Oliver Stone (1991)
Clint Eastwood (1992)
Steven Spielberg (1993)
Robert Zemeckis (1994)
Mel Gibson (1995)
Miloš Forman (1996)
James Cameron (1997)
Steven Spielberg (1998)
Sam Mendes (1999)
Ang Lee (2000)
Robert Altman (2001)
Martin Scorsese (2002)
Peter Jackson (2003)
Clint Eastwood (2004)
Ang Lee (2005)
Martin Scorsese (2006)
Julian Schnabel (2007)
Danny Boyle (2008)
James Cameron (2009)
David Fincher (2010)
Martin Scorsese (2011)
Ben Affleck (2012)
Alfonso Cuarón (2013)
Richard Linklater (2014)
Alejandro G. Iñárritu (2015)
Damien Chazelle (2016)












v
t
e


Hasty Pudding Men of the Year



1967–2000



Bob Hope (1967)
Paul Newman (1968)
Bill Cosby (1969)
Robert Redford (1970)
James Stewart (1971)
Dustin Hoffman (1972)
Jack Lemmon (1973)
Peter Falk (1974)
Warren Beatty (1975)
Robert Blake (1976)
Johnny Carson (1977)
Richard Dreyfuss (1978)
Robert De Niro (1979)
Alan Alda (1980)
John Travolta (1981)
James Cagney (1982)
Steven Spielberg (1983)
Sean Connery (1984)
Bill Murray (1985)
Sylvester Stallone (1986)
Mikhail Baryshnikov (1987)
Steve Martin (1988)
Robin Williams (1989)
Kevin Costner (1990)
Clint Eastwood (1991)
Michael Douglas (1992)
Chevy Chase (1993)
Tom Cruise (1994)
Tom Hanks (1995)
Harrison Ford (1996)
Mel Gibson (1997)
Kevin Kline (1998)
Samuel L. Jackson (1999)
Billy Crystal (2000)





2001–present



Anthony Hopkins (2001)
Bruce Willis (2002)
Martin Scorsese (2003)
Robert Downey Jr. (2004)
Tim Robbins (2005)
Richard Gere (2006)
Ben Stiller (2007)
Christopher Walken (2008)
James Franco (2009)
Justin Timberlake (2010)
Jay Leno (2011)
Jason Segel (2012)
Kiefer Sutherland (2013)
Neil Patrick Harris (2014)
Chris Pratt (2015)
Joseph Gordon-Levitt (2016)
Ryan Reynolds (2017)












v
t
e


Honorary César



1976–2000



Ingrid Bergman (1976)
Diana Ross (1976)
Henri Langlois (1977)
Jacques Tati (1977)
Robert Dorfmann (1978)
René Goscinny (1978)
Marcel Carné (1979)
Charles Vanel (1979)
Walt Disney (1979)
Pierre Braunberger (1980)
Louis de Funès (1980)
Kirk Douglas (1980)
Marcel Pagnol (1981)
Alain Resnais (1981)
Georges Dancigers (1982)
Alexandre Mnouchkine (1982)
Jean Nény (1982)
Andrzej Wajda (1982)
Raimu (1983)
René Clément (1984)
Georges de Beauregard (1984)
Edwige Feuillère (1984)
Christian-Jaque (1985)
Danielle Darrieux (1985)
Christine Gouze-Rénal (1985)
Alain Poiré (1985)
Maurice Jarre (1986)
Bette Davis (1986)
Jean Delannoy (1986)
René Ferracci (1986)
Claude Lanzmann (1986)
Jean-Luc Godard (1987)
Serge Silberman (1988)
Bernard Blier (1989)
Paul Grimault (1989)
Gérard Philipe (1990)
Jean-Pierre Aumont (1991)
Sophia Loren (1991)
Michèle Morgan (1992)
Sylvester Stallone (1992)
Jean Marais (1993)
Marcello Mastroianni (1993)
Gérard Oury (1993)
Jean Carmet (1994)
Jeanne Moreau (1995)
Gregory Peck (1995)
Steven Spielberg (1995)
Lauren Bacall (1996)
Henri Verneuil (1996)
Charles Aznavour (1997)
Andie MacDowell (1997)
Michael Douglas (1998)
Clint Eastwood (1998)
Jean-Luc Godard (1998)
Pedro Almodóvar (1999)
Johnny Depp (1999)
Jean Rochefort (1999)
Josiane Balasko (2000)
Georges Cravenne (2000)
Jean-Pierre Léaud (2000)
Martin Scorsese (2000)





2001–present



Darry Cowl (2001)
Charlotte Rampling (2001)
Agnès Varda (2001)
Anouk Aimée (2002)
Jeremy Irons (2002)
Claude Rich (2002)
Bernadette Lafont (2003)
Spike Lee (2003)
Meryl Streep (2003)
Micheline Presle (2004)
Jacques Dutronc (2005)
Will Smith (2005)
Hugh Grant (2006)
Pierre Richard (2006)
Marlène Jobert (2007)
Jude Law (2007)
Jeanne Moreau (2008)
Roberto Benigni (2008)
Dustin Hoffman (2009)
Harrison Ford (2010)
Quentin Tarantino (2011)
Kate Winslet (2012)
Kevin Costner (2013)
Scarlett Johansson (2014)
Sean Penn (2015)
Michael Douglas (2016)
George Clooney (2017)












v
t
e


Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Director






Sidney Lumet (1975)
Sidney Lumet (1976)
Herbert Ross (1977)
Michael Cimino (1978)
Robert Benton (1979)
Roman Polanski (1980)
Warren Beatty (1981)
Steven Spielberg (1982)
James L. Brooks (1983)
Miloš Forman (1984)
Terry Gilliam (1985)
David Lynch (1986)
John Boorman (1987)
David Cronenberg (1988)
Spike Lee (1989)
Martin Scorsese (1990)
Barry Levinson (1991)
Clint Eastwood (1992)
Jane Campion (1993)
Quentin Tarantino (1994)
Mike Figgis (1995)
Mike Leigh (1996)
Curtis Hanson (1997)
Steven Spielberg (1998)
Sam Mendes (1999)
Steven Soderbergh (2000)
David Lynch (2001)
Pedro Almodóvar (2002)
Peter Jackson (2003)
Alexander Payne (2004)
Ang Lee (2005)
Paul Greengrass (2006)
Paul Thomas Anderson (2007)
Danny Boyle (2008)
Kathryn Bigelow (2009)
Olivier Assayas / David Fincher (2010)
Terrence Malick (2011)
Paul Thomas Anderson (2012)
Alfonso Cuarón (2013)
Richard Linklater (2014)
George Miller (2015)
Barry Jenkins (2016)
Guillermo del Toro / Luca Guadagnino (2017)












v
t
e


International Emmy Founders Award






Jim Henson (1980)
Shaun Sutton / Roone Arledge (1981)
Michael Landon (1982)
Herbert Brodkin (1983)
David L. Wolper (1984)
David Attenborough (1985)
Donald L. Taffner (1986)
Jacques Cousteau (1987)
Goar Mestre (1988)
Paul Fox (1989)
Joan Ganz Cooney (1990)
Adrian Cowell (1991)
Bill Cosby (1992)
Richard Dunn (1993)
Film on Four (1994)
Don Hewitt (1995)
Reg Grundy (1996)
Jac Venza (1997)
Robert Halmi Sr. (1998)
Hisashi Hieda (1999)
John Hendricks (2000)
Pierre Lescure (2001)
Howard Stringer (2002)
HBO (2003)
MTV International (2004)
Oprah Winfrey (2005)
Steven Spielberg (2006)
Al Gore (2007)
Dick Wolf (2008)
David Frost (2009)
Simon Cowell (2010)
Nigel Lythgoe (2011)
Ryan Murphy / Norman Lear / Alan Alda (2012)
J. J. Abrams (2013)
Matthew Weiner (2014)
Julian Fellowes (2015)
Shonda Rhimes (2016)












v
t
e


Kennedy Center Honorees (2000s)



2000



Mikhail Baryshnikov
Chuck Berry
Plácido Domingo
Clint Eastwood
Angela Lansbury





2001



Julie Andrews
Van Cliburn
Quincy Jones
Jack Nicholson
Luciano Pavarotti





2002



James Earl Jones
James Levine
Chita Rivera
Paul Simon
Elizabeth Taylor





2003



James Brown
Carol Burnett
Loretta Lynn
Mike Nichols
Itzhak Perlman





2004



Warren Beatty
Ossie Davis & Ruby Dee
Elton John
Joan Sutherland
John Williams





2005



Tony Bennett
Suzanne Farrell
Julie Harris
Robert Redford
Tina Turner





2006



Zubin Mehta
Dolly Parton
Smokey Robinson
Steven Spielberg
Andrew Lloyd Webber





2007



Leon Fleisher
Steve Martin
Diana Ross
Martin Scorsese
Brian Wilson





2008



Morgan Freeman
George Jones
Barbra Streisand
Twyla Tharp
Pete Townshend & Roger Daltrey





2009



Mel Brooks
Dave Brubeck
Grace Bumbry
Robert De Niro
Bruce Springsteen








Complete list
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
2010s












v
t
e


National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Director



1966-1979



Michelangelo Antonioni (1966)
Ingmar Bergman (1967)
Ingmar Bergman (1968)
François Truffaut (1969)
Ingmar Bergman (1970)
Bernardo Bertolucci (1971)
Luis Buñuel (1972)
François Truffaut (1973)
Francis Ford Coppola (1974)
Robert Altman (1975)
Martin Scorsese (1976)
Luis Buñuel (1977)
Terrence Malick (1978)
Woody Allen / Robert Benton (1979)





1980-1999



Martin Scorsese (1980)
Louis Malle (1981)
Steven Spielberg (1982)
Paolo Taviani and Vittorio Taviani (1983)
Robert Bresson (1984)
John Huston (1985)
David Lynch (1986)
John Boorman (1987)
Philip Kaufman (1988)
Gus Van Sant (1989)
Martin Scorsese (1990)
David Cronenberg (1991)
Clint Eastwood (1992)
Steven Spielberg (1993)
Quentin Tarantino (1994)
Mike Figgis (1995)
Lars von Trier (1996)
Curtis Hanson (1997)
Steven Soderbergh (1998)
Mike Leigh (1999)





2000-present



Steven Soderbergh (2000)
Robert Altman (2001)
Roman Polanski (2002)
Clint Eastwood (2003)
Zhang Yimou (2004)
David Cronenberg (2005)
Paul Greengrass (2006)
Paul Thomas Anderson (2007)
Mike Leigh (2008)
Kathryn Bigelow (2009)
David Fincher (2010)
Terrence Malick (2011)
Michael Haneke (2012)
Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2013)
Richard Linklater (2014)
Todd Haynes (2015)
Barry Jenkins (2016)












v
t
e


Saturn Award for Best Director






Mel Brooks (1974/75)
Dan Curtis (1976)
George Lucas/Steven Spielberg (1977)
Philip Kaufman (1978)
Ridley Scott (1979)
Irvin Kershner (1980)
Steven Spielberg (1981)
Nicholas Meyer (1982)
John Badham (1983)
Joe Dante (1984)
Ron Howard (1985)
James Cameron (1986)
Paul Verhoeven (1987)
Robert Zemeckis (1988)
James Cameron (1989/90)
James Cameron (1991)
Francis Ford Coppola (1992)
Steven Spielberg (1993)
James Cameron (1994)
Kathryn Bigelow (1995)
Roland Emmerich (1996)
John Woo (1997)
Michael Bay (1998)
Andy Wachowski and Larry Wachowski (1999)
Bryan Singer (2000)
Peter Jackson (2001)
Steven Spielberg (2002)
Peter Jackson (2003)
Sam Raimi (2004)
Peter Jackson (2005)
Bryan Singer (2006)
Zack Snyder (2007)
Jon Favreau (2008)
James Cameron (2009)
Christopher Nolan (2010)
J. J. Abrams (2011)
Joss Whedon (2012)
Alfonso Cuarón (2013)
James Gunn (2014)
Ridley Scott (2015)
Gareth Edwards (2016)












v
t
e


Saturn Award for Best Writing






William Peter Blatty (1973)
Ib Melchior/Harlan Ellison (1974/75)
Jimmy Sangster (1976)
George Lucas (1977)
Elaine May and Warren Beatty (1978)
Nicholas Meyer (1979)
William Peter Blatty (1980)
Lawrence Kasdan (1981)
Melissa Mathison (1982)
Ray Bradbury (1983)
James Cameron and Gale Anne Hurd (1984)
Tom Holland (1985)
James Cameron (1986)
Michael Miner and Edward Neumeier (1987)
Gary Ross and Anne Spielberg (1988)
William Peter Blatty (1989/90)
Ted Tally (1991)
James V. Hart (1992)
Michael Crichton and David Koepp (1993)
Jim Harrison and Wesley Strick (1994)
Andrew Kevin Walker (1995)
Kevin Williamson (1996)
Mike Werb and Michael Colleary (1997)
Andrew Niccol (1998)
Charlie Kaufman (1999)
David Hayter (2000)
Steven Spielberg (2001)
Scott Frank and Jon Cohen (2002)
Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, and Peter Jackson (2003)
Alvin Sargent (2004)
Christopher Nolan and David S. Goyer (2005)
Michael Dougherty and Dan Harris (2006)
Brad Bird (2007)
Christopher and Jonathan Nolan (2008)
James Cameron (2009)
Christopher Nolan (2010)
Jeff Nichols (2011)
Quentin Tarantino (2012)
Spike Jonze (2013)
Christopher and Jonathan Nolan (2014)
Lawrence Kasdan, J. J. Abrams, and Michael Arndt (2015)
Eric Heisserer (2016)

















v
t
e


Cannes Film Festival jury presidents



1946–1975



Georges Huisman (1946)
Georges Huisman (1947)
Georges Huisman (1949)
André Maurois (1951)
Maurice Genevoix (1952)
Jean Cocteau (1953)
Jean Cocteau (1954)
Marcel Pagnol (1955)
Maurice Lehmann (1956)
André Maurois (1957)
Marcel Achard (1958)
Marcel Achard (1959)
Georges Simenon (1960)
Jean Giono (1961)
Tetsurō Furukaki (1962)
Armand Salacrou (1963)
Fritz Lang (1964)
Olivia de Havilland (1965)
Sophia Loren (1966)
Alessandro Blasetti (1967)
André Chamson (1968)
Luchino Visconti (1969)
Miguel Ángel Asturias (1970)
Michèle Morgan (1971)
Joseph Losey (1972)
Ingrid Bergman (1973)
René Clair (1974)
Jeanne Moreau (1975)





1975–2000



Tennessee Williams (1976)
Roberto Rossellini (1977)
Alan J. Pakula (1978)
Françoise Sagan (1979)
Kirk Douglas (1980)
Jacques Deray (1981)
Giorgio Strehler (1982)
William Styron (1983)
Dirk Bogarde (1984)
Miloš Forman (1985)
Sydney Pollack (1986)
Yves Montand (1987)
Ettore Scola (1988)
Wim Wenders (1989)
Bernardo Bertolucci (1990)
Roman Polanski (1991)
Gérard Depardieu (1992)
Louis Malle (1993)
Clint Eastwood (1994)
Jeanne Moreau (1995)
Francis Ford Coppola (1996)
Isabelle Adjani (1997)
Martin Scorsese (1998)
David Cronenberg (1999)
Luc Besson (2000)





2001–present



Liv Ullmann (2001)
David Lynch (2002)
Patrice Chéreau (2003)
Quentin Tarantino (2004)
Emir Kusturica (2005)
Wong Kar-wai (2006)
Stephen Frears (2007)
Sean Penn (2008)
Isabelle Huppert (2009)
Tim Burton (2010)
Robert De Niro (2011)
Nanni Moretti (2012)
Steven Spielberg (2013)
Jane Campion (2014)
Joel and Ethan Coen (2015)
George Miller (2016)
Pedro Almodóvar (2017)
Cate Blanchett (2018)








Biography portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 111553324
LCCN: n79148103
ISNI: 0000 0001 2147 8992
GND: 118812068
SELIBR: 277984
SUDOC: 027648540
BNF: cb11925337n (data)
ULAN: 500330922
MusicBrainz: b3721f66-4379-44d1-947a-79d1c95b6b9f
NLA: 35750976
NDL: 00475426
NKC: jn20011211018
BNE: XX911658
IATH: w6jq16mz











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Steven_Spielberg&oldid=817464852"					Categories: Steven Spielberg1946 birthsLiving people20th-century American businesspeople20th-century American male actors21st-century American businesspeople21st-century American male actors21st-century American writersAction film directorsAkira Kurosawa Award winnersAmerican billionairesAmerican film directorsAmerican film editorsAmerican film producersAmerican film studio executivesAmerican humanitariansAmerican male film actorsAmerican male screenwritersAmerican television directorsAmerican television producersAmerican people of Ukrainian-Jewish descentAnimaniacsBAFTA fellowsBest Directing Academy Award winnersBest Director BAFTA Award winnersBest Director Empire Award winnersBest Director Golden Globe winnersBusinesspeople from ArizonaBusinesspeople from CincinnatiBusinesspeople from Los AngelesBusinesspeople from New JerseyBusinesspeople from New York (state)California DemocratsCalifornia State University, Long Beach alumniCecil B. DeMille Award Golden Globe winnersChevaliers of the Légion d'honneurCommanders of the Order of the Crown (Belgium)David di Donatello Career Award winnersDavid di Donatello winnersDaytime Emmy Award winnersDirectors Guild of America Award winnersDistinguished Eagle ScoutsEagle ScoutsEnglish-language film directorsFantasy film directorsFilm directors from CaliforniaFilm directors from New York (state)Film directors from OhioFilm theoristsGolden Globe Award-winning producersHonorary Knights Commander of the Order of the British EmpireInternational Emmy Founders Award winnersJewish American art collectorsJewish American philanthropistsJewish American writersJews and Judaism in CincinnatiKennedy Center honoreesKnight Commanders of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of GermanyMale actors from ArizonaMale actors from CincinnatiMale actors from Los AngelesMale actors from New JerseyMale actors from New York (state)National Humanities Medal recipientsPeople from East Hampton (town), New YorkPeople from Haddon Township, New JerseyPeople from Saratoga, CaliforniaPhilanthropists from CaliforniaPresidential Medal of Freedom recipientsPrimetime Emmy Award winnersProducers who won the Best Picture Academy AwardRecipients of the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial AwardScience fiction fansScience fiction film directorsScience Fiction Hall of Fame inducteesSpecial effects peopleTelevision producers from CaliforniaTelevision producers from New York (state)Writers from CincinnatiWriters from Los AngelesWriters from New JerseyWriters from New York (state)Writers from Scottsdale, ArizonaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2016CS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles with dead external links from April 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse mdy dates from January 2015Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsArticles that may contain original research from April 2011All articles that may contain original researchAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2014Articles with DMOZ linksAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers