

Financial markets







Public market
Exchange · Securities




Bond market




Bond valuation
Corporate bond
Fixed income
Government bond
High-yield debt
Municipal bond

Securitization




Stock market




Common stock
Preferred stock
Registered share
Stock

Stock certificate
Stock exchange




Other markets



Derivatives


(Credit derivative
Futures exchange
Hybrid security)



Foreign exchange


(Currency
Exchange rate)




Commodity
Money
Real estate
Reinsurance




Over-the-counter (off-exchange)





Forwards
Options




Spot market
Swaps





Trading




Participants
Regulation
Clearing




Related areas




Banks and banking
Finance

corporate
personal
public









v
t
e







A 400-year evolution of global stock markets (and capital markets in general)


Courtyard of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange (Beurs van Hendrick de Keyser in Dutch), the foremost centre of European stock markets in the 17th century.



The trading floor of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in the blooming era of Internet.



A stock market, equity market or share market is the aggregation of buyers and sellers (a loose network of economic transactions, not a physical facility or discrete entity) of stocks (also called shares), which represent ownership claims on businesses; these may include securities listed on a public stock exchange as well as those only traded privately. Examples of the latter include shares of private companies which are sold to investors through equity crowdfunding platforms. Stock exchanges list shares of common equity as well as other security types, e.g. corporate bonds and convertible bonds.



Contents


1 Size of the market
2 Stock exchange
3 Trade
4 Market participant

4.1 Trends in market participation

4.1.1 Indirect vs. direct investment
4.1.2 Participation by income and wealth strata
4.1.3 Participation by head of household race and gender
4.1.4 Determinants and possible explanations of stock market participation




5 History

5.1 Early history
5.2 Birth of formal stock markets


6 Importance

6.1 Function and purpose
6.2 Relation to the modern financial system
6.3 United States S&P stock market returns
6.4 Behavior of the stock market
6.5 Irrational behavior
6.6 Crashes
6.7 Stock market prediction


7 Stock market index
8 Derivative instruments
9 Leveraged strategies

9.1 Short selling
9.2 Margin buying


10 New issuance
11 ASX Share Market Game
12 Investment strategies
13 Taxation
14 See also
15 References
16 Further reading
17 External links



Size of the market[edit]
Stocks can be categorised in various ways. One way is by the country where the company is domiciled. For example, Nestlé and Novartis are domiciled in Switzerland, so they may be considered as part of the Swiss stock market, although their stock may also be traded on exchanges in other countries, for example, as American depository receipts (ADRs) on U.S. stock markets.
As of mid 2017, the size of the world stock market (total market capitalisation) was about US$76.3 trillion.[1] By country, the largest market was the United States (about 34%), followed by Japan (about 6%) and the United Kingdom (about 6%).[2] These numbers increased in 2013.[3]
As of 2015, there are a total of 60 stock exchanges in the world with a total market capitalization of $69 trillion. Of these, there are 16 exchanges with a market capitalization of $1 trillion or more, and they account for 87% of global market capitalization. Apart from the Australian Securities Exchange, these 16 exchanges are based in one of three continents: North America, Europe and Asia.[4]
Stock exchange[edit]
Main article: Stock exchange
A stock exchange is a place where, or an organization through which, individuals and organizations can trade stocks. Many large companies have their stock listed on a stock exchange. This makes the stock more liquid and thus more attractive to many investors. It may also act as a guarantor of settlement. Other stocks may be traded "over the counter" (OTC), that is, through a dealer. Some large companies will have their stock listed on more than one exchange in different countries, so as to attract international investors.[5]
Stock exchanges may also cover other types of securities, such as fixed interest securities (bonds) or (less frequently) derivatives, which are more likely to be traded OTC.
Trade[edit]




The New York Stock Exchange






The London Stock Exchange


Trade in stock markets means the transfer for money of a stock or security from a seller to a buyer. This requires these two parties to agree on a price. Equities (stocks or shares) confer an ownership interest in a particular company.
Participants in the stock market range from small individual stock investors to larger trader investors, who can be based anywhere in the world, and may include banks, insurance companies, pension funds and hedge funds. Their buy or sell orders may be executed on their behalf by a stock exchange trader.
Some exchanges are physical locations where transactions are carried out on a trading floor, by a method known as open outcry. This method is used in some stock exchanges and commodity exchanges, and involves traders shouting bid and offer prices. The other type of stock exchange has a network of computers where trades are made electronically. An example of such an exchange is the NASDAQ.
A potential buyer bids a specific price for a stock, and a potential seller asks a specific price for the same stock. Buying or selling at the market means you will accept any ask price or bid price for the stock. When the bid and ask prices match, a sale takes place, on a first-come, first-served basis if there are multiple bidders or askers at a given price.
The purpose of a stock exchange is to facilitate the exchange of securities between buyers and sellers, thus providing a marketplace. The exchanges provide real-time trading information on the listed securities, facilitating price discovery.
The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) is a physical exchange, with a hybrid market for placing orders electronically from any location as well as on the trading floor. Orders executed on the trading floor enter by way of exchange members and flow down to a floor broker, who submits the order electronically to the floor trading post for the Designated Market Maker ("DMM") for that stock to trade the order. The DMM's job is to maintain a two-sided market, making orders to buy and sell the security when there are no other buyers or sellers. If a spread exists, no trade immediately takes place – in this case the DMM may use their own resources (money or stock) to close the difference. Once a trade has been made, the details are reported on the "tape" and sent back to the brokerage firm, which then notifies the investor who placed the order. Computers play an important role, especially for program trading.
The NASDAQ is a virtual exchange, where all of the trading is done over a computer network. The process is similar to the New York Stock Exchange. One or more NASDAQ market makers will always provide a bid and ask price at which they will always purchase or sell 'their' stock.
The Paris Bourse, now part of Euronext, is an order-driven, electronic stock exchange. It was automated in the late 1980s. Prior to the 1980s, it consisted of an open outcry exchange. Stockbrokers met on the trading floor of the Palais Brongniart. In 1986, the CATS trading system was introduced, and the order matching process was fully automated.
People trading stock will prefer to trade on the most popular exchange since this gives the largest number of potential counterparties (buyers for a seller, sellers for a buyer) and probably the best price. However, there have always been alternatives such as brokers trying to bring parties together to trade outside the exchange. Some third markets that were popular are Instinet, and later Island and Archipelago (the later two have since been acquired by Nasdaq and NYSE, respectively). One advantage is that this avoids the commissions of the exchange. However, it also has problems such as adverse selection.[6] Financial regulators are probing dark pools.[7][8]
Market participant[edit]




The offices of Bursa Malaysia, Malaysia's national stock exchange (known before demutualization as Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange)


Market participants include individual retail investors, institutional investors such as mutual funds, banks, insurance companies and hedge funds, and also publicly traded corporations trading in their own shares. Some studies have suggested that institutional investors and corporations trading in their own shares generally receive higher risk-adjusted returns than retail investors.[9]
A few decades ago, most buyers and sellers were individual investors, such as wealthy businessmen, usually with long family histories to particular corporations. Over time, markets have become more "institutionalized"; buyers and sellers are largely institutions (e.g., pension funds, insurance companies, mutual funds, index funds, exchange-traded funds, hedge funds, investor groups, banks and various other financial institutions).
The rise of the institutional investor has brought with it some improvements in market operations. There has been a gradual tendency for "fixed" (and exorbitant) fees being reduced for all investors, partly from falling administration costs but also assisted by large institutions challenging brokers' oligopolistic approach to setting standardised fees.[citation needed] A current trend in stock market investments includes the decrease in fees due to computerized asset management termed Robo Advisers within the industry. Automation has decreased portfolio management costs by lowering the cost associated with investing as a whole.
Trends in market participation[edit]
Stock market participation refers to the number of agents who buy and sell equity backed securities either directly or indirectly in a financial exchange. Participants are generally subdivided into three distinct sectors; households, institutions, and foreign traders. Direct participation occurs when any of the above entities buys or sells securities on its own behalf on an exchange. Indirect participation occurs when an institutional investor exchanges a stock on behalf of an individual or household. Indirect investment occurs in the form of pooled investment accounts, retirement accounts, and other managed financial accounts.
Indirect vs. direct investment[edit]
The total value of equity-backed securities in the United States rose over 600% in the 25 years between 1989 and 2012 as market capitalization expanded from $2,790 billion to $18,668 billion.[10] Direct ownership of stock by individuals rose slightly from 17.8% in 1992 to 17.9% in 2007, with the median value of these holdings rising from $14,778 to $17,000.[11][12] Indirect participation in the form of retirement accounts rose from 39.3% in 1992 to 52.6% in 2007, with the median value of these accounts more than doubling from $22,000 to $45,000 in that time.[11][12] Rydqvist, Spizman, and Strebulaev attribute the differential growth in direct and indirect holdings to differences in the way each are taxed in the United States. Investments in pension funds and 401ks, the two most common vehicles of indirect participation, are taxed only when funds are withdrawn from the accounts. Conversely, the money used to directly purchase stock is subject to taxation as are any dividends or capital gains they generate for the holder. In this way the current tax code incentivizes individuals to invest indirectly.[13]
Participation by income and wealth strata[edit]
Rates of participation and the value of holdings differs significantly across strata of income. In the bottom quintile of income, 5.5% of households directly own stock and 10.7% hold stocks indirectly in the form of retirement accounts.[12] The top decile of income has a direct participation rate of 47.5% and an indirect participation rate in the form of retirement accounts of 89.6%.[12] The median value of directly owned stock in the bottom quintile of income is $4,000 and is $78,600 in the top decile of income as of 2007.[14] The median value of indirectly held stock in the form of retirement accounts for the same two groups in the same year is $6,300 and $214,800 respectively.[14] Since the Great Recession of 2008 households in the bottom half of the income distribution have lessened their participation rate both directly and indirectly from 53.2% in 2007 to 48.8% in 2013, while over the same time period households in the top decile of the income distribution slightly increased participation 91.7% to 92.1%.[15] The mean value of direct and indirect holdings at the bottom half of the income distribution moved slightly downward from $53,800 in 2007 to $53,600 in 2013.[15] In the top decile, mean value of all holdings fell from $982,000 to $969,300 in the same time.[15] The mean value of all stock holdings across the entire income distribution is valued at $269,900 as of 2013.[15]
Participation by head of household race and gender[edit]
The racial composition of stock market ownership shows households headed by whites are nearly four and six times as likely to directly own stocks than households headed by blacks and Hispanics respectively. As of 2011 the national rate of direct participation was 19.6%, for white households the participation rate was 24.5%, for black households it was 6.4% and for Hispanic households it was 4.3% Indirect participation in the form of 401k ownership shows a similar pattern with a national participation rate of 42.1%, a rate of 46.4% for white households, 31.7% for black households, and 25.8% for Hispanic households. Households headed by married couples participated at rates above the national averages with 25.6% participating directly and 53.4% participating indirectly through a retirement account. 14.7% of households headed by men participated in the market directly and 33.4% owned stock through a retirement account. 12.6% of female headed households directly owned stock and 28.7% owned stock indirectly.[12]
Determinants and possible explanations of stock market participation[edit]
In a 2002 paper Anntte Vissing-Jorgensen from the University of Chicago attempts to explain disproportionate rates of participation along wealth and income groups as a function of fixed costs associated with investing. Her research concludes that a fixed cost of $200 per year is sufficient to explain why nearly half of all U.S. households do not participate in the market.[16] Participation rates have been shown to strongly correlate with education levels, promoting the hypothesis that information and transaction costs of market participation are better absorbed by more educated households. Behavioral economists Harrison Hong, Jeffrey Kubik and Jeremy Stein suggest that sociability and participation rates of communities have a statistically significant impact on an individual’s decision to participate in the market. Their research indicates that social individuals living in states with higher than average participation rates are 5% more likely to participate than individuals that do not share those characteristics.[17] This phenomenon also explained in cost terms. Knowledge of market functioning diffuses through communities and consequently lowers transaction costs associated with investing.
History[edit]




Courtyard of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange (or Beurs van Hendrick de Keyser in Dutch), the world's first formal stock exchange. The first formal stock market in its modern sense – as one of the indispensable elements of modern capitalism[18] – was a pioneering innovation by the VOC managers and shareholders in the early 1600s.[19][20]


Early history[edit]
In 12th-century France, the courretiers de change were concerned with managing and regulating the debts of agricultural communities on behalf of the banks. Because these men also traded with debts, they could be called the first brokers. A common misbelief[citation needed] is that, in late 13th-century Bruges, commodity traders gathered inside the house of a man called Van der Beurze, and in 1409 they became the "Brugse Beurse", institutionalizing what had been, until then, an informal meeting, but actually, the family Van der Beurze had a building in Antwerp where those gatherings occurred;[21] the Van der Beurze had Antwerp, as most of the merchants of that period, as their primary place for trading. The idea quickly spread around Flanders and neighboring countries and "Beurzen" soon opened in Ghent and Rotterdam.
In the middle of the 13th century, Venetian bankers began to trade in government securities. In 1351 the Venetian government outlawed spreading rumors intended to lower the price of government funds. Bankers in Pisa, Verona, Genoa and Florence also began trading in government securities during the 14th century. This was only possible because these were independent city-states not ruled by a duke but a council of influential citizens. Italian companies were also the first to issue shares. Companies in England and the Low Countries followed in the 16th century.
Birth of formal stock markets[edit]
See also: Economic history of the Dutch Republic, Financial history of the Dutch Republic, and Dutch East India Company




One of the oldest known stock certificates, issued by the VOC chamber of Enkhuizen, dated 9 Sep 1606.[22][23][24][25]






A 17th-century engraving depicting the Amsterdam Stock Exchange (Amsterdam's old bourse, a.k.a. Beurs van Hendrick de Keyser in Dutch), built by Hendrick de Keyser (c. 1612). The Amsterdam Stock Exchange was the world's first official (formal) stock exchange when it began trading the VOC's freely transferable securities, including bonds and shares of stock[26].






Courtyard of the Amsterdam Stock Exchange (Beurs van Hendrick de Keyser) by Emanuel de Witte, 1653. The Amsterdam Stock Exchange is said to have been the first stock exchange to introduce continuous trade in the early 17th century. The process of buying and selling the VOC's shares, on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange, became the basis of the world's first official (formal) stock market.[27][28][29]






Established in 1875, the Bombay Stock Exchange is Asia's first stock exchange.


In the 17th and 18th centuries, the Dutch pioneering several financial innovations that helped lay the foundations of modern financial system.[30][31][32][33] While the Italian city-states produced the first transferable government bonds, they did not develop the other ingredient necessary to produce a fully fledged capital market: corporate shareholders. In the early 1600s the Dutch East India Company (VOC) became the first company in history to issue bonds and shares of stock to the general public.[34] As Edward Stringham (2015) notes, "companies with transferable shares date back to classical Rome, but these were usually not enduring endeavors and no considerable secondary market existed (Neal, 1997, p. 61)."[35] The Dutch East India Company (founded in the year of 1602) was also the first joint-stock company to get a fixed capital stock and as a result, continuous trade in company stock occurred on the Amsterdam Exchange. Soon thereafter, a lively trade in various derivatives, among which options and repos, emerged on the Amsterdam market. Dutch traders also pioneered short selling – a practice which was banned by the Dutch authorities as early as 1610.[36]
There are now stock markets in virtually every developed and most developing economies, with the world's largest markets being in the United States, United Kingdom, Japan, India, China, Canada, Germany (Frankfurt Stock Exchange), France, South Korea and the Netherlands.[37]
Importance[edit]
As the Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises noted, "A stock market is crucial to the existence of capitalism and private property. For it means that there is a functioning market in the exchange of private titles to the means of production. There can be no genuine private ownership of capital without a stock market: there can be no true socialism if such a market is allowed to exist."[38]
Function and purpose[edit]
The stock market is one of the most important ways for companies to raise money, along with debt markets which are generally more imposing but do not trade publicly.[39] This allows businesses to be publicly traded, and raise additional financial capital for expansion by selling shares of ownership of the company in a public market. The liquidity that an exchange affords the investors enables their holders to quickly and easily sell securities. This is an attractive feature of investing in stocks, compared to other less liquid investments such as property and other immoveable assets. Some companies actively increase liquidity by trading in their own shares.[40][41]
History has shown that the price of stocks and other assets is an important part of the dynamics of economic activity, and can influence or be an indicator of social mood. An economy where the stock market is on the rise is considered to be an up-and-coming economy. The stock market is often considered the primary indicator of a country's economic strength and development.[42]
Rising share prices, for instance, tend to be associated with increased business investment and vice versa. Share prices also affect the wealth of households and their consumption. Therefore, central banks tend to keep an eye on the control and behavior of the stock market and, in general, on the smooth operation of financial system functions. Financial stability is the raison d'être of central banks.[43]
Exchanges also act as the clearinghouse for each transaction, meaning that they collect and deliver the shares, and guarantee payment to the seller of a security. This eliminates the risk to an individual buyer or seller that the counterparty could default on the transaction.[44]
The smooth functioning of all these activities facilitates economic growth in that lower costs and enterprise risks promote the production of goods and services as well as possibly employment. In this way the financial system is assumed to contribute to increased prosperity, although some controversy exists as to whether the optimal financial system is bank-based or market-based.[45][citation needed]
Recent events such as the Global Financial Crisis have prompted a heightened degree of scrutiny of the impact of the structure of stock markets[46][47] (called market microstructure), in particular to the stability of the financial system and the transmission of systemic risk.[48]
Relation to the modern financial system[edit]
The financial system in most western countries has undergone a remarkable transformation. One feature of this development is disintermediation. A portion of the funds involved in saving and financing, flows directly to the financial markets instead of being routed via the traditional bank lending and deposit operations. The general public interest in investing in the stock market, either directly or through mutual funds, has been an important component of this process.
Statistics show that in recent decades, shares have made up an increasingly large proportion of households' financial assets in many countries. In the 1970s, in Sweden, deposit accounts and other very liquid assets with little risk made up almost 60 percent of households' financial wealth, compared to less than 20 percent in the 2000s. The major part of this adjustment is that financial portfolios have gone directly to shares but a good deal now takes the form of various kinds of institutional investment for groups of individuals, e.g., pension funds, mutual funds, hedge funds, insurance investment of premiums, etc.
The trend towards forms of saving with a higher risk has been accentuated by new rules for most funds and insurance, permitting a higher proportion of shares to bonds. Similar tendencies are to be found in other developed countries. In all developed economic systems, such as the European Union, the United States, Japan and other developed nations, the trend has been the same: saving has moved away from traditional (government insured) "bank deposits to more risky securities of one sort or another".
A second transformation is the move to electronic trading to replace human trading of listed securities.[47]
United States S&P stock market returns[edit]
(assumes 2% annual dividend)


Years to December 31, 2012
Average Annual Return
 %[citation needed][clarification needed]
Average Compounded
Annual Return
 %[citation needed][clarification needed]


1
15.5
15.5


3
10.9
11.6


5
4.3
10.1


10
8.8
7.3


15
6.5
5.9


20
10.0
6.4


30
11.6
7.3


40
10.1
8.0


50
10.0
8.1


60
10.5
8.2


Compared to Other Asset Classes Over the long term, investing in a well diversified portfolio of stocks such as an S&P 500 Index outperforms other investment vehicles such as Treasury Bills and Bonds, with the S&P 500 having a geometric annual average of 9.55% from 1928 to 2013.[49]
Behavior of the stock market[edit]




NASDAQ in Times Square, New York City


Investors may temporarily move financial prices away from market equilibrium. Over-reactions may occur—so that excessive optimism (euphoria) may drive prices unduly high or excessive pessimism may drive prices unduly low. Economists continue to debate whether financial markets are generally efficient.
According to one interpretation of the efficient-market hypothesis (EMH), only changes in fundamental factors, such as the outlook for margins, profits or dividends, ought to affect share prices beyond the short term, where random 'noise' in the system may prevail. The 'hard' efficient-market hypothesis does not explain the cause of events such as the crash in 1987, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plummeted 22.6 percent—the largest-ever one-day fall in the United States.[50]
This event demonstrated that share prices can fall dramatically even though no generally agreed upon definite cause has been found: a thorough search failed to detect any 'reasonable' development that might have accounted for the crash. (Note that such events are predicted to occur strictly by chance, although very rarely.) It seems also to be the case more generally that many price movements (beyond that which are predicted to occur 'randomly') are not occasioned by new information; a study of the fifty largest one-day share price movements in the United States in the post-war period seems to confirm this.[50]
A 'soft' EMH has emerged which does not require that prices remain at or near equilibrium, but only that market participants not be able to systematically profit from any momentary market 'inefficiencies'. Moreover, while EMH predicts that all price movement (in the absence of change in fundamental information) is random (i.e., non-trending), many studies have shown a marked tendency for the stock market to trend over time periods of weeks or longer. Various explanations for such large and apparently non-random price movements have been promulgated. For instance, some research has shown that changes in estimated risk, and the use of certain strategies, such as stop-loss limits and value at risk limits, theoretically could cause financial markets to overreact. But the best explanation seems to be that the distribution of stock market prices is non-Gaussian[51] (in which case EMH, in any of its current forms, would not be strictly applicable).[52][53]
Other research has shown that psychological factors may result in exaggerated (statistically anomalous) stock price movements (contrary to EMH which assumes such behaviors 'cancel out'). Psychological research has demonstrated that people are predisposed to 'seeing' patterns, and often will perceive a pattern in what is, in fact, just noise, e.g. seeing familiar shapes in clouds or ink blots. In the present context this means that a succession of good news items about a company may lead investors to overreact positively, driving the price up. A period of good returns also boosts the investors' self-confidence, reducing their (psychological) risk threshold.[54]
Another phenomenon—also from psychology—that works against an objective assessment is group thinking. As social animals, it is not easy to stick to an opinion that differs markedly from that of a majority of the group. An example with which one may be familiar is the reluctance to enter a restaurant that is empty; people generally prefer to have their opinion validated by those of others in the group.
In one paper the authors draw an analogy with gambling.[55] In normal times the market behaves like a game of roulette; the probabilities are known and largely independent of the investment decisions of the different players. In times of market stress, however, the game becomes more like poker (herding behavior takes over). The players now must give heavy weight to the psychology of other investors and how they are likely to react psychologically.
In the period running up to the 1987 crash, less than 1 percent of the analyst's recommendations had been to sell (and even during the 2000–2002 bear market, the average did not rise above 5%). In the run-up to 2000, the media amplified the general euphoria, with reports of rapidly rising share prices and the notion that large sums of money could be quickly earned in the so-called new economy stock market.[citation needed]
Stock markets play an essential role in growing industries that ultimately affect the economy through transferring available funds from units that have excess funds (savings) to those who are suffering from funds deficit (borrowings) (Padhi and Naik, 2012). In other words, capital markets facilitate funds movement between the above-mentioned units. This process leads to the enhancement of available financial resources which in turn affects the economic growth positively. Moreover, both economic and financial theories argue that stock prices are affected by macroeconomic trends.[citation needed]
Many different academic researchers have stated companies with low P/E ratios and smaller sized companies have a tendency to outperform the market. Research carried out states mid-sized companies outperform large cap companies and smaller companies have higher returns historically.
Irrational behavior[edit]
Sometimes, the market seems to react irrationally to economic or financial news, even if that news is likely to have no real effect on the fundamental value of securities itself. [56] However, this market behaviour may be more apparent than real, since often such news was anticipated, and a counterreaction may occur if the news is better (or worse) than expected. Therefore, the stock market may be swayed in either direction by press releases, rumors, euphoria and mass panic.
Over the short-term, stocks and other securities can be battered or buoyed by any number of fast market-changing events, making the stock market behavior difficult to predict. Emotions can drive prices up and down, people are generally not as rational as they think, and the reasons for buying and selling are generally accepted.
Behaviorists argue that investors often behave irrationally when making investment decisions thereby incorrectly pricing securities, which causes market inefficiencies, which, in turn, are opportunities to make money.[57] However, the whole notion of EMH is that these non-rational reactions to information cancel out, leaving the prices of stocks rationally determined.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average biggest gain in one day was 936.42 points or 11%.[58]
Crashes[edit]
Main article: Stock market crash
Further information: List of stock market crashes




Robert Shiller's plot of the S&P Composite Real Price Index, Earnings, Dividends, and Interest Rates, from Irrational Exuberance, 2d ed.[59] In the preface to this edition, Shiller warns, "The stock market has not come down to historical levels: the price-earnings ratio as I define it in this book is still, at this writing [2005], in the mid-20s, far higher than the historical average... People still place too much confidence in the markets and have too strong a belief that paying attention to the gyrations in their investments will someday make them rich, and so they do not make conservative preparations for possible bad outcomes."






Price-Earnings ratios as a predictor of twenty-year returns based upon the plot by Robert Shiller (Figure 10.1,[59] source). The horizontal axis shows the real price-earnings ratio of the S&P Composite Stock Price Index as computed in Irrational Exuberance (inflation adjusted price divided by the prior ten-year mean of inflation-adjusted earnings). The vertical axis shows the geometric average real annual return on investing in the S&P Composite Stock Price Index, reinvesting dividends, and selling twenty years later. Data from different twenty-year periods is color-coded as shown in the key. See also ten-year returns. Shiller states that this plot "confirms that long-term investors—investors who commit their money to an investment for ten full years—did do well when prices were low relative to earnings at the beginning of the ten years. Long-term investors would be well advised, individually, to lower their exposure to the stock market when it is high, as it has been recently, and get into the market when it is low."[59]


A stock market crash is often defined as a sharp dip in share prices of stocks listed on the stock exchanges. In parallel with various economic factors, a reason for stock market crashes is also due to panic and investing public's loss of confidence. Often, stock market crashes end speculative economic bubbles.
There have been famous stock market crashes that have ended in the loss of billions of dollars and wealth destruction on a massive scale. An increasing number of people are involved in the stock market, especially since the social security and retirement plans are being increasingly privatized and linked to stocks and bonds and other elements of the market. There have been a number of famous stock market crashes like the Wall Street Crash of 1929, the stock market crash of 1973–4, the Black Monday of 1987, the Dot-com bubble of 2000, and the Stock Market Crash of 2008.
One of the most famous stock market crashes started October 24, 1929, on Black Thursday. The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 50% during this stock market crash. It was the beginning of the Great Depression. Another famous crash took place on October 19, 1987 – Black Monday. The crash began in Hong Kong and quickly spread around the world.
By the end of October, stock markets in Hong Kong had fallen 45.5%, Australia 41.8%, Spain 31%, the United Kingdom 26.4%, the United States 22.68%, and Canada 22.5%. Black Monday itself was the largest one-day percentage decline in stock market history – the Dow Jones fell by 22.6% in a day. The names "Black Monday" and "Black Tuesday" are also used for October 28–29, 1929, which followed Terrible Thursday—the starting day of the stock market crash in 1929.
The crash in 1987 raised some puzzles – main news and events did not predict the catastrophe and visible reasons for the collapse were not identified. This event raised questions about many important assumptions of modern economics, namely, the theory of rational human conduct, the theory of market equilibrium and the efficient-market hypothesis. For some time after the crash, trading in stock exchanges worldwide was halted, since the exchange computers did not perform well owing to enormous quantity of trades being received at one time. This halt in trading allowed the Federal Reserve System and central banks of other countries to take measures to control the spreading of worldwide financial crisis. In the United States the SEC introduced several new measures of control into the stock market in an attempt to prevent a re-occurrence of the events of Black Monday.
Since the early 1990s, many of the largest exchanges have adopted electronic 'matching engines' to bring together buyers and sellers, replacing the open outcry system. Electronic trading now accounts for the majority of trading in many developed countries. Computer systems were upgraded in the stock exchanges to handle larger trading volumes in a more accurate and controlled manner. The SEC modified the margin requirements in an attempt to lower the volatility of common stocks, stock options and the futures market. The New York Stock Exchange and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange introduced the concept of a circuit breaker. The circuit breaker halts trading if the Dow declines a prescribed number of points for a prescribed amount of time. In February 2012, the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC) introduced single-stock circuit breakers.[60]

New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) circuit breakers[61]



 % drop
time of drop
close trading for


10 
before 2 pm
one hour halt


10 
2 pm – 2:30 pm
half-hour halt


10 
after 2:30 pm
market stays open


20 
before 1 pm
halt for two hours


20 
1 pm – 2 pm
halt for one hour


20 
after 2 pm
close for the day


30 
any time during day
close for the day


Stock market prediction[edit]
Main article: Stock market prediction
Tobias Preis and his colleagues Helen Susannah Moat and H. Eugene Stanley introduced a method to identify online precursors for stock market moves, using trading strategies based on search volume data provided by Google Trends.[62] Their analysis of Google search volume for 98 terms of varying financial relevance suggests that increases in search volume for financially relevant search terms tend to precede large losses in financial markets.[63][64]
Stock market index[edit]
Main article: Stock market index
The movements of the prices in a market or section of a market are captured in price indices called stock market indices, of which there are many, e.g., the S&P, the FTSE and the Euronext indices. Such indices are usually market capitalization weighted, with the weights reflecting the contribution of the stock to the index. The constituents of the index are reviewed frequently to include/exclude stocks in order to reflect the changing business environment.
Derivative instruments[edit]
Main article: Derivative (finance)
Financial innovation has brought many new financial instruments whose pay-offs or values depend on the prices of stocks. Some examples are exchange-traded funds (ETFs), stock index and stock options, equity swaps, single-stock futures, and stock index futures. These last two may be traded on futures exchanges (which are distinct from stock exchanges—their history traces back to commodity futures exchanges), or traded over-the-counter. As all of these products are only derived from stocks, they are sometimes considered to be traded in a (hypothetical) derivatives market, rather than the (hypothetical) stock market.
Leveraged strategies[edit]
Stock that a trader does not actually own may be traded using short selling; margin buying may be used to purchase stock with borrowed funds; or, derivatives may be used to control large blocks of stocks for a much smaller amount of money than would be required by outright purchase or sales.
Short selling[edit]
Main article: Short selling
In short selling, the trader borrows stock (usually from his brokerage which holds its clients' shares or its own shares on account to lend to short sellers) then sells it on the market, betting that the price will fall. The trader eventually buys back the stock, making money if the price fell in the meantime and losing money if it rose. Exiting a short position by buying back the stock is called "covering." This strategy may also be used by unscrupulous traders in illiquid or thinly traded markets to artificially lower the price of a stock. Hence most markets either prevent short selling or place restrictions on when and how a short sale can occur. The practice of naked shorting is illegal in most (but not all) stock markets.
Margin buying[edit]
Main article: margin buying
In margin buying, the trader borrows money (at interest) to buy a stock and hopes for it to rise. Most industrialized countries have regulations that require that if the borrowing is based on collateral from other stocks the trader owns outright, it can be a maximum of a certain percentage of those other stocks' value. In the United States, the margin requirements have been 50% for many years (that is, if you want to make a $1000 investment, you need to put up $500, and there is often a maintenance margin below the $500).
A margin call is made if the total value of the investor's account cannot support the loss of the trade. (Upon a decline in the value of the margined securities additional funds may be required to maintain the account's equity, and with or without notice the margined security or any others within the account may be sold by the brokerage to protect its loan position. The investor is responsible for any shortfall following such forced sales.)
Regulation of margin requirements (by the Federal Reserve) was implemented after the Crash of 1929. Before that, speculators typically only needed to put up as little as 10 percent (or even less) of the total investment represented by the stocks purchased. Other rules may include the prohibition of free-riding: putting in an order to buy stocks without paying initially (there is normally a three-day grace period for delivery of the stock), but then selling them (before the three-days are up) and using part of the proceeds to make the original payment (assuming that the value of the stocks has not declined in the interim).
New issuance[edit]
Main article: Thomson Reuters league tables
Global issuance of equity and equity-related instruments totaled $505 billion in 2004, a 29.8% increase over the $389 billion raised in 2003. Initial public offerings (IPOs) by US issuers increased 221% with 233 offerings that raised $45 billion, and IPOs in Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA) increased by 333%, from $9 billion to $39 billion.
ASX Share Market Game[edit]
ASX Share Market Game is a platform for Australian school students and beginners to learn about trading stocks. The game is a free service hosted on ASX (Australian Securities Exchange) website.[65] Each year more than 70,000 students enroll in the game. For the vast majority, this is an introduction to stock market investing. Students once enrolled, are given $50,000 of virtual money and can buy and sell up to 20 times a day. The game runs for 10 weeks. Many similar programs are found in secondary educational institutions across the world.
Investment strategies[edit]
Main article: Investment strategy
There are many different approaches to investing. Many strategies can be classified as either fundamental analysis or technical analysis. Fundamental analysis refers to analyzing companies by their financial statements found in SEC filings, business trends, general economic conditions, etc. Technical analysis studies price actions in markets through the use of charts and quantitative techniques to attempt to forecast price trends regardless of the company's financial prospects. One example of a technical strategy is the Trend following method, used by John W. Henry and Ed Seykota, which uses price patterns and is also rooted in risk control and diversification.
Additionally, many choose to invest via the index method. In this method, one holds a weighted or unweighted portfolio consisting of the entire stock market or some segment of the stock market (such as the S&P 500 or Wilshire 5000). The principal aim of this strategy is to maximize diversification, minimize taxes from too frequent trading, and ride the general trend of the stock market (which, in the U.S., has averaged nearly 10% per year, compounded annually, since World War II).
Taxation[edit]
Main article: Capital gains tax
According to much national or state legislation, a large array of fiscal obligations are taxed for capital gains. Taxes are charged by the state over the transactions, dividends and capital gains on the stock market, in particular in the stock exchanges. These fiscal obligations vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Some countries[which?] avoid taxing profits on stocks as the profits are already taxed when companies file returns, but double taxation is common at some level in many countries.
See also[edit]

Equity crowdfunding
List of market opening times
List of stock exchanges
List of stock market indices
Modeling and analysis of financial markets
Securities market participants (United States)
Securities regulation in the United States
Stock market bubble
Stock market cycles
Stock market data systems

References[edit]


^ Agarwal (July 14, 2017). "Introduction to the Stock Market". Intelligent Economist. Retrieved December 18, 2017. 
^ WFE 2012 Market Highlights
^ "Global Stock Rally: World Market Cap Reached Record High In March | Seeking Alpha". 
^ "All of the World's Stock Exchanges by Size". 2016-02-16. Retrieved 2016-09-29. 
^ "IBM Investor relations - FAQ | On what stock exchanges is IBM listed ?". IBM. 
^ Ortega, Edgar; Yalman, Onaran (December 4, 2006). "UBS, Goldman Threaten NYSE, Nasdaq With Rival Stock Markets". Bloomberg.com. Retrieved 2011-05-31. 
^ Mamudi, Sam (June 13, 2014). "Dark Pools Take Larger Share of Trades Amid SEC Scrutiny". Bloomberg. 
^ Financial regulators probe dark pools Financial Times
^ Amedeo De Cesari, Susanne Espenlaub, Arif Khurshed, and Michael Simkovic, The Effects of Ownership and Stock Liquidity on the Timing of Repurchase Transactions (October 2010). Paolo Baffi Centre Research Paper No. 2011-100.
^ "Market capitalization of listed domestic companies (current US$) | Data | Graph". data.worldbank.org. Retrieved 2015-12-17. 
^ a b Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1995 (Report). United States Census Bureau. September 1995. p. 513. Retrieved 2015-12-17. 
^ a b c d e Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012 (Report). United States Census Bureau. August 2011. p. 730. Retrieved 2015-12-17. 
^ Rydqvist, Kristian; Spizman, Joshua; Strebulaev, Ilya A. (2011-10-01). "Government Policy and Ownership of Financial Assets". 
^ a b Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2007 to 2010: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF) (Report). Federal Reserve Board of Governors. June 2012. p. 24. Retrieved 2015-12-17. 
^ a b c d Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2010 to 2013: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF) (Report). Federal Reserve Board of Governors. September 2014. p. 20. Retrieved 2015-12-17. 
^ Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette (2002-04-01). "Towards an Explanation of Household Portfolio Choice Heterogeneity: Nonfinancial Income and Participation Cost Structures". 
^ Hong, Harrison (February 2004). "Social Interaction and Stock-Market Participation" (PDF). The Journal of Finance. Retrieved 2015-12-17. 
^ Preda, Alex (2009)
^ Stringham, Edward Peter: Private Governance: Creating Order in Economic and Social Life. (Oxford University Press, 2015, ISBN 9780199365166)
^ Stringham, Edward Peter (5 October 2015). "How Private Governance Made the Modern World Possible". Cato Unbound (www.cato-unbound.org). Retrieved 15 August 2017. 
^ "16de eeuwse traditionele bak- en zandsteenarchitectuur Oude Beurs Antwerpen 1 (centrum) / Antwerp foto". Belgiumview.com. Retrieved March 5, 2010. 
^ "World's oldest share". The World's Oldest Share. Retrieved 8 August 2017. 
^ "Dutch history student finds world's oldest share". Guinness World Records Limited 2014. 10 Sep 2010. Retrieved 8 August 2017. 
^ "Student finds oldest Dutch share". Radio Netherlands Worldwide. 10 Sep 2010. Retrieved 8 August 2017. 
^ Dunkley, Jamie (11 Sep 2010). "Dutch student finds world's oldest share certificate". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 8 August 2017. 
^ Petram, Lodewijk: The World's First Stock Exchange (Columbia Business School Publishing). Translated from the Dutch original by Lynne Richards. (Columbia University Press, 2014, ISBN 9780231163781)
^ Brooks, John: The Fluctuation: The Little Crash in '62, in Business Adventures: Twelve Classic Tales from the World of Wall Street. (New York: Weybright & Talley, 1968)
^ Shiller, Robert (2011). Economics 252, Financial Markets: Lecture 4 – Portfolio Diversification and Supporting Financial Institutions (Open Yale Courses). [Transcript]
^ Macaulay, Catherine R. (2015). Capitalism's renaissance? The potential of repositioning the financial 'meta-economy'. (Futures, Volume 68, April 2015, p. 5–18)
^ Tracy, James D. (1985). A Financial Revolution in the Habsburg Netherlands: Renten and Renteniers in the County of Holland, 1515–1565. (University of California Press, 300 pp)
^ Goetzmann, William N.; Rouwenhorst, K. Geert (2005). The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations that Created Modern Capital Markets. (Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195175714))
^ Goetzmann, William N.; Rouwenhorst, K. Geert (2008). The History of Financial Innovation, in Carbon Finance, Environmental Market Solutions to Climate Change. (Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, chapter 1, pp. 18–43). As Goetzmann & Rouwenhorst (2008) noted, "The 17th and 18th centuries in the Netherlands were a remarkable time for finance. Many of the financial products or instruments that we see today emerged during a relatively short period. In particular, merchants and bankers developed what we would today call securitization. Mutual funds and various other forms of structured finance that still exist today emerged in the 17th and 18th centuries in Holland."
^ Sylla, Richard (2015). "Financial Development, Corporations, and Inequality". (BHC-EBHA Meeting). As Richard Sylla (2015) notes, "In modern history, several nations had what some of us call financial revolutions. These can be thought of as creating in a short period of time all the key components of a modern financial system. The first was the Dutch Republic four centuries ago."
^ Neal, Larry (2005). “Venture Shares of the Dutch East India Company,”, in The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations that Created Modern Capital Markets, Goetzmann & Rouwenhorst (eds.), Oxford University Press, 2005, pp. 165–175
^ Stringham, Edward Peter: Private Governance: Creating Order in Economic and Social Life. (Oxford University Press, 2015, ISBN 9780199365166), p.42
^ Petram, Lodewijk (Columbia University Press, 2014, ISBN 9780231163781)
^ "World Federation of Exchanges Monthly YTD Data". World-exchanges.org. Retrieved 2011-05-31. 
^ Rothbard, Murray: Making Economic Sense, 2nd edition. (Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2006, ISBN 9781610165907), p. 426
^ "Equity market > Size relative to bond markets and bank assets". eurocapitalmarkets.org. Retrieved August 14, 2015. 
^ Cesari, Amedeo De; Espenlaub, Susanne; Khurshed, Arif; Simkovic, Michael (2010). "The Effects of Ownership and Stock Liquidity on the Timing of Repurchase Transactions". Paolo Baffi Centre Research Paper No. 2011-100. SSRN 1884171 . 
^ Simkovic, Michael (2009). "The Effect of Enhanced Disclosure on Open Market Stock Repurchases". Berkeley Business Law Journal. 6 (1). SSRN 1117303 . 
^ Mahipal Singh, 2011, ISBN 9788182055193, April 2011
^ "Financial Stability Frameworks and the Role of Central Banks: Lessons from the Crisis" (PDF). 
^ "Clearinghouse Definition & Example | Investing Answers". www.investinganswers.com. Retrieved 2015-10-20. 
^ http://wdi.umich.edu/files/publications/workingpapers/wp442.pdf
^ http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD354.pdf
^ a b "Future of computer trading". www.gov.uk. Retrieved August 14, 2015. 
^ K Alexander, R Dhumale, J Eatwell, Global governance of financial systems: the international regulation of systemic risk, Oxford University Press2006
^ "Historical Returns". nyu.edu. Retrieved August 14, 2015. 
^ a b Cutler, D. Poterba, J. & Summers, L. (1991). "Speculative dynamics". Review of Economic Studies. 58 (3): 520–546. doi:10.2307/2298010. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "OpenStax CNX". cnx.org. Rice University. Retrieved 22 February 2017. 
^ Mandelbrot, Benoit & Hudson, Richard L. (2006). The Misbehavior of Markets: A Fractal View of Financial Turbulence, annot. ed. Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-04357-7. 
^ Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (2008). Fooled by Randomness: The Hidden Role of Chance in Life and in the Markets, 2nd ed. Random House. ISBN 1-4000-6793-6. 
^ Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). "Judgement under uncertainty: heuristics and biases". Science. 185 (4157): 1124–1131. doi:10.1126/science.185.4157.1124. PMID 17835457. 
^ Morris, Stephen; Shin, Hyun Song (1999). "Risk management with interdependent choice" (PDF). Oxford Review of Economic Policy. 15 (3): 52–62. doi:10.1093/oxrep/15.3.52. 
^ David Fabian (February 9, 2014). "Why The Market Doesn't Care Where You Think It Should Go". Seeking Alpha. Retrieved August 14, 2015. 
^ Sergey Perminov, Trendocracy and Stock Market Manipulations (2008, ISBN 978-1-4357-5244-3).
^ "News Headlines". Cnbc.com. October 13, 2008. Retrieved March 5, 2010. 
^ a b c Shiller, Robert (2005). Irrational Exuberance (2d ed.). Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-12335-7. 
^ Completing the Circuit: Canadian Regulation, FIXGlobal, February 2012
^ Chris Farrell. "Where are the circuit breakers". Retrieved October 16, 2008. 
^ Philip Ball (April 26, 2013). "Counting Google searches predicts market movements". Nature. Retrieved August 28, 2013. 
^ Nick Bilton (April 26, 2013). "Google Search Terms Can Predict Stock Market, Study Finds". New York Times. Retrieved August 28, 2013. 
^ Jason Palmer (April 25, 2013). "Google searches predict market moves". BBC. Retrieved August 28, 2013. 
^ "Sharemarket Game". asx.com.au. Retrieved August 14, 2015. 


Further reading[edit]


Hamilton, W. P. (1922). The Stock Market Baraometer. New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc (1998 reprint). ISBN 0-471-24764-2. 
Preda, Alex (2009). Framing Finance: The Boundaries of Markets and Modern Capitalism. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-67932-7. 
Siegel, Jeremy J. (2008). "Stock Market". In David R. Henderson (ed.). Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Library of Economics and Liberty. ISBN 978-0865976658. OCLC 237794267. CS1 maint: Extra text: editors list (link)


External links[edit]



Look up stock market in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Stock market



Stock exchanges at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Stocks investing at Curlie (based on DMOZ)







v
t
e


Financial markets



Types of markets



Primary market
Secondary market
Third market
Fourth market





Types of stocks



Common stock
Golden share
Preferred stock
Restricted stock
Tracking stock





Share capital



Authorised capital
Issued shares
Shares outstanding
Treasury stock





Participants



Broker-dealer
Day trader
Floor broker
Floor trader
Investor
Market maker
Proprietary trader
Quantitative analyst
Regulator
Stock trader





Exchanges



Electronic communication network
List of stock exchanges

Opening times


Multilateral trading facility
Over-the-counter





Stock valuation



Alpha
Arbitrage pricing theory
Beta
Bid–ask spread
Book value
Capital asset pricing model
Capital market line
Dividend discount model
Dividend yield
Earnings per share
Earnings yield
Net asset value
Security characteristic line
Security market line
T-model





Trading theories
and strategies



Algorithmic trading
Buy and hold
Contrarian investing
Day trading
Dollar cost averaging
Efficient-market hypothesis
Fundamental analysis
Growth stock
Market timing
Modern portfolio theory
Momentum investing
Mosaic theory
Pairs trade
Post-modern portfolio theory
Random walk hypothesis
Sector rotation
Style investing
Swing trading
Technical analysis
Trend following
Value investing





Related terms



Block trade
Cross listing
Dark liquidity
Dividend
Dual-listed company
DuPont analysis
Efficient frontier
Flight-to-quality
Haircut
Initial public offering
Margin
Market anomaly
Market capitalization
Market depth
Market manipulation
Market trend
Mean reversion
Momentum
Open outcry
Public float
Public offering
Rally
Returns-based style analysis
Reverse stock split
Share repurchase
Short selling
Slippage
Speculation
Stock dilution
Stock market index
Stock split
Trade
Uptick rule
Volatility
Voting interest
Yield












v
t
e


Largest stock exchanges by market capitalization






  New York Stock Exchange
  NASDAQ
  London Stock Exchange
  Borsa Italiana
  Japan Exchange Group – Tokyo
  Shanghai
  Hong Kong
  Euronext
  Shenzhen
  Toronto Stock Exchange
  Deutsche Börse
  Bombay Stock Exchange
  National Stock Exchange of India
  SIX Swiss Exchange
  Australian Securities Exchange
  South Korea
  NASDAQ OMX Nordic Exchange
  JSE Limited
  BME Spanish Exchanges
  Taiwan
  BM&F Bovespa












v
t
e


Stock market crashes



17th century



Early stock market crashes in the Dutch Republic





18th century



The Mississippi Bubble
South Sea Bubble of 1720
Panic of 1792
Panic of 1796–97





19th century



Panic of 1819
Panic of 1825
Panic of 1837
Panic of 1847
Panic of 1857
Black Friday (1869)
Panic of 1873
Paris Bourse crash of 1882
Panic of 1884
Encilhamento
Panic of 1893
Panic of 1896





20th century



Panic of 1901
Panic of 1907
Depression of 1920–21
Wall Street Crash of 1929
Recession of 1937–38
1971 Brazilian markets crash
1973–74 stock market crash
Souk Al-Manakh stock market crash (1982)
Japanese asset price bubble (1986–1991)
Black Monday (1987)
Rio de Janeiro Stock Exchange collapse
Friday the 13th mini-crash (1989)
1990s Japanese stock market crash
Dot-com bubble (1995–2000)
1997 Asian financial crisis
October 27, 1997, mini-crash
1998 Russian financial crisis





21st century



Economic effects arising from the September 11 attacks (2001)
Stock market downturn of 2002
Chinese stock bubble of 2007
United States bear market of 2007–09
Financial crisis of 2007–08
Dubai debt standstill
European debt crisis
2010 Flash Crash
2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami (Aftermath)
August 2011 stock markets fall
2011 Bangladesh share market scam
2015–16 Chinese stock market turbulence
2015–16 stock market crash
2016 United Kingdom EU referendum (Aftermath)







See also: List of stock market crashes and bear markets











v
t
e


Economic history of the Netherlands



General



Economy of the Netherlands from 1500–1700
Economic history of the Dutch Republic
Economic history of the Netherlands (1500–1815)
Financial history of the Dutch Republic
Dutch guilder
Amsterdam Entrepôt
Tulip mania
Dutch Financial Revolution
Dutch economic miracle
Whaling in the Netherlands
Diamond industry in the Dutch Republic
Sugar industry in the Dutch Republic
Shipbuilding industry in the Dutch Republic
Pulp and paper industry in the Dutch Republic

Hollander beater


History of the chocolate industry

Dutch process chocolate


Polder model
Dutch disease





Key institutions




Pre-1815



Amsterdam Stock Exchange
Amsterdam Wisselbank
Brabantsche Compagnie
Compagnie van Verre
Dutch East India Company
Dutch West India Company
New Netherland Company
Noordsche Compagnie





Post-1815



De Nederlandsche Bank
Dutch Caribbean Securities Exchange (DCSX)
Stichting Max Havelaar








Notable business and
financial innovators



Louis De Geer
Gerard Adriaan Heineken
Isaac Le Maire
Johan Palmstruch
Anton Philips
Gerard Philips
Nico Roozen
Coenraad Johannes van Houten
Frans van der Hoff









Authority control



GND: 4130931-5
NDL: 00572098











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stock_market&oldid=818267213"					Categories: Stock market17th-century introductionsCapitalismDutch inventionsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listUse mdy dates from June 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2014Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2017CS1 maint: Extra text: editors listArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers