For other uses, see Stream (disambiguation).
"Rivulet" redirects here. For the moth, see Rivulet (moth).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Rocky stream in Italy


A stream is a body of water[1] with a current, confined within a bed and banks. Depending on its location or certain characteristics, a stream may be referred to by a variety of local or regional names.
Streams are important as conduits in the water cycle, instruments in groundwater recharge, and corridors for fish and wildlife migration. The biological habitat in the immediate vicinity of a stream is called a riparian zone. Given the status of the ongoing Holocene extinction, streams play an important corridor role in connecting fragmented habitats and thus in conserving biodiversity. The study of streams and waterways in general is known as surface hydrology and is a core element of environmental geography.[2]



Contents


1 Types
2 Other names

2.1 United Kingdom
2.2 North America


3 Other terminology
4 Sources
5 Characteristics
6 Intermittent and ephemeral streams

6.1 Ephemeral stream
6.2 Intermittent stream


7 Drainage basins
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Types[edit]




A rocky creek in Spearfish Canyon, South Dakota, US






Creek in Heathcote National Park, Australia






Wyming Brook in Sheffield, UK






Brook near the Bay of Fundy, Canada






A low level stream in Macon County, Illinois, US






A small stream in Lake Parramatta, Sydney.



Brook
A stream smaller than a creek, especially one that is fed by a spring or seep. It is usually small and easily forded. A brook is characterised by its shallowness and its bed being composed primarily of rocks.
Creek




In North America, Australia and New Zealand, a small to medium-sized natural stream. Sometimes navigable by motor craft and may be intermittent.
In parts of Maryland, New England,[3] the UK and India, a tidal inlet, typically in a salt marsh or mangrove swamp, or between enclosed and drained former salt marshes or swamps (e.g. Port Creek separating Portsea Island from the mainland). In these cases, the stream is the tidal stream, the course of the seawater through the creek channel at low and high tide.




River
A large natural stream, which may be a waterway.
Runnel
the linear channel between the parallel ridges or bars on a shoreline beach or river floodplain, or between a bar and the shore. Also called a swale.
Tributary
A contributory stream, or a stream which does not reach a static body of water such as a lake or ocean, but joins another river (a parent river). Sometimes also called a branch or fork.

Other names[edit]
There are a number of regional names for a stream.
United Kingdom[edit]

Allt is used in Highland Scotland.[citation needed]
Beck is used in Lincolnshire to Cumbria in areas which were once occupied by the Danes and Norwegians.[4]
Bourne or winterbourne is used in the chalk downland of southern England.[5]
Brook.[6]
Burn is used in Scotland and North East England.[7]
Gill or ghyll is seen in the north of England and Kent and Surrey influenced by Old Norse. The variant "ghyll" is used in the Lake District and appears to have been an invention of William Wordsworth.[8]
Nant is used in Wales.[9]
Rivulet is an term encountered in Victorian era publications.[10]
Stream
Syke is used in lowland Scotland and Cumbria for a seasonal stream.[11]

North America[edit]

Branch is used to name streams in Maryland and Virginia.[12]
Creek is common throughout the central and western United States, as well as Australia.
Falls is also used to name streams in Maryland, for streams/rivers which have waterfalls on them, even if such falls have a small vertical drop. Little Gunpowder Falls and The Jones Falls are actually rivers named in this manner, unique to Maryland.[citation needed]
Kill in New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and New Jersey comes from a Dutch language word meaning "riverbed" or "water channel", and can also be used for the UK meaning of 'creek'.
Run in Ohio, Maryland, Michigan, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia, or West Virginia can be the name of a stream.[citation needed]
Run in Florida is the name given to streams coming out of small natural springs.[citation needed]River is used for larger springs like the Silver River and Rainbow River.
Stream and brook are used in Midwestern states, Mid-Atlantic states, and New England.[citation needed]

Other terminology[edit]

Bar
A shoal that develops in a stream as sediment is deposited as the current slows or is impeded by wave action at the confluence.
Bifurcation
A fork into two or more streams.
Channel
A depression created by constant erosion that carries the stream's flow.
Confluence
The point at which the two streams merge. If the two tributaries are of approximately equal size, the confluence may be called a fork.
Floodplain
Lands adjacent to the stream that are subject to flooding when a stream overflows its banks.
Gauging station
A point of demarcation along the route of a stream or river, used for reference marking or water monitoring.
Headwaters
The part of a stream or river proximate to its source. The word is most commonly used in the plural where there is no single point source.
Knickpoint
The point on a stream's profile where a sudden change in stream gradient occurs.
Mouth
The point at which the stream discharges, possibly via an estuary or delta, into a static body of water such as a lake or ocean.
Pool
A segment where the water is deeper and slower moving.
Riffle
A segment where the flow is shallower and more turbulent.
River
A large natural stream, which may be a waterway.
Run
A somewhat smoothly flowing segment of the stream.
Source
The spring from which the stream originates, or other point of origin of a stream.
Spring
The point at which a stream emerges from an underground course through unconsolidated sediments or through caves. A stream can, especially with caves, flow aboveground for part of its course, and underground for part of its course.
Stream bed
The bottom of a stream.
Stream corridor
Stream, its floodplains, and the transitional upland fringe[13]
Thalweg
The river's longitudinal section, or the line joining the deepest point in the channel at each stage from source to mouth.
Waterfall or cascade
The fall of water where the stream goes over a sudden drop called a nickpoint; some nickpoints are formed by erosion when water flows over an especially resistant stratum, followed by one less so. The stream expends kinetic energy in "trying" to eliminate the nickpoint.
Wetted perimeter
The line on which the stream's surface meets the channel walls.

Sources[edit]




Small tributary stream, Diamond Ridge, Alaska, US






Creek in Perisher Ski Resort, Australia


Streams typically derive most of their water from precipitation in the form of rain and snow. Most of this water re-enters the atmosphere by evaporation from soil and water bodies, or by the evapotranspiration of plants. Some of the water proceeds to sink into the earth by infiltration and becomes groundwater, much of which eventually enters streams. Some precipitated water is temporarily locked up in snow fields and glaciers, to be released later by evaporation or melting. The rest of the water flows off the land as runoff, the proportion of which varies according to many factors, such as wind, humidity, vegetation, rock types, and relief. This runoff starts as a thin film called sheet wash, combined with a network of tiny rills, together constituting sheet runoff; when this water is concentrated in a channel, a stream has its birth. Some creeks may start from ponds or lakes.




Stream in Southbury, Connecticut, US


Characteristics[edit]

Ranking

To qualify as a stream, a body of water must be either recurring or perennial. Recurring (intermittent) streams have water in the channel for at least part of the year. A stream of the first order is a stream which does not have any other recurring or perennial stream feeding into it. When two first-order streams come together, they form a second-order stream. When two second-order streams come together, they form a third-order stream. Streams of lower order joining a higher order stream do not change the order of the higher stream. Thus, if a first-order stream joins a second-order stream, it remains a second-order stream. It is not until a second-order stream combines with another second-order stream that it becomes a third-order stream.

Gradient

The gradient of a stream is a critical factor in determining its character and is entirely determined by its base level of erosion. The base level of erosion is the point at which the stream either enters the ocean, a lake or pond, or enters a stretch in which it has a much lower gradient, and may be specifically applied to any particular stretch of a stream.
In geological terms, the stream will erode down through its bed to achieve the base level of erosion throughout its course. If this base level is low, then the stream will rapidly cut through underlying strata and have a steep gradient, and if the base level is relatively high, then the stream will form a flood plain and meander.

Meander

Meanders are looping changes of direction of a stream caused by the erosion and deposition of bank materials. These are typically serpentine in form. Typically, over time the meanders gradually migrate downstream.
If some resistant material slows or stops the downstream movement of a meander, a stream may erode through the neck between two legs of a meander to become temporarily straighter, leaving behind an arc-shaped body of water termed an oxbow lake or bayou. A flood may also cause a meander to be cut through in this way.

Profile

Typically, streams are said to have a particular profile, beginning with steep gradients, no flood plain, and little shifting of channels, eventually evolving into streams with low gradients, wide flood plains, and extensive meanders. The initial stage is sometimes termed a "young" or "immature" stream, and the later state a "mature" or "old" stream. However, a stream may meander for some distance before falling into a "young" stream condition.

Stream load

Streams can carry sediment, or alluvium. The amount of load it can carry (capacity) as well as the largest object it can carry (competence) are both dependent on the velocity of the stream.
Intermittent and ephemeral streams[edit]




Australian creek, low in the dry season, carrying little water. The energetic flow of the stream had, in flood, moved finer sediment further downstream. There is a pool to lower right and a riffle to upper left of the photograph.


A perennial stream is one which flows continuously all year.[14]:57 Some perennial streams may only have continuous flow in segments of its stream bed year round during years of normal rainfall.[15][16]
Blue-line streams are perennial streams and are marked on topographic maps with a solid blue line.
Ephemeral stream[edit]
Generally, streams that flow only during and immediately after precipitation are termed ephemeral. There is no clear demarcation between surface runoff and an ephemeral stream,[14]:58 and some ephemeral streams can be classed as intermittent—flow all but disappearing in the normal course of seasons but ample flow (backups) restoring stream presence—such circumstances are documented when stream beds have opened up a path into mines or other underground chambers.[17]
Intermittent stream[edit]

or seasonal stream

In the United States, an intermittent or seasonal stream is one that only flows for part of the year and is marked on topographic maps with a line of blue dashes and dots.[14]:57–58 A wash or desert wash is normally a dry streambed in the deserts of the American Southwest which flows only after significant rainfall. Washes can fill up quickly during rains, and there may be a sudden torrent of water after a thunderstorm begins upstream, such as during monsoonal conditions. These flash floods often catch travelers by surprise. An intermittent stream can also be called an arroyo in Latin America, a winterbourne in Britain, or a wadi in the Arabic-speaking world.
In Italy, an intermittent stream is termed a torrent (Italian torrente). In full flood the stream may or may not be "torrential" in the dramatic sense of the word, but there will be one or more seasons in which the flow is reduced to a trickle or less. Typically torrents have Apennine rather than Alpine sources, and in the summer they are fed by little precipitation and no melting snow. In this case the maximum discharge will be during the spring and autumn. However, there are also glacial torrents with a different seasonal regime.
In Australia, an intermittent stream is usually called a creek and marked on topographic maps with a solid blue line.
Drainage basins[edit]
The extent of land basin drained by a stream is termed its drainage basin (also known in North America as the watershed and, in British English, as a catchment).[18] A basin may also be composed of smaller basins. For instance, the Continental Divide in North America divides the mainly easterly-draining Atlantic Ocean and Arctic Ocean basins from the largely westerly-flowing Pacific Ocean basin. The Atlantic Ocean basin, however, may be further subdivided into the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico drainages. (This delineation is termed the Eastern Continental Divide.) Similarly, the Gulf of Mexico basin may be divided into the Mississippi River basin and several smaller basins, such as the Tombigbee River basin. Continuing in this vein, a component of the Mississippi River basin is the Ohio River basin, which in turn includes the Kentucky River basin, and so forth.
See also[edit]

Chalk stream
Head cut
Playfair's Law
River ecosystem
Rock-cut basin

References[edit]


^ Langbein, W.B.; Iseri, Kathleen T. (1995). "Hydrologic Definitions: Stream". Manual of Hydrology: Part 1. General Surface-Water Techniques (Water Supply Paper 1541-A). Reston, VA: USGS. Archived from the original on 2012-05-09. 
^ "What is hydrology and what do hydrologists do?" Archived 2014-02-22 at the Wayback Machine. U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). Atlanta, GA. 2009-05-13.
^ Spruce Creek Association. Kittery, ME. "About the Spruce Creek Watershed." Archived 2008-07-03 at the Wayback Machine. Accessed 2010-10-02.
^ "OED Online - Beck". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "OED Online - Bourne". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "OED Online - Brook". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "OED Online - Burn". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "OED Online - Gill". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "OED Online - Nant". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "OED Online - Rivulet". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "OED Online - Sike". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "OED Online -Branch". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "Stream Corridor Structure" Archived 2015-04-02 at the Wayback Machine. Adapted from Stream Corridor Restoration: Principles, Processes, and Practices
^ a b c Meinzer, Oscar E. (1923). Outline of ground-water hydrology, with definitions. Washington, DC: USGS. Archived from the original on 2017-07-09.  Water Supply Paper 494.
^ Meinzer, Oscar E. (1923). Outline of ground-water hydrology, with definitions. Washington, DC: US Geological Survey (USGS). p. 57. Archived from the original on 2017-07-09.  Water Supply Paper 494.
^ "OSM - COALEX State Inquiry Report 97". Archived from the original on 2012-04-15. Retrieved 2011-12-11. 
^ Black Creek (Susquehanna River)#Hydrology_and_climate, `Black Creek is an ephemeral stream. It used to drain an area between Turtle Creek and the Susquehanna River, but now loses its flow to underground mines via broken bedrock. Its channel is also disrupted by strip mines and rock piles.', 14 Nov 2016.
^ Langbein, W.B.; Iseri, Kathleen T. (1995). "Hydrologic Definitions: Watershed". Manual of Hydrology: Part 1. General Surface-Water Techniques (Water Supply Paper 1541-A). Reston, VA: USGS. Archived from the original on 2012-05-09. 


External links[edit]



Look up stream in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Streams.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Streams



Glossary of stream-related terms, StreamNet







v
t
e


Rivers, streams and springs



Rivers



Alluvial river
Braided river
Blackwater river
Channel
Channel pattern
Channel types
Confluence
Distributary
Drainage basin
Subterranean river
River bifurcation
River ecosystem
River source
Tributary
more...








Streams



Arroyo
Bourne
Burn
Chalk stream
Coulee
Current
Stream
Stream bed
Stream channel
Stream gradient
Stream pool
Perennial stream
Winterbourne
more...





Springs



Geyser
Sacred spring
Hot spring
Karst spring
Mineral spring
Rhythmic spring
Spring
Spring horizon
more...





Sedimentary processes
and erosion



Abrasion
Anabranch
Aggradation
Armor
Bed load
Bed material load
Granular flow
Debris flow
Deposition
Dissolved load
Downcutting
Erosion
Headward erosion
Knickpoint
Palaeochannel
Progradation
Retrogradation
Saltation
Secondary flow
Sediment transport
Suspended load
Wash load
Water gap





Fluvial landforms



Ait
Alluvial fan
Antecedent drainage stream
Avulsion
Bank
Bar
Bayou
Billabong
Canyon
Chine
Cut bank
Estuary
Fluvial terrace
Gill
Gulch
Gully
Glen
Meander scar
Mouth bar
Oxbow lake
Riffle-pool sequence
Point bar
Ravine
Rill
River island
Rock-cut basin
Sedimentary basin
Sedimentary structures
Strath
Thalweg
River valley
Wadi





Fluvial flow



Helicoidal flow
International Scale of River Difficulty
Meander
Plunge pool
Rapids
Riffle
Shoal
Waterfall
Whitewater





Surface runoff



Agricultural wastewater treatment
Effluent
First flush
Urban runoff
Wastewater





Floods and stormwater



100-year flood
Crevasse splay
Flash flood
Flood
Flood barrier
Flood control
Flood forecasting
Flood-meadow
Floodplain
Flood pulse concept
Flooded grasslands and savannas
Storm Water Management Model
Return period





River measurement
and modelling



Baer's law
Baseflow
Bradshaw model
Discharge (hydrology)
Drainage density
Exner equation
Groundwater model
Hack's law
Hjulström curve
Hydrograph
Hydrological modelling
Hydrological transport model
Infiltration (hydrology)
Main stem
Playfair's Law
Relief ratio
River continuum concept
Rouse number
Runoff curve number
Runoff model (reservoir)
Stream gauge
Universal Soil Loss Equation
WAFLEX
Wetted perimeter
Volumetric flow rate





River engineering



Aqueduct
Balancing lake
Canal
Check dam
Dam
Drop structure
Daylighting
Detention basin
Erosion control
Fish ladder
Floodplain restoration
Flume
Infiltration basin
Leat
Levee
Retention basin
Revetment
Riparian zone restoration
Stream restoration
Weir





River sports



Canyoning
Rafting
River surfing
Riverboarding
Whitewater canoeing
Whitewater kayaking
Whitewater slalom





Other topics



Aquifer
Aquatic toxicology
Body of water
Limnology
Riparian zone
River civilization
River cruise
Surface water
World Rivers Day








Lists of rivers
Rivers by continent
Rivers by length
Rivers by discharge rate
Drainage basins
Whitewater rivers
Flash floods
River name etymologies









Authority control



GND: 4140549-3











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stream&oldid=817356441"					Categories: Water streamsBodies of waterFluvial landformsGeomorphologyHydrologyRiversHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing additional references from October 2010All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2015Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers