





This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (September 2011)






Russia






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the Russian Federation







Constitution
Law





Mental Health Law
Russian Criminal Code
Tax Code








Presidency


President: Vladimir Putin



Presidential Administration
Security Council
State Council









Executive


Prime Minister: Dmitry Medvedev



Government
Cabinet (54th)









Legislature


Federal Assembly



Federation Council
Chairman: Valentina Matviyenko



State Duma
7th convocation
Chairman: Vyacheslav Volodin








Judiciary


Constitutional Court
Supreme Court
Prosecutor General
Supreme Court of Arbitration
Legal system








Elections


Presidential elections
Legislative elections
Central Election Commission
Electoral geography
Political parties
List of presidential candidates








Federalism


Federal subjects
Heads of federal subjects
Regional parliaments








Foreign relations


European Union
NATO
United Nations
Arab–Israeli conflict








Related topics


Administrative divisions
Armed forces
Civic Chamber
Accounts Chamber
E-Government
Opposition
Human rights
Political abuse of psychiatry









Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





Russia is divided into several types and levels of subdivisions.



Contents


1 Federal subjects

1.1 2014 Crimean crisis


2 Administrative divisions
3 Municipal divisions
4 Other types of subdivisions

4.1 Federal districts
4.2 Economic regions
4.3 Military districts


5 See also
6 References
7 Sources
8 External links



Federal subjects[edit]
Main article: Federal subjects of Russia




Federal subjects of Russia prior to the addition of the Republic of Crimea and the federal city of Sevastopol in 2014


Since March 18, 2014, the Russian Federation consisted of eighty-five federal subjects that are constituent members of the Federation.[1] However, two of these federal subjects—the Republic of Crimea and the federal city of Sevastopol—are internationally recognized as part of Ukraine. All federal subjects are of equal federal rights in the sense that they have equal representation—two delegates each—in the Federation Council (upper house of the Federal Assembly). They do, however, differ in the degree of autonomy they enjoy.
There are 6 types of federal subjects—22 republics, 9 krais, 46 oblasts, 3 federal cities, 1 autonomous oblast, and 4 autonomous okrugs.
Autonomous okrugs are the only ones that have a peculiar status of being federal subjects in their own right, yet at the same time they are considered to be administrative divisions of other federal subjects (with Chukotka Autonomous Okrug being the only exception).
2014 Crimean crisis[edit]
On March 18, 2014, as a part of the 2014 Crimean crisis events and following the establishment of the Republic of Crimea (an independent entity recognized only by Russia), a treaty was signed between Russia and the Republic of Crimea incorporating the Republic of Crimea and the City of Sevastopol as the constituent members of the Russian Federation.[2] According to the Treaty, the Republic of Crimea is accepted as a federal subject with the status of a republic while the City of Sevastopol has received federal city status.[2] Neither the Republic of Crimea nor the city of Sevastopol are politically recognized as parts of Russia by most countries.[3]
Administrative divisions[edit]
Prior to the adoption of the 1993 Constitution of Russia, the administrative-territorial structure of Russia was regulated by the Decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR of August 17, 1982 "On the Procedures of Dealing with the Matters of the Administrative-Territorial Structure of the RSFSR".[4] The 1993 Constitution, however, did not identify the matters of the administrative-territorial divisions as the responsibility of the federal government nor as the joint responsibility of the federal government and the subjects. This was interpreted by the governments of the federal subjects as a sign that the matters of the administrative-territorial divisions became solely the responsibility of the federal subjects.[4] As a result, the modern administrative-territorial structures of the federal subjects vary significantly from one federal subject to another. While the implementation details may be considerably different, in general, however, the following types of high-level administrative divisions are recognized:

administrative districts (raions)
cities/towns and urban-type settlements of federal subject significance
closed administrative-territorial formations

Autonomous okrugs and okrugs are intermediary units of administrative divisions, which include some of the federal subject's districts and cities/towns/urban-type settlements of federal subject significance.

Autonomous okrugs, while being under the jurisdiction of another federal subject, are still constitutionally recognized as federal subjects on their own right. Chukotka Autonomous Okrug is an exception in that it is not administratively subordinated to any other federal subject of Russia.
Okrugs are usually former autonomous okrugs that lost their federal subject status due to a merger with another federal subject.

Typical lower-level administrative divisions include:

selsoviets (rural councils)
towns and urban-type settlements of the administrative district significance
city districts







v
t
e


 Administrative divisions of the federal subjects of Russia



Republics



Adygea
Altai
Bashkortostan
Buryatia
Chechnya
Chuvashia
Crimea1
Dagestan
Ingushetia
Kabardino-Balkaria
Kalmykia
Karachay-Cherkessia
Karelia
Khakassia
Komi
Mari El
Mordovia
North Ossetia-Alania
Sakha
Tatarstan
Tuva
Udmurtia










Krais



Altai
Kamchatka
Khabarovsk
Krasnodar
Krasnoyarsk
Perm
Primorsky
Stavropol
Zabaykalsky





Oblasts



Amur
Arkhangelsk
Astrakhan
Belgorod
Bryansk
Chelyabinsk
Irkutsk
Ivanovo
Kaliningrad
Kaluga
Kemerovo
Kirov
Kostroma
Kurgan
Kursk
Leningrad
Lipetsk
Magadan
Moscow
Murmansk
Nizhny Novgorod
Novgorod
Novosibirsk
Omsk
Orenburg
Oryol
Penza
Pskov
Rostov
Ryazan
Sakhalin
Samara
Saratov
Smolensk
Sverdlovsk
Tambov
Tomsk
Tula
Tver
Tyumen
Ulyanovsk
Vladimir
Volgograd
Vologda
Voronezh
Yaroslavl





Federal cities



Moscow
Saint Petersburg
Sevastopol1





Autonomous oblast



Jewish





Autonomous okrugs



Chukotka
Khanty-Mansi
Nenets
Yamalo-Nenets






1Recognized as territory of Ukraine by most of the international community




Municipal divisions[edit]
Main article: Municipal divisions of Russia
In the course of the Russian municipal reform of 2004–2005, all federal subjects of Russia were to streamline the structures of local self-government, which is guaranteed by the Constitution of Russia. The reform mandated that each federal subject was to have a unified structure of the municipal government bodies by January 1, 2005, and a law enforcing the reform provisions went in effect on January 1, 2006. According to the law, the units of the municipal division (called "municipal formations") are as follows:[5]

Municipal district, a group of urban and rural settlements, often along with the inter-settlement territories. In practice, municipal districts are usually formed within the boundaries of existing administrative districts (raions).

Urban settlement, a city/town or an urban-type settlement, possibly together with adjacent rural and/or urban localities
Rural settlement, one or several rural localities


Urban okrug, an urban settlement not incorporated into a municipal district. In practice, urban okrugs are usually formed within the boundaries of existing cities of federal subject significance.
Intra-urban territory (intra-urban municipal formation) of a federal city, a part of a federal city's territory. In Moscow, these are called municipal formations (which correspond to districts); in St. Petersburg—municipal okrugs, towns, and settlements. In Sevastopol (located on the Crimean Peninsula, which is a territory disputed between Russia and Ukraine), they are known as municipal okrugs and a town.[6]

Territories not included as a part of municipal formations are known as inter-settlement territories.
The Federal Law was amended on May 27, 2014 to include new types of municipal divisions:[7]

Urban okrug with intra-urban divisions, an urban okrug divided into intra-urban districts at the lower level of the municipal hierarchy

Intra-urban district, a municipal formation within an urban okrug with intra-urban divisions. This municipal formation type would typically be established within the borders of existing city districts (i.e., the administrative divisions in some of the cities of federal subject significance).



In June 2014, Chelyabinsky Urban Okrug became the first urban okrug to implement intra-urban divisions.[8]
Other types of subdivisions[edit]
Federal districts[edit]
Main article: Federal districts of Russia




Federal districts of Russia


All of the federal subjects are grouped into eight federal districts,[9] each administered by an envoy appointed by the President of Russia. Federal districts' envoys serve as liaisons between the federal subjects and the federal government and are primarily responsible for overseeing the compliance of the federal subjects with the federal laws.

Economic regions[edit]
Main article: Economic regions of Russia




Economic regions of Russia


For economic and statistical purposes the federal subjects are grouped into twelve economic regions.[10] Economic regions and their parts sharing common economic trends are in turn grouped into economic zones and macrozones.

Military districts[edit]
Main article: Military districts of Russia




Military districts of Russia


In order for the Armed Forces to provide an efficient management of military units, their training, and other operational activities, the federal subjects are grouped into five military districts.[11] Each military district operates under the command of the district headquarters, headed by the district commander, and is subordinated to the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.

See also[edit]

History of the administrative division of Russia
List of federal subjects of Russia by area
List of federal subjects of Russia by population
Types of inhabited localities in Russia
Republics of the Soviet Union

References[edit]


^ Constitution, Article 65
^ a b Kremlin.ru. "Договор между Российской Федерацией и Республикой Крым о принятии в Российскую Федерацию Республики Крым и образовании в составе Российской Федерации новых субъектов" ("Treaty Between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Crimea on Ascension to the Russian Federation of the Republic of Crimea and on Establishment of New Subjects Within the Russian Federation") (in Russian)
^ "Putin signs Crimea treaty, will not seize other Ukraine regions", Reuters, 18 March 2014.
^ a b "Энциклопедический словарь конституционного права". Статья "Административно-территориальное устройство". Сост. А. А. Избранов. — Мн.: Изд. В.М. Суров, 2001.
^ Государственная Дума Российской Федерации. Федеральный Закон №131-ФЗ от 6 октября 2003 г. «Об общих принципах организации местного самоуправления в Российской Федерации», в ред. Федерального Закона №243-ФЗ от 28 сентября 2010 г.(State Duma of the Russian Federation. Federal Law #131-FZ of October 6, 2003 On the General Principles of Organization of the Local Self-Government in the Russian Federation, as amended by the Federal Law #243-FZ of September 28, 2010. ).
^ Law #17-ZS
^ Федеральный Закон №136-ФЗ от 27 мая 2014 г. «О внесении изменений в статью 26.3 Федерального Закона "Об общих принципах организации законодательных (представительных) и исполнительных органов государственной власти субъектов Российской Федерации" и Федеральный Закон "Об общих принципах организации местного самоуправления в Российской Федерации"». Вступил в силу со дня официального опубликования. Опубликован: Официальный интернет-портал правовой информации http://www.pravo.gov.ru, 27 мая 2014 г.(Federal Law #136-FZ of May 27, 2014 On Amending Article 26.3 of the Federal Law "On the General Principles of Organization of Legislative (Representative) and Executive Bodies of State Power in the Subjects of the Russian Federation" and the Federal Law "On the General Principles of Organization of the Local Self-Government in the Russian Federation". Effective as of the day of the official publication.).
^ Законодательное Собрание Челябинской области. Закон №706-ЗО от 10 июня 2014 г. «О статусе и границах Челябинского городского округа и внутригородских районов в его составе». Вступил в силу со дня официального опубликования. Опубликован: "Южноуральская панорама", №87 (спецвыпуск №24), 14 июня 2014 г.(Legislative Assembly of Chelyabinsk Oblast. Law #706-ZO of June 10, 2014 On the Status and Borders of Chelyabinsky Urban Okrug and the City Districts It Comprises. Effective as of the day of the official publication.).
^ Президент Российской Федерации. Указ №849 от 13 мая 2000 г. «О полномочном представителе Президента Российской Федерации в федеральном округе». Вступил в силу 13 мая 2000 г. Опубликован: "Собрание законодательства РФ", №20, ст. 2112, 15 мая 2000 г.(President of the Russian Federation. Decree #849 of May 13, 2000 On the Plenipotentiary Representative of the President of the Russian Federation in a Federal District. Effective as of May 13, 2000.).
^ "Общероссийский классификатор экономических регионов" (ОК 024-95) введённый 1 января 1997 г., в ред. Изменения № 05/2001. Секция II. Экономические районы (Russian Classification of Economic Regions (OK 024-95) of January 1, 1997 as amended by the Amendments #1/1998 through #5/2001. Section II. Economic Regions)
^ Президент Российской Федерации. Указ №900 от 27 июль 1998 г. «О военно-административном делении Российской Федерации», в ред. Указа №1144 от 20 сентябрь 2010 г. Вступил в силу 27 июль 1998 г..(President of the Russian Federation. Decree #900 of July 27, 1998 On Military Administrative Division of the Russian Federation, as amended by the Decree #1144 of September 20, 2010. Effective as of July 27, 1998.).


Sources[edit]

12 декабря 1993 г. «Конституция Российской Федерации», в ред. Федерального конституционного закона №7-ФКЗ от 30 декабря 2008 г. Вступил в силу со дня официального опубликования. Опубликован: "Российская газета", №237, 25 декабря 1993 г.(December 12, 1993 Constitution of the Russian Federation, as amended by the Federal Constitutional Law #7-FKZ of December 30, 2008. Effective as of the official publication date.).
Законодательное Собрание города Севастополя. Закон №17-ЗС от 3 июня 2014 г. «Об установлении границ и статусе муниципальных образований в городе Севастополе». Вступил в силу через 10 дней со дня официального опубликования.(Legislative Assembly of the City of Sevastopol. Law #17-ZS of June 3, 2014 On Establishing the Borders and the Status of the Municipal Formations in the City of Sevastopol. Effective as of the day which is 10 days after the day of the official publication.).

External links[edit]

Local government in Russia: Its powers vary across the country at Citymayors.com (in English)







v
t
e


Russia articles



History




Timeline



Proto-Indo-Europeans
Scythians
East Slavs
Rus' Khaganate
Kievan Rus'
Novgorod Republic
Vladimir-Suzdal
Grand Duchy of Moscow
Tsardom of Russia
Russian Empire
Russian Republic
Russian SFSR
Soviet Union
Russian Federation





By topic



Economy
Military
Journalism ‎
Postal











Geography







Subdivisions
Borders
Earthquakes
Geology
European Russia
Caucasus Mountains
North Caucasus
Caspian Sea
Ural Mountains
West Siberian Plain
Siberia
Russian Far East
North Asia
Extreme points
Cities and towns
Islands
Lakes
Rivers
Volcanoes
Climate








Politics







Conscription
Constitution
Elections
Federal budget
Foreign relations
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of press

Media


Government
Human rights
Judiciary
Law

Citizenship


Civil Service
Law enforcement (Prisons)
Liberalism
Military
Opposition
Political parties
President of Russia








Economy







Agriculture
Aircraft industry
Car industry
Banking
Central Bank
Corruption
Defence industry
Economic regions
Energy
Fishing industry
Forestry
Gambling
Mining
Petroleum industry
Russian ruble
Russian oligarchs
Space industry
Shipbuilding
Trade unions
Taxation
Tourism
Transport
Telecommunications
Waste








Society







Demographics
Citizens
Abortion
Alcoholism
Crime
Education
Healthcare
Ethnic groups
Languages
LGBT
Immigration

Illegal


Prostitution
Racism
Religion
Suicide
Water supply and sanitation
Women





Culture



Architecture
Art
Literature
Ballet
Cinema
Graffiti
Inventions
Media
Music
Public holidays
Opera
Language
Cuisine
Martial arts
Folklore
Television
Internet
National anthem
Coat of arms
National flag
Sports












Outline



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Types of administrative divisions of Russia






Autonomous okrug
Okrug
Administrative district (raion)
City/town of a federal subject importance
City district
Urban-type settlement of a federal subject importance
Selsoviet












v
t
e


Subdivisions of Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard












v
t
e


Subdivisions of Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subdivisions_of_Russia&oldid=808643189"					Categories: Subdivisions of RussiaCountry subdivisions by countryCountry subdivisions in EuropeHistory of Russia (1992–present)Russia geography-related listsHidden categories: Articles with Russian-language external linksArticles containing Russian-language textWikipedia introduction cleanup from September 2011All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2011All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyUse mdy dates from March 2014