This article is about the biological term. For the film series, see Subspecies (film series).
In biological classification, subspecies (abbreviated "subsp." or "ssp."; plural: "subspecies") is either a taxonomic rank subordinate to species, or a taxonomic unit in that rank. A subspecies cannot be recognized independently: a species will either be recognized as having no subspecies at all or at least two (including any that are extinct).
In zoology, under the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, the subspecies is the only taxonomic rank below that of species that can receive a name. In botany and mycology, under the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants, other infraspecific ranks, such as variety, may be named. In bacteriology and virology, under standard bacterial nomenclature and virus nomenclature, there are recommendations but not strict requirements for recognizing other important infraspecific ranks.
A taxonomist decides whether to recognize a subspecies or not. A common way to decide is that organisms belonging to different subspecies of the same species are capable of interbreeding and producing fertile offspring, but they do not usually interbreed in nature due to geographic isolation, sexual selection, or other factors. The differences between subspecies are usually less distinct than the differences between species.




Panthera tigris tigris, Bengal tiger, the nominate tiger subspecies






Panthera tigris sondaica, Sumatran tiger, an Indonesian subspecies





Contents


1 Nomenclature

1.1 Nominotypical subspecies and subspecies autonyms
1.2 Doubtful cases


2 Criteria
3 Monotypic and polytypic species
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References



Nomenclature[edit]
In zoology, the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (4th edition, 1999) accepts only one rank below that of species, namely the rank of subspecies.[1] Other groupings, "infrasubspecific entities" do not have names regulated by the ICZN. Such forms have no official ICZN status, though they may be useful in describing altitudinal or geographical clines, pet breeds, transgenic animals, etc. While the scientific name of a species is a binomen, the scientific name of a subspecies is a trinomen - a binomen followed by a subspecific name. A tiger's binomen is Panthera tigris, so for a Sumatran tiger the trinomen is, for example, Panthera tigris sumatrae.
In bacteriology, the only rank below species that is regulated explicitly by the code of nomenclature is subspecies, but infrasubspecific taxa are extremely important in bacteriology; Appendix 10 of the code lays out some recommendations that are intended to encourage uniformity in describing such taxa. Names published before 1992 in the rank of variety are taken to be names of subspecies[2] (see International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria).
In botany, subspecies is one of many ranks below that of species, such as variety, subvariety, form, and subform. The subspecific name is preceded by "subsp." or "ssp.", as Schoenoplectus californicus ssp. tatora (totora). A botanical name consists of at most three parts. An infraspecific name includes the species binomial, and one infraspecific epithet, such as subspecies or variety.
Nominotypical subspecies and subspecies autonyms[edit]
 In zoological nomenclature, when a species is split into subspecies, the originally described population is retained as the "nominotypical subspecies"[3] or "nominate subspecies", which repeats the same name as the species. For example, Motacilla alba alba (often abbreviated Motacilla a. alba) is the nominotypical subspecies of the white wagtail (Motacilla alba).
The subspecies name that repeats the species name is referred to in botanical nomenclature as the subspecies "autonym", and the subspecific taxon as the "autonymous subspecies".[4]
Doubtful cases[edit]
When zoologists disagree over whether a certain population is a subspecies or a full species, the species name may be written in parentheses. Thus Larus (argentatus) smithsonianus means the American herring gull; the notation within the parentheses means that some consider it a subspecies of a larger herring gull species and therefore call it Larus argentatus smithsonianus, while others consider it a full species and therefore call it Larus smithsonianus (and the user of the notation is not taking a position).[citation needed]
Criteria[edit]
A subspecies is a taxonomic rank below species – the only recognized rank in the zoological code,[5] and one of three main ranks below species in the botanical code.[4] When geographically separate populations of a species exhibit recognizable phenotypic differences, biologists may identify these as separate subspecies; a subspecies is a recognized local variant of a species.[6] Botanists and mycologists have the choice of ranks lower than subspecies, such as variety (varietas) or form (forma), to recognize smaller differences between populations.[4]
Monotypic and polytypic species[edit]




The Indian rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis) is a monotypic species.


In biological terms, rather than in relation to nomenclature, a polytypic species has two or more subspecies, races, or more generally speaking, populations that need a separate description.[7] These are separate groups that are clearly distinct from one another and do not generally interbreed (although there may be a relatively narrow hybridization zone), but which may interbreed if given the chance to do so. These subspecies, races, or populations, can be named as subspecies by zoologists, or in more varied ways by botanists and microbiologists.
A monotypic species has no distinct population or races, or rather one race comprising the whole species. A taxonomist would not name a subspecies within such a species. Monotypic species can occur in several ways:

All members of the species are very similar and cannot be sensibly divided into biologically significant subcategories.
The individuals vary considerably, but the variation is essentially random and largely meaningless so far as genetic transmission of these variations is concerned.
The variation among individuals is noticeable and follows a pattern, but there are no clear dividing lines among separate groups: they fade imperceptibly into one another. Such clinal variation always indicates substantial gene flow among the apparently separate groups that make up the population(s). Populations that have a steady, substantial gene flow among them are likely to represent a monotypic species, even when a fair degree of genetic variation is obvious.

See also[edit]



Look up subspecies in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Breed
Glossary of scientific naming
Color phase
Cultivar in botany
Landrace
Strain in microbiology
Variety (botany)
Species complex

Notes[edit]



^ "Index". International Code of Zoological Nomenclature. Fourth Edition. Natural History Museum. January 1, 2000. Retrieved January 17, 2013.
^ "Chapter 3Rules of Nomenclature with Recommendations". National Center for Biotechnology Information. Retrieved January 17, 2013.
^ International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, Art. 47
^ a b c McNeill, J.; Barrie, F.R.; Buck, W.R.; Demoulin, V.; Greuter, W.; Hawksworth, D.L.; Herendeen, P.S.; Knapp, S.; Marhold, K.; Prado, J.; Prud'homme Van Reine, W.F.; Smith, G.F.; Wiersema, J.H.; Turland, N.J. (2012). International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Melbourne Code) adopted by the Eighteenth International Botanical Congress Melbourne, Australia, July 2011. Regnum Vegetabile 154. A.R.G. Gantner Verlag KG. ISBN 978-3-87429-425-6. 
^ International Code of Zoological Nomenclature. "ICZN Glossary". International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature. 
^ Peter J. Russell, Paul E. Hertz, Beverly McMillan (2011). "21-Speciation". Biology: The Dynamic Science. Brooks/Cole California. p. 456. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Mayr, Ernst. Populations, Species, and Evolution: An Abridgment of Animal Species and Evolution.



References[edit]

Barrow, Mark V. (1998). A Passion for Birds: American Ornithology after Audubon. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691044026. 
Lewis, Daniel (2012). The Feathery Tribe: Robert Ridgway and the Modern Study of Birds. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300175523. 
Ernst W. Mayr, Peter D. Ashlock: Principles of Systematic Zoology, Mcgraw-Hill College, 1991, ISBN 0-07-041144-1







v
t
e


Taxonomic ranks









Domain/Superkingdom
Kingdom
Subkingdom
Infrakingdom/Branch




Superphylum/Superdivision
Phylum/Division
Subphylum
Infraphylum
Microphylum




Superclass
Class
Subclass
Infraclass
Parvclass




Legion
Cohort




Magnorder
Superorder
Order
Suborder
Infraorder
Parvorder




Section (zoo.)
Superfamily
Family
Subfamily




Supertribe
Tribe
Subtribe




Genus
Subgenus
Section (bot.)
Series (bot.)




Species
Subspecies
Variety
Form














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subspecies&oldid=817715099"					Categories: Taxa by rankBotanical nomenclaturePlant taxonomyZoological nomenclatureBiology terminologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2013