This article is about a topographic term. For meetings between heads of state, see Summit (meeting). For other uses, see Summit (disambiguation).




Climbers on the world's highest summit, Mount Everest.






View from the summit of Switzerland's highest, Monte Rosa


A summit is a point on a surface that is higher in elevation than all points immediately adjacent to it. Mathematically, a summit is a local maximum in elevation. The topographic terms "acme", "apex", "peak", and "zenith" are synonymous.



Contents


1 Definition

1.1 Western United States


2 See also
3 References
4 External links



Definition[edit]
The term "summit" is generally used only for a mountain peak with some significant amount of topographic prominence (height above the lowest point en route to the nearest higher peak) or topographic isolation (distance from the nearest point of higher elevation); for example, a boulder next to the main summit of a mountain is not considered a summit. Summits near a higher peak, with some prominence or isolation, but not reaching a certain cutoff value for the quantities, are often considered subsummits (or subpeaks) of the higher peak, and are considered as part of the same mountain. A pyramidal peak is an exaggerated form produced by ice erosion of a mountain top. Summit may also refer to the highest point along a line, trail, or route.
The highest summit in the world is Everest with height of 8844.43 m above sea level (29,029 ft). The first official ascent was made by Sir Edmund Hillary. He reached the mountain`s peak in 1953. [1][2] The UIAA definition is that a summit is independent if it has a prominence of 30 metres (98 ft) or more; it is a mountain if it has a prominence of at least 300 metres (980 ft). This can be summarised as follows:


Term
Prominence
Isolation


Subpeak
< 30 m
? m


Independent peak or summit
30 m or more
? m


Mountain
300 m or more
? m









The summit of Mount Damavand, Iran, in winter








Jeff Davis Peak, one of the highest peaks entirely within Nevada, United States








Mount Elbrus and its two peaks (Caucasus, Russia)





Western United States[edit]




Siskiyou Mountain Summit sign along Interstate 5, marking the highest point along the highway


In many parts of the western United States, the term summit refers to the highest point along a road, highway, or railroad. For example, the highest point along Interstate 80 in California is referred to as Donner Summit (not to be confused with Donner Pass, which is just to the south) while the highest point on Interstate 5 is Siskiyou Mountain Summit.
See also[edit]

Geoid
Hill
List of highest mountains
Maxima and minima
Nadir (topography) (antonym)
Summit accordance

References[edit]



^ Lyons, Kate (2017-05-21). "Mount Everest's Hillary Step has collapsed, mountaineer confirms". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2017-12-10. 
^ "Everest". www.nationalgeographic.com. Retrieved 2017-12-10. 



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Summits.



Peak finder







v
t
e


Earth science






Atmospheric science
Environmental science
Geodesy
Geology
Geophysics
Glaciology
Hydrology
Meteorology
Oceanography
Physical geography
Soil science
Volcanology








Category
Portal
Commons








Mountains portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Summit&oldid=816858836"					Categories: SummitsGeodesyCartographyPhysical geographySlope landformsSurveyingTopographyOronyms