

 
Part of a series on

Sunni Islam








Beliefs


Monotheism
Prophets and messengers
Holy books
Angels
Judgement Day
Predestination








Five Pillars


Declaration of Faith
Prayer
Charity
Fasting
Pilgrimage








Rightly-Guided Caliphs


Abu Bakr
Umar ibn al-Khattab
Uthman ibn Affan
Ali ibn Abi Talib








Sunni schools of law


Hanafi
Maliki
Shafi'i
Hanbali

Others

Zahiri
Awza'i
Thawri
Laythi
Jariri








Sunni schools of theology


Ash'ari
Maturidi
Traditionalist

Others:

Mu'tazila
Murji'ah








Contemporary movements


Ahl-i Hadith
Al-Ahbash
Barelvi
Deobandi
Islamic Modernism
Salafi movement
Wahhabism








Holy sites


Jerusalem
Mecca
Medina
Mount Sinai








Lists


Literature

Kutub al-Sittah








 Islam portal





v
t
e








This article contains Arabic text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols.


Sunni Islam (/ˈsuːni/ or /ˈsʊni/) is the largest denomination of Islam. Its name comes from the word Sunnah, referring to the exemplary behaviour of the Islamic prophet Muhammad.[1] The differences between Sunni and Shia Muslims arose from a disagreement over the choice of Muhammad's successor and subsequently acquired broader political significance, as well as theological and juridical dimensions.[2]
According to Sunni traditions, Muhammad did not clearly designate a successor and the Muslim community acted according to his sunnah in electing his father-in-law Abu Bakr as the first caliph.[3][2] This contrasts with the Shi'a view, which holds that Muhammad appointed his son-in-law and cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib to succeed him.[4][5][6][7][8] Unlike the first three caliphs, Ali was from the same clan as Muhammad, Banu Hashim, and Shia Muslims consider him legitimate, inter alia, by favour of his blood ties to Muhammad, too.[9][10] Political tensions between Sunnis and Shias continued with varying intensity throughout Islamic history and they have been exacerbated in recent times by ethnic conflicts and the rise of Wahhabism.[2]
As of 2009[update], Sunni Muslims constituted 87–90% of the world's Muslim population.[11] Sunni Islam is the world's largest religious denomination, followed by Catholicism.[12] Its adherents are referred to in Arabic as ahl as-sunnah wa l-jamāʻah ("the people of the sunnah and the community") or ahl as-sunnah for short.[13][14] In English, its doctrines and practices are sometimes called Sunnism,[15] while adherents are known as Sunni Muslims, Sunnis, Sunnites and Ahlus Sunnah. Sunni Islam is sometimes referred to as "orthodox Islam".[16][17][18] However, other scholars of Islam, such as John Burton believe that there's no such thing as "orthodox Islam".[19]
The Quran, together with hadith (especially those collected in Kutub al-Sittah) and binding juristic consensus form the basis of all traditional jurisprudence within Sunni Islam. Sharia rulings are derived from these basic sources, in conjunction with analogical reasoning, consideration of public welfare and juristic discretion, using the principles of jurisprudence developed by the traditional legal schools.
In matters of creed, the Sunni tradition upholds the six pillars of iman (faith) and comprises the Ash'ari and Maturidi schools of rationalistic theology as well as the textualist school known as traditionalist theology.



Contents


1 Terminology
2 History

2.1 The post Rashidun period till the fall of the Ottoman empire

2.1.1 Transition of caliphate into dynastic monarchy of Banu Umayya
2.1.2 Caliphate and the dynastic monarchy of Banu Abbas
2.1.3 Sunni Islam in the contemporary era




3 Adherents
4 Organizational structure
5 Jurisprudence

5.1 Schools of law
5.2 Differences in the schools


6 Pillars of iman
7 Theological traditions

7.1 Ash'ari
7.2 Maturidi
7.3 Traditionalist


8 Sunni mysticism
9 Sunni view of hadith

9.1 Kutub al-Sittah


10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Terminology[edit]




Sunni Mosque in Selangor, Malaysia


Sunnī (Classical Arabic: سُنِّي /ˈsunniː/), also commonly referred to as Sunnīism, is a term derived from sunnah (سُنَّة /ˈsunna/, plural سُنَن sunan /ˈsunan/) meaning "habit", "usual practice",[20] "custom", "tradition". The Muslim use of this term refers to the sayings and living habits of the prophet Muhammad. In Arabic, this branch of Islam is referred to as ahl as-sunnah wa l-jamāʻah (Arabic: أهل السنة والجماعة‎), "the people of the sunnah and the community", which is commonly shortened to ahl as-sunnah (Arabic أهل السنة).[13][14]
History[edit]
One common mistake is to assume that Sunni Islam represents a normative Islam that emerged during the period after Muhammad's death, and that Sufism and Shi'ism developed out of Sunni Islam.[21] This perception is partly due to the reliance on highly ideological sources that have been accepted as reliable historical works, and also because the vast majority of the population is Sunni. Both Sunnism and Shiaism are the end products of several centuries of competition between ideologies. Both sects used each other to further cement their own identities and doctrines.[22]
The first four caliphs are known among Sunnis as the Rashidun or "Rightly-Guided Ones". Sunni recognition includes the aforementioned Abu Bakr as the first, Umar as the second, Uthman as the third, and Ali as the fourth.[23]
The post Rashidun period till the fall of the Ottoman empire[edit]
Sunnis recognised different rulers as the caliph, though not included anyone in the list of the rightly guided ones or Rashidun after the murder of Ali, till caliphate was constitutionally abolished in Turkey on 3 March 1924.
Transition of caliphate into dynastic monarchy of Banu Umayya[edit]
The seeds of metamorphosis of caliphate into kingship were sown, as the second caliph Umar had feared, as early as the regime of the third caliph Uthman, who appointed many of his kinsmen from his clan Banu Umayya, including Marwan and Walid bin Uqba on important government positions, becoming the main cause of turmoil resulting in his murder and the ensuing infighting during Ali's time and rebellion by Muawiya, another of Uthman's kinsman. This ultimately resulted in the establishment of firm dynastic rule of Banu Umayya after Husain, the younger son of Ali from Fatima, was killed at the battle of karbala. The rise to power of Banu Umayya, the Meccan tribe of elites who had vehemently opposed Muhammad under the leadership of Abu Sufyan, Muawiya's father, right up to the conquest of Mecca by Muhammad, as his successors with the accession of Uthman to caliphate, replaced the egalitarian society formed as a result of Muhammad's revolution to a society stratified between haves and have-nots as a result of nepotism, and in the words of El-Hibri through "the use of religious charity revenues (zakat) to subsidise family interests, which Uthman justified as "al-sila" (pious filial support)."[24][25][26] Ali, during his rather brief regime after Uthman maintained austere life style and tried hard to bring back the egalitarian system and supremacy of law over the ruler idealised in Muhammad's message, but faced continued opposition, and wars one after another by Aisha-Talhah-Zubair, by Muawiya and finally by the Kharjites. After he was murdered his followers immediately elected Hasan ibn Ali his elder son from Fatima to succeed him. Hasan, however, shortly afterwards signed a treaty with Muawiaya relinquishing power in favour of the latter, with a condition inter alia, that one of the two who will outlive the other will be the caliph, and that this caliph will not appoint a successor but will leave the matter of selection of the caliph to the public. Subsequently Hasan was poisoned to death and Muawiya enjoyed unchallenged power. Not honouring his treaty with Hasan he however nominated his son Yazid to succeed him. Upon Muawiya's death, Yazid asked Husain the younger brother of Hasan, Ali's son and Muhammad's grandson, to give his allegiance to Yazid, which he plainly refused. His caravan was cordoned by Yazid's army at Karbala and he was killed with all his male companions - total 72 people, in a day long battle after which Yazid established himself as a sovereign, though strong public uprising erupted after his death against his dynasty to avenge the massacre of Karbala, but Banu Umayya were able to quickly suppress them all and ruled the Muslim world, till they were finally overthrown by Banu Abbas.[27][28][29][30]
Caliphate and the dynastic monarchy of Banu Abbas[edit]
The rule of and "caliphate" of Banu Umayya came to an end at the hands of Banu Abbas a branch of Banu Hashim, the tribe of Muhammad, only to usher another dynastic monarchy styled as caliphate from 750 CE. This period is seen formative in Sunni Islam as the founders of the four schools viz, Abu Hanifa, Malik bin Anas, Shafi'i and Ahmad bin Hambal all practised during this time, so also did Jafar al Sadiq who elaborated the doctrine of imamate, the basis for the Shi'a religious thought. There was no clearly accepted formula for determining succession in the Abbasid caliphate. Two or three sons or other relatives of the dying caliph emerged as candidates to the throne, each supported by his own party of supporters. A trial of strength ensued and the most powerful party won and expected favours of the caliph they supported once he ascended the throne. The caliphate of this dynasty ended with the death of the Caliph al-Ma’mun in 833 CE, when the period of Turkish domination began. [31]
Sunni Islam in the contemporary era[edit]
The fall of the Ottoman, the biggest Sunni empire in the world for six centuries, the mightiest power in the Mediterranean world and one of the important participants in World War I which joined the war on the side of the Central Powers, bringing caliphate to an end was an epochal event. This resulted in Sunni protests in far off places including the Khilafat Movement in India, which was later on upon gaining independence from Britain divided into Sunni dominated Pakistan and secular India. Pakistan, the most populous Sunni state at its birth, however later got partitioned into Pakistan and Bangladesh. The demise of Ottoman caliphate also resulted in the emergence of Saudi Arabia, a dynastic absolute monarchy with the support of the British and Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, the founder of Wahabism.[32][33][34][35]
The sequence of events of the 20th century has led to resentment in some quarters of the Sunni community due to the loss of pre-eminence in several previously Sunni-dominated regions such as the Levant, Mesopotamia, the Balkans, the Caucasus and the Indian sub continent.[36]
Adherents[edit]




Countries with more than 5% Muslim population.[37]
  Sunni
  Shia
  Ibadi



Sunnis believe that the companions of Muhammad were the best of Muslims. This belief is based upon prophetic traditions such as one narrated by Abdullah, son of Masud, in which Muhammad said: "The best of the people are my generation, then those who come after them, then those who come after them." Support for this view is also found in the Quran, according to Sunnis.[38] Sunnis also believe that the companions were true believers since it was the companions who were given the task of compiling the Quran. Furthermore, narrations that were narrated by the companions (ahadith) are considered by Sunnis to be a second source of knowledge of the Muslim faith. A study conducted by the Pew Research Center in 2010 and released January 2011[39] found that there are 1.62 billion Muslims around the world, and it is estimated over 85–90% are Sunni.[40]
Organizational structure[edit]
Sunni Islam does not have a formal hierarchy. Leaders are informal, and gain influence through study to become a scholar of Islamic law, called sharia. According to the Islamic Center of Columbia, South Carolina, anyone with the intelligence and the will can become an Islamic scholar. During Midday Mosque services on Fridays, the congregation will choose a well-educated person to lead the service, known as a Khateeb (one who speaks).[41]
Jurisprudence[edit]
Schools of law[edit]
There are many intellectual traditions within the field of Islamic law, often referred to as legal schools. These varied traditions reflect differing viewpoints on some laws and obligations within Islamic law. While one school may see a certain act as a religious obligation, another may see the same act as optional. These schools aren't regarded as sects; rather, they represent differing viewpoints on issues that are not considered the core of Islamic belief. Historians have differed regarding the exact delineation of the schools based on the underlying principles they follow.
Many traditional scholars saw Sunni Islam in two groups: Ahl al-Ra'i, or "people of reason," due to their emphasis on scholarly judgment and discourse; and Ahl al-Hadith, or "people of traditions," due to their emphasis on restricting juristic thought to only what is found in scripture.[42] Ibn Khaldun defined the Sunni schools as three: the Hanafi school representing reason, the Ẓāhirīte school representing tradition, and a broader, middle school encompassing the Shafi'ite, Malikite and Hanbalite schools.[43][44]
During the Middle Ages, the Mamluk Sultanate in Egypt delineated the acceptable Sunni schools as only Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi'i and Hanbali, excluding the Ẓāhirī school.[45] The Ottoman Empire later reaffirmed the official status of four schools as a reaction to the Shiite character of their ideological and political archrival, the Persian Safavids,[46] though former Prime Minister of Sudan Al-Sadiq al-Mahdi, as well as the Amman Message issued by King Abdullah II of Jordan, recognize the Ẓāhirī and keep the number of Sunni schools at five.[47][48]
Differences in the schools[edit]




The Great Mosque of Kairouan (also known as the Mosque of Uqba) was, in particular during the 9th, 10th and 11th centuries, an important center of Islamic learning with an emphasis on the Maliki Madh'hab.[49] It is located in the city of Kairouan in Tunisia


Interpreting Islamic law by deriving specific rulings – such as how to pray – is commonly known as Islamic jurisprudence. The schools of law all have their own particular tradition of interpreting this jurisprudence. As these schools represent clearly spelled out methodologies for interpreting Islamic law, there has been little change in the methodology with regard to each school. While conflict between the schools was often violent in the past,[46] today the schools recognize one another as viable legal methods rather than sources of error or heresy in contrast to one another. Each school has its evidences, and differences of opinion are generally respected.[citation needed] Conflict between the schools was often violent in the past.[46]
Pillars of iman[edit]
Main articles: Iman (concept) and Islamic theology
All the branches of Sunni Islam testify to six principal articles of faith known as the six pillars of iman (Arabic for "faith"),[50] which are believed to be essential. These are [51]
1. Belief in the Oneness of God
2. Belief in the Angels of God
3. Belief in the Divine Revelations (Books)
4. Belief in the Prophets of God
5. Belief in Resurrection after Death and the Day of Judgment and
6. Belief in Preordainment (Qadar)
These six articles are what all present-day Sunnis agree on, from those who adhere to traditional Sunnism to those who adhere to latter-day movements. Additionally, classical Sunni Islam also outlined numerous other cardinal doctrines from the eighth-century onwards in the form of organized creeds such as the Creed of Tahawi, in order to codify what constituted "Sunni orthodoxy."[citation needed] While none of these creeds gained the importance attributed to the Nicene Creed in Christianity, primarily because ecumenical councils never happened in Islam, the beliefs outlined in these creeds became the "orthodox" doctrine by ijma, or binding consensus.[citation needed] But while most of the tenets outlined in the classical creeds are accepted by all Sunnis, some of these doctrines have been rejected by the aforementioned movements as lacking strictly scriptural precedent. Traditionally, these other important Sunni articles of faith have included the following (those that are controversial today because of their rejection by such groups shall be denoted by an asterisk):[citation needed]

Belief in the six principal articles of faith being essential for salvation for Muslims[52]
Belief in God having created creation with His wisdom[53]
Belief in Muhammad having been the Seal of the Prophets or the last prophet sent to mankind[54]
Belief in the Quran being the eternal, uncreated Word of God[55]
Belief in the beatific vision being a reality in the afterlife, even if it will not be all-encompassing and the "manner" of it remains unknown[56]
Belief in the Night Journey of Muhammad having happened in a bodily form, while he was "awake"[57]
Belief in the intercession of Muhammad being a reality on the Last Day[58]
Belief in God's covenant with Adam and his offspring having been "true"[59]
Belief in Abraham having been God's "intimate friend"[60]
Belief in Moses having conversed directly with God without a mediator[60]
Belief in the idea that wrong works in themselves does not make a Muslim an "unbeliever" and that it is forbidden to declare takfir on those who know that what they are doing is wrong[61]
Belief in it being wrong to "make a distinction" between the various prophets of God[62]
Belief in believing in that which "all the prophets" brought from God[62]
Belief in avoiding "deviations, divisions, and differences" in the fold of Islam[63]
Belief in venerating all the Companions of Muhammad[64]
Belief in the existence of saints, and in venerating them and accepting the traditional narratives of their lives and miracles[65] (*)
Belief that saints, while exalted in their own right, occupy an infinitely lesser rank than the prophets and that "one of the prophets is greater than all the saints put together"[65] (*)
Belief in the Signs of the Apocalypse[66]
Belief that Jesus is the Promised Messiah of God and that all Muslims await his Second Coming[66]

Theological traditions[edit]


 Part of a series on Islam
Aqidah







Five Pillars of Islam


Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj








Sunni
Six articles of belief

God
Prophets
Holy books
Angels
The Last Judgement
Predestination

Sunni theological traditions

Ilm al-Kalam

Ash'ari1
Maturidi



Sunni Murji'ah
Traditionalist2








Shi'a
Twelver3

Principles

Tawhid
Adalah
Prophecy
Imamah
Qiyamah




Practices

Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj
Khums
Jihad
Commanding what is just
Forbidding what is evil
Tawalla
Tabarra



Seven pillars of Ismailism4

Walayah
Tawhid
Salah
Zakat
Sawm
Hajj
Jihad

Other Shia concepts of Aqidah

Imamate
Batin
Sixth Pillar of Islam








Other schools of theology


Khawarij5
Ibadi6
Murji'ah

Qadariyah
Muʿtazila7
Sufism8






Including:
1Jahmi; 2Karramiyya; 3Alawites & Qizilbash
4Sevener-Qarmatians, Assassins & Druzes
5Ajardi, Azariqa, Bayhasiyya, Najdat & Sūfrī
6Nūkkārī; 7Bahshamiyya & Ikhshîdiyya
8Alevism, Bektashi Order & Qalandariyya
 Islam portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on


Islam







Beliefs


Oneness of God


Prophets
Revealed books


Angels
Predestination


Day of Resurrection








Practices


Profession of faith
Prayer


Fasting
Alms-giving
Pilgrimage








Texts and laws


Quran
Sunnah
Hadith


Sharia (law)
Fiqh (jurisprudence)


Kalam (dialectic)








History


Timeline
Muhammad


Ahl al-Bayt
Sahabah
Rashidun


Imamate
Caliphate
Spread of Islam








Culture and society


Calendar
Festivals
Academics
Art
Moral teachings
Children
Denominations
Feminism
Women
Madrasa
Mosque
Philosophy
Politics
Proselytizing
Animals
LGBT
Science
Demographics
Economics
Finance
Social welfare








Related topics


Criticism of Islam
Islam and other religions


Islamism
Islamophobia


Glossary








 Islam portal







v
t
e





Some Islamic scholars faced questions that they felt were not explicitly answered in the Quran and the Sunnah, especially questions with regard to philosophical conundra such as the nature of God, the existence of human free will, or the eternal existence of the Quran. Various schools of theology and philosophy developed to answer these questions, each claiming to be true to the Quran and the Muslim tradition (sunnah). Among Sunni Muslims, various schools of thought in theology began to be born out of the sciences of kalam in opposition to the textualists who stood by affirming texts without delving into philosophical speculation as they saw it as an innovation in Islam. The following were the three dominant schools of theology that grew. All three of these are accepted by Muslims around the globe, and are considered within "Islamic orthodoxy". The key beliefs of classical Sunni Islam are all agreed upon (being the six pillars of Iman) and codified in the treatise on Aqeedah by Imam Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Tahawi in his Aqeedat Tahawiyyah.
Ash'ari[edit]
Main article: Ash'ari
Founded by Abu al-Hasan al-Ash'ari (873–935). This theological school of Aqeedah was embraced by many Muslim scholars and developed in parts of the Islamic world throughout history; al-Ghazali wrote on the creed discussing it and agreeing upon some of its principles.[67]

Ash'ari theology stresses divine revelation over human reason. Contrary to the Mu'tazilites, they say that ethics cannot be derived from human reason, but that God's commands, as revealed in the Quran and the Sunnah (the practices of Muhammad and his companions as recorded in the traditions, or hadith), are the sole source of all morality and ethics.
Regarding the nature of God and the divine attributes, the Ash'ari rejected the Mu'tazili position that all Quranic references to God as having real attributes were metaphorical. The Ash'aris insisted that these attributes were as they "best befit His Majesty". The Arabic language is a wide language in which one word can have 15 different meanings, so the Ash'aris endeavor to find the meaning that best befits God and is not contradicted by the Quran. Therefore, when God states in the Quran, "He who does not resemble any of His creation," this clearly means that God cannot be attributed with body parts because He created body parts. Ash'aris tend to stress divine omnipotence over human free will and they believe that the Quran is eternal and uncreated.
Maturidi[edit]
Main article: Maturidi
Founded by Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (died 944). Maturidiyyah was a minority tradition until it was accepted by the Turkish tribes of Central Asia (previously they had been Ash'ari and followers of the Shafi'i school,[citation needed] it was only later on migration into Anatolia that they became Hanafi and followers of the Maturidi creed.[citation needed]) One of the tribes, the Seljuk Turks, migrated to Turkey, where later the Ottoman Empire was established.[68] Their preferred school of law achieved a new prominence throughout their whole empire although it continued to be followed almost exclusively by followers of the Hanafi school while followers of the Shafi and Maliki schools within the empire followed the Ash'ari and Athari schools of thought. Thus, wherever can be found Hanafi followers, there can be found the Maturidi creed.[discuss][citation needed]
Traditionalist[edit]
Main article: Traditionalist Theology (Islam)
Traditionalist theology is a movement of Islamic scholars who reject rationalistic Islamic theology (kalam) in favor of strict textualism in interpreting the Quran and sunnah.[69] The name derives from "tradition" in its technical sense as translation of the Arabic word hadith. It is also sometimes referred to by several other names.
Adherents of traditionalist theology believe that the zahir (literal, apparent) meaning of the Qur'an and the hadith have sole authority in matters of belief and law; and that the use of rational disputation is forbidden even if it verifies the truth.[70] They engage in a literal reading of the Qur'an, as opposed to one engaged in ta'wil (metaphorical interpretation). They do not attempt to conceptualize the meanings of the Qur'an rationally, and believe that their realities should be consigned to God alone (tafwid).[71] In essence, the text of the Qur'an and Hadith is accepted without asking "how" or "Bi-la kaifa".
Traditionalist theology emerged among scholars of hadith who eventually coalesced into a movement called ahl al-hadith under the leadership of Ahmad ibn Hanbal.[72] In matters of faith, they were pitted against Mu'tazilites and other theological currents, condemning many points of their doctrine as well as the rationalistic methods they used in defending them.[72] In the tenth century al-Ash'ari and al-Maturidi found a middle ground between Mu'tazilite rationalism and Hanbalite literalism, using the rationalistic methods championed by Mu'tazilites to defend most tenets of the traditionalist doctrine.[73][74] Although the mainly Hanbali scholars who rejected this synthesis were in the minority, their emotive, narrative-based approach to faith remained influential among the urban masses in some areas, particularly in Abbasid Baghdad.[75]
While Ash'arism and Maturidism are often called the Sunni "orthodoxy", traditionalist theology has thrived alongside it, laying rival claims to be the orthodox Sunni faith.[76] In the modern era it has had a disproportionate impact on Islamic theology, having been appropriated by Wahhabi and other traditionalist Salafi currents and spread well beyond the confines of the Hanbali school of law.[77]
Sunni mysticism[edit]
There has also been a rich tradition of mysticism within Sunni Islam, which has most prominently manifested itself in the principal orders of Sunni Sufism. Historically, Sufism became "an incredibly important part of Islam" and "one of the most widespread and omnipresent aspects of Muslim life" in Islamic civilization from the early medieval period onwards,[78][79] when it began to permeate nearly all major aspects of Sunni Islamic life in regions stretching from India and Iraq to Senegal.[80] Sufism continued to remain a crucial part of daily Islamic life until the twentieth century, when its historical influence upon Islamic civilization began to be combated by the rise of Salafism and Wahhabism.[80][81] Islamic scholar Timothy Winter has remarked: "[In] classical, mainstream, medieval Sunni Islam ... [the idea of] 'orthodox Islam' would not ... [have been possible] without Sufism,"[78] and that the classical belief in Sufism being an essential component of Islam has only weakened in some quarters of the Islamic world "a generation or two ago" with the rise of Salafism.[78] In the modern world, the classical interpretation of Sunni orthodoxy, which sees in Sufism an essential dimension of Islam alongside the disciplines of jurisprudence and theology, is represented by institutions such as Al-Azhar University and Zaytuna College, with Al-Azhar's current Grand Imam Ahmed el-Tayeb defining "Sunni orthodoxy" as being a follower "of any of the four schools of [legal] thought (Hanafi, Shafi’i, Maliki or Hanbali) and ... [also] of the Sufism of Imam Junayd of Baghdad in doctrines, manners and [spiritual] purification."[82]
In the eleventh-century, Sufism, which had previously been a less "codified" trend in Islamic piety, began to be "ordered and crystallized"[83] into orders which have continued until the present day.[83] All these orders were founded by a major Sunni Islamic saint, and some of the largest and most widespread included the Qadiriyya (after Abdul-Qadir Gilani [d. 1166]), the Rifa'iyya (after Ahmed al-Rifa'i [d. 1182]), the Chishtiyya (after Moinuddin Chishti [d. 1236]), the Shadiliyya (after Abul Hasan ash-Shadhili [d. 1258]), and the Naqshbandiyya (after Baha-ud-Din Naqshband Bukhari [d. 1389]).[83] Contrary to popular perception in the West,[84] however, neither the founders of these orders nor their followers ever considered themselves to be anything other than orthodox Sunni Muslims,[84] and in fact all of these orders were attached to one of the four orthodox legal schools of Sunni Islam.[78][82] Thus, the Qadiriyya order was Hanbali, with its founder, Abdul-Qadir Gilani, being a renowned Hanbali jurist; the Chishtiyya was Hanafi; the Shadiliyya order was Maliki; and the Naqshbandiyya order was Hanafi.[85] Thus, "many of the most eminent defenders of Islamic orthodoxy, such as Abdul-Qadir Gilani, Ghazali, and the Sultan Ṣalāḥ ad-Dīn (Saladin) were connected with Sufism."[86]
The contemporary Salafi and Wahhabi strands of Sunnis, however, do not accept the traditional stance on mystical practices.[87]
Sunni view of hadith[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The Quran as it exists today in book form was compiled by Muhammad's companions (Sahabah) within a handful of months of his death, and is accepted by all sects of Islam. However, there were many matters of belief and daily life that were not directly prescribed in the Quran, but were actions that were observed by Muhammad and the early Muslim community. Later generations sought out oral traditions regarding the early history of Islam, and the practices of Muhammad and his first followers, and wrote them down so that they might be preserved. These recorded oral traditions are called hadith. Muslim scholars have through the ages sifted through the hadith and evaluated the chain of narrations of each tradition, scrutinizing the trustworthiness of the narrators and judging the strength of each hadith accordingly.
Kutub al-Sittah[edit]
Kutub al-Sittah are six books containing collections of hadiths. Sunni Muslims accept the hadith collections of Bukhari and Muslim as the most authentic (sahih, or correct), and while accepting all hadiths verified as authentic, grant a slightly lesser status to the collections of other recorders. There are, however, four other collections of hadith that are also held in particular reverence by Sunni Muslims, making a total of six:

Sahih al-Bukhari of Muhammad al-Bukhari
Sahih Muslim of Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj
Sunan al-Sughra of Al-Nasa'i
Sunan Abu Dawud of Abu Dawood
Jami' at-Tirmidhi of Al-Tirmidhi
Sunan Ibn Majah of Ibn Majah

There are also other collections of hadith which also contain many authentic hadith and are frequently used by scholars and specialists. Examples of these collections include:

Musannaf of Abd al-Razzaq of ‘Abd ar-Razzaq as-San‘ani
Musnad of Ahmad ibn Hanbal
Mustadrak of Al Haakim
Muwatta of Imam Malik
Sahih Ibn Hibbaan
Sahih Ibn Khuzaymah of Ibn Khuzaymah
Sunan al-Darimi of Al-Darimi

See also[edit]

Islamic schools and branches
Suni (disambiguation)

References[edit]


^ John L. Esposito, ed. (2014). "Sunni Islam". The Oxford Dictionary of Islam. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
^ a b c Tayeb El-Hibri, Maysam J. al Faruqi (2004). "Sunni Islam". In Philip Mattar. The Encyclopedia of the Modern Middle East and North Africa (Second ed.). MacMillan Reference USA. 
^ "Caliphate and Monarchistic (Urdu) Khilafat o Malookiat of Modoodi". Urdu Movies – via Google Books. 
^ Jafri, Syed Husain Mohammad (27 August 1976). The Origins and Early Development of Shi'a Islam (Millennium (Series)) (The Millennium (Series).). Karachi, Pakistan: Oxford University Press (First Published By Longman Group Ltd and Librairie du Liban 1979). p. 19 - 21. ISBN 9780195793871. The Shi'a unequivocally take the word in the meaning of leader, master, and patron, and therefore the explicitly nominated successor of the Prophet. The Sunnis, on the other hand, interpret the word mawla in the meaning of a friend, or the nearest kin and confidant. 
^ "CHAPTER IV IMAMHOOD". Imam Ali (a.s.) Foundation. Imam Ali (a.s.) Foundation, an affiliate website of the Grand Ayatullah al-Sayyid Ali al-Hussani al-Sistani. Retrieved 24 December 2017. Appointing the heir was done when the Prophet [P] returned from the (Departure Pilgrimage); he [p] gathered all the pilgrims in a place called (Ghadeer khum) addressing them with a lengthy speech through which he asked:(Do not I own thy souls more that thou do, they said: aye). Then he [p] took Imam Ali [p] by the shoulder, holding him in front of the people and said:(He whom I am his guardian, Ali be his guardian).Thus he [p] certified Imam Ali's [p] heavenly guardianship; so everybody who was present then paid tribute to him, including the second Caliph ( i. e Omar Ben Al-Khattab), who congratulated Ali [p] saying: (Blassed be thee O! Ali, thou became my guardian and the guardian of every Mo'men.) 
^ "Beliefs: Did the Prophet (s) Appoint a Successor". Al-Islam.org. Retrieved 25 December 2017. The Shi’ah believe that the proclamation mentioned by the Qur’anic verse was fulfilled by the Prophet (s) when he appointed Imam ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (a) as his successor on the day of Ghadir Khumm. 
^ Mawlana Hazar Imam. "Imam Ali declared the Successor of Prophet Muhammad in Sunni Hadith Literature". Ismaili Gnosis. Ismaili Gnosis. Retrieved 25 December 2017. As you know, the Shi’a divided from the Sunni after the death of Prophet Muhammad. Hazrat Ali, the cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet, was in Shia belief, named by the Prophet to be the Legitimate Authority for the interpretation of the faith. For Shi’a today all over the world, he is regarded as the first imam. 
^ Harney, John (January 3, 2016). "How Do Sunni and Shia Islam Differ?". New York Times. Retrieved January 4, 2016. Shiites believe that he chose Ali, his cousin and son-in-law 
^ Triana, María (2017-03-31). Managing Diversity in Organizations: A Global Perspective. Taylor & Francis. p. 159. ISBN 9781317423683. 
^ Ja'fari, Sayyid Husayn Muhammad (22 September 2014). "The Origins and Early Development of Shia Islam p.14-24". OUP Pakistan – via Google Books. 
^ "Mapping the Global Muslim Population". Retrieved 10 December 2014. 
^ Connie R. Green, Sandra Brenneman Oldendorf, Religious Diversity and Children's Literature: Strategies and Resources, Information Age Publishing, 2011, p. 156. Quote: "Catholicism is the second largest religious body after Sunni Muslims"
^ a b Michael E. Marmura (2009). "Sunnī Islam. Historical Overview". In John L. Esposito. The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Subscription required (help)). Sunnī Muslims have thus referred to themselves as ahl al-sunnah wa al-jamāʿah (people of the sunnah and the community). 
^ a b Lucas, Scott C. (2011). "Sunnism, Sunni". Encyclopedia of Christianity Online. Brill. (Subscription required (help)). The terms “Sunnism” and “Sunni” are anglicizations of Arab. ahl al-sunnah (the people of the Sunna [lit. “custom, way”]) or ahl al-sunnah wa-l-jamāʿa (the people of the Sunna and community). 
^ "Sunnism". -Ologies & -Isms. The Gale Group. Retrieved Oct 5, 2016. 
^ John Richard Thackrah (5 Sep 2013). Dictionary of Terrorism (2, revised ed.). Routledge. p. 252. ISBN 978-1-135-16595-6. 
^ Nasir, Jamal J., ed. (2009). The Status of Women Under Islamic Law and Modern Islamic Legislation (revised ed.). BRILL. p. 11. ISBN 9789004172739. 
^ George W. Braswell (2000). What You Need to Know about Islam & Muslims (illustrated ed.). B&H Publishing Group. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-8054-1829-3. 
^ An Introduction to the Hadith. John Burton. Published by Edinburgh University Press. 1996. p. 201. Cite: "Sunni: Of or pertaining sunna, especially the Sunna of the Prophet. Used in conscious opposition to Shi'a, Shi'í. There being no ecclesia or centralized magisterium, the translation 'orthodox' is inappropriate. To the Muslim 'unorthodox' implies heretical, mubtadi, from bid'a, the contrary of sunna, and so 'innovation'."
^ Sunnah Archived 2010-12-05 at the Wayback Machine., Center for Muslim-Jewish Engagement
^ Hughes, Aaron. Muslim Identities: An Introduction to Islam. p. 115. It is a mistake to assume, as is frequently done, that Sunni Islam emerged as normative from the chaotic period following Muhammad's death and that the other two movements simply developed out of it. This assumption is based in... the taking of later and often highly ideological sources as accurate historical portrayals - and in part on the fact that the overwhelming majority of Muslims throughout the world follows now what emerged as Sunni Islam in the early period. 
^ Hughes, Aaron. Muslim Identities: An Introduction to Islam. p. 116. Each of these sectarian movements... used the other to define itself more clearly and in the process to articulate its doctrinal contents and rituals. 
^ Tore Kjeilen. "Lexic Orient.com". Lexic Orient.com. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ El-Hibri, Tayeb (October 22, 2010). Parable and Politics in Early Islamic History:The Rashidun Caliphs. New York Chichester West Sussex: A Columbia University Press. p. 526 (kindle). ISBN 978-0-231-52165-9. 
^ Maududi, Abul A'la (July 2000). Khilafat o Malookiat [Caliphate and Monarchistic] (in Urdu). Lahore, Pakistan: Adara Tarjuman-ul-Quran (Private) Ltd, Urdu Bazar, Lahore, Pakistan. p. 105-153. 
^ Hazleton, Lesley (4 September 2009). After the Prophet:The Epic Story of Shia-Sunni Split in Islam. New York, London, Toranto, Sydney, Auckland: Anchor (Doubleday). p. 193 (kindle). ISBN 978-0385523936. 
^ Irving, Washington (1859). Lives of the Successors of Mahomet. Sunnyside: W. Clowes. p. 163-218. ISBN 978-1273126963. 
^ Nadvi, Syed Abul Hasan Ali. Al-Murtaza [The Murtaza] (in Urdu). Karachi Pakistan: Majlis-e-Nashriyat-e-Islam. p. 218-382. 
^ Maududi, Abul A'la (July 2000). Khilafat o Malookiat [Caliphate and Monarchistic] (in Urdu). Lahore, Pakistan: Adara Tarjuman-ul-Quran (Private) Ltd, Urdu Bazar, Lahore, Pakistan. p. 90. 
^ Jafri, Syed Husain Mohammad (27 August 1976). The Origins and Early Development of Shi'a Islam (Millennium (Series)) (The Millennium (Series).). Karachi, Pakistan: Oxford University Press (First Published By Longman Group Ltd and Librairie du Liban 1979). p. 108-109. ISBN 9780195793871. 
^ Kennedy, Hugh (2016). The Early Abbasid Caliphate: A Political History (Routledge Revivals) 1st Edition. Oxon: Routledge. p. 15-16. ISBN 978-1138953215. 
^ Gail Minault, The Khilafat Movement: Religious Symbolism and Political Mobilization in India (1982).
^ Rogan, Eugene (26 February 2015). The Fall of the Ottomans. UK: Penguin UK. 
^ Ian Harris; Stuart Mews; Paul Morris; John Shepherd (1992). Contemporary Religions: A World Guide. p. 369. ISBN 978-0-582-08695-1. 
^ Bowen, Wayne H. (2007). The History of Saudi Arabia. ISBN 978-0-313-34012-3. 
^ Minahan, James (2002). Encyclopedia of the Stateless Nations. p. 547. 
^ Source for distribution is the CIA World Factbook, Shiite/Sunnite distribution collected from other sources. Shiites may be underrepresented in some countries where they do not appear in official statistics.
^ Quran, 9:100
^ "Region: Middle East-North Africa". The Future of the Global Muslim Population – Executive Summary. Pew Research Center. Retrieved 3 April 2013. 
^ See:

Eastern Europe Russia and Central Asia "some 80% of the worlds Muslims are Sunni"
"Religions". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Retrieved 8 December 2011. Sunni Islam accounts for over 75% of the world's Muslim population 
Sue Hellett;U.S. should focus on sanctions against Iran "Sunnis make up over 75 percent of the world's Muslim population"
Iran, Israel and the United States "Sunni, accounts for over 75% of the Islamic population"
A dictionary of modern politics "probably 80% of the worlds Muslims are Sunni"
"Mapping the Global Muslim Population: A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Muslim Population". Pew Research Center. October 7, 2009. Retrieved 2010-08-24. Of the total Muslim population, 10-13% are Shia Muslims and 87-90% are Sunni Muslims. 
"Quick guide: Sunnis and Shias". BBC News. 2011-12-06. Retrieved December 18, 2011. The great majority of Muslims are Sunnis – estimates suggest the figure is somewhere between 85% and 90%. 
"Tension between Sunnis, Shiites emerging in USA". USA Today. 2007-09-24. Retrieved December 18, 2011. Among the world's estimated 1.4 billion Muslims, about 85% are Sunni and about 15% are Shiite. 
Sunni Islam: Oxford Bibliographies Online Research Guide "Sunni Islam is the dominant division of the global Muslim community, and throughout history it has made up a substantial majority (85 to 90 percent) of that community."


^ Masjid al-Muslimiin. "Organizational Structure Of Islam," The Islamic Center of Columbia (South Carolina). Accessed 07 December 2013.
^ Murtada Mutahhari, The Role of Ijtihad in Legislation, Al-Tawhid volume IV, No.2, Publisher: Islamic Thought Foundation
^ Meinhaj Hussain, A New Medina, The Legal System, Grande Strategy, January 5th, 2012
^ Ignác Goldziher, The Zahiris, pg. 5. Trns. Wolfgang Behn, intro. Camilla Adang.Volume three of Brill Classics in Islam. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 2008. ISBN 9789004162419
^ "Law, Islamic". Encyclopedia.com. Retrieved 13 March 2012. 
^ a b c Chibli Mallat, Introduction to Middle Eastern Law, pg. 116. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-19-923049-5
^ Hassan Ahmed Ibrahim, "An Overview of al-Sadiq al-Madhi's Islamic Discourse." Taken from The Blackwell Companion to Contemporary Islamic Thought, pg. 172. Ed. Ibrahim Abu-Rabi'. Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell, 2008. ISBN 978-1-4051-7848-8
^ "AmmanMessage.com – The Official Site". 
^ Wilfrid Scawen Blunt and Riad Nourallah, The future of Islam, Routledge, 2002, page 199
^ "Sunni Islam Afterlife and Salvation". 
^ "Dr Al-Ifta Al-Missriyyah". 
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya LXVI
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya XVIII
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya XXIX
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya XXXIII
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya XXXV
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya XXXIX
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya XLI
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya XLII
^ a b Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya LII
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya LVII
^ a b Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya LXVII
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya LXXIII
^ Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya XCIII
^ a b Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya XCVIII-IX
^ a b Al-Ṭaḥāwī, Al-ʿAqīdah aṭ-Ṭaḥāwiyya C
^ J. B. Schlubach. "Fethullah Gülen and Al-Ghazzali on Tolerance". Retrieved 2010-01-07. 
^ "Maturidiyyah". Philtar. Archived from the original on 2006-02-23. Retrieved 2006-04-01. 
^ Halverson, Jeffry R. (2010). Theology and Creed in Sunni Islam: The Muslim Brotherhood, Ash'arism, and Political Sunnism. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 36. ISBN 9781137473578. The Atharis can thus be described as a school or movement led by a contingent of scholars (ulama), typically Hanbalite or even Shafi'ite, which retained influence, or at the very least a shared sentiment and conception of piety, well beyond the limited range of Hanbalite communities. This body of scholars continued to reject theology in favor of strict textualism well after Ash'arism had infiltrated the Sunni schools of law. It is for these reasons that we must delineate the existence of a distinctly traditionalist, anti-theological movement, which defies strict identtification with any particular madhhab, and therefore cannot be described as Hanbalite. 
^ Halverson, Jeffry R. (2010). Theology and Creed in Sunni Islam: The Muslim Brotherhood, Ash'arism, and Political Sunnism. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 36. ISBN 9781137473578. 
^ Halverson, Jeffry R. (2010). Theology and Creed in Sunni Islam: The Muslim Brotherhood, Ash'arism, and Political Sunnism. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 36–37. ISBN 9781137473578. 
^ a b Lapidus, Ira M. (2014). A History of Islamic Societies. Cambridge University Press (Kindle edition). p. 130. ISBN 978-0-521-51430-9. 
^ Lapidus, Ira M. (2014). A History of Islamic Societies. Cambridge University Press (Kindle edition). pp. 123–124. ISBN 978-0-521-51430-9. 
^ Blankinship, Khalid (2008). Tim Winter, ed. The early creed. The Cambridge Companion to Classical Islamic Theology. Cambridge University Press (Kindle edition). p. 53. 
^ Halverson, Jeffry R. (2010). Theology and Creed in Sunni Islam: The Muslim Brotherhood, Ash'arism, and Political Sunnism. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 35. ISBN 9781137473578. 
^ Brown, Jonathan A.C. (2009). Hadith: Muhammad's Legacy in the Medieval and Modern World. Oneworld Publications (Kindle edition). p. 180. The Ash‘ari school of theology is often called the Sunni 'orthodoxy.' But the original ahl al-hadith, early Sunni creed from which Ash‘arism evolved has continued to thrive alongside it as a rival Sunni 'orthodoxy' as well. 
^ Hoover, Jon (2014). "Ḥanbalī Theology". In Sabine Schmidtke. The Oxford Handbook of Islamic Theology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 625. (Subscription required (help)). 
^ a b c d "Is orthodox Islam possible without Sufism? - Shaykh Abdal Hakim Murad (Dr. Timothy Winter)". youtube.com. 13 May 2015. 
^ "Dr. Jonathan AC Brown - What is Sufism?". youtube.com. 27 December 2015. 
^ a b "Dr. Jonathan AC Brown - What is Sufism?". youtube.com. 13 May 2015. 
^ Jonathan A.C. Brown, Misquoting Muhammad (London: Oneworld Publications, 2015), p. 254
^ a b "Profile of Sheikh Ahmad Muhammad Al-Tayyeb onThe Muslim 500". The Muslim 500: The World's Most Influential Muslims. 
^ a b c Seyyed Hossein Nasr, The Essential Seyyed Hossein Nasr, ed. William C. Chittick (Bloomington: World Wisdom, 2007), p. 76
^ a b Martin Lings, What is Sufism? (Lahore: Suhail Academy, 2005; first imp. 1983, second imp. 1999), p.16
^ Massington, L., Radtke, B., Chittick, W.C., Jong, F. de., Lewisohn, L., Zarcone, Th., Ernst, C, Aubin, Françoise and J.O. Hunwick, “Taṣawwuf”, in: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition, Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W.P. Heinrichs; q.v. "Hanafi," "Hanbali," and "Maliki," and under "mysticism in..." for each.
^ Titus Burckhardt, Introduction to Sufi Doctrine (Bloomington: World Wisdom, 2008, p. 4, note 2
^ Jeffrey Halverson, Theology and Creed in Sunni Islam, 2010, p. 48


Further reading[edit]

Branon Wheeler, Applying the Canon in Islam: The Authorization and Maintenance of Interpretive Reasoning in Ḥanafī Scholarship, SUNY Press, 1996.
Patler, Nicholas (2017). From Mecca to Selma: Malcolm X, Islam, and the Journey Into the American Civil Rights Movement. http://theislamicmonthly.com/mecca-to-selma/: The Islamic Monthly. 

External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article Sunnites.



Islam.org.uk
International Quran
Books relating to belief of ahl as-Sunnat
Ahl as-sunnat belief
Translation and Detailed Commentary on Quran
SunniPath – Study Islam Online







v
t
e


Islamic theology











Fields
Theologians
Books










Fields



Aqidah
‘aql
Astronomy
Cosmology
Eschatology
Ethics
Kalam
Fiqh
Logic in philosophy
Peace in philosophy
Philosophy
Physics
Philosophy of education





Theologians



Abd al-Jabbar ibn Ahmad
Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani
Abdul Hosein Amini
Abdulhakim Arvasi
Abū Ḥanīfa
Abu l-A‘la Mawdudi
Abu Yusuf
Ahmad ibn Hanbal
Ahmad Sirhindi
Ahmad Yasavi
Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi
Akhtar Raza Khan
al-Ash‘ari
al-Ballūṭī
al-Baydawi
al-Dhahabi
al-Ghazali
al-Hilli
al-Jahiz
al-Jubba'i
al-Kindi
al-Masudi
al-Maturidi
al-Mufid
Al-Qasim
al-Qushayri
al-Razi
Al-Shafi‘i
al-Shahrastani
al-Shirazi
al-Tirmidhi
Allameh Majlesi
Amr ibn Ubayd
Dawud al-Zahiri
Fazlur Rahman Malik
Hasan of Basra
Hacı Bayram-ı Veli
Haji Bektash Veli
Hüseyin Hilmi Işık
ibn ‘Arabī
ibn al-Jawzi
ibn ‘Aqil
ibn Hazm
ibn Qudamah
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ja’far al-Sadiq
Jalal al-Din Muhammad Rumi
Malik ibn Anas
Mahmud Hudayi
Morteza Motahhari
Muhammad al-Baqir
Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya
Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr
Muhammed Hamdi Yazır
Muhammad Hamidullah
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah
Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri
Muhammad Taqi Usmani
Nasir Khusraw
Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi
Said Nursî
Shaykh Tusi
Sheikh Bedreddin
Wasil ibn Ata
Zayd ibn Ali
Zayn al-Abidin





Key books



Crucial Sunni books

al-Irshad
al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah


Buyruks
Kitab al Majmu
Masnavi
Nahj al-Balagha
Epistles of Wisdom
Risale-i Nur
















Schools







Sunni



Ash'ari
Maturidi
Traditionalism





Shia




Kaysanites



Mukhtar

Abu Muslim
Sunpadh
Ishaq al-Turk


Muhammerah

Khurramites

Babak
Mazyar
Ismail I / Pir Sultan Abdal – Qizilbash / Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam


al-Muqanna







Zaidiyyah



Jarudi
Batriyya
Alid dynasties of northern Iran

Hasan al-Utrush


List of extinct Shia sects

Dukayniyya
Khalafiyya
Khashabiyya







Imami Isma'ilism



Batiniyyah

Sevener Qarmatians
Hamza / al-Muqtana Baha'uddin / ad-Darazi – Druzes


Musta'li

Hafizi
Taiyabi


Nizari

Assassins
Nizaris


Nasir Khusraw – Badakhshan & Turkestan Alevism





Imami Twelver



Theology of Twelvers

Ja'fari

Akhbari
Shaykhi
Usuli


Alevism

Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Qalandariyya
Baba Ishak – Babai Revolt
Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Rifa'i-Galibi Order


Ghulat

al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites
Fazlallah Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism and folk religion












Independent



Ibadi

ibn Ibāḍ
Jābir ibn Zayd


Jabriyyah

Ibn Safwan


Murji'ah
Karramiyya
Qadariyah

Ma'bad al-Juhani
Muʿtazila
Bahshamiyya







Khawarij



Azariqa
Najdat
Sufri

Abu Qurra


Nakkariyyah

Abu Yazid


Haruriyyah


















v
t
e


Islam topics




Outline of Islam







Beliefs



God in Islam
Tawhid
Muhammad

In Islam


Prophets of Islam





Five Pillars



Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj








History
Leaders






Timeline of Muslim history
Conquests
Golden Age
Historiography
Sahaba
Ahl al-Bayt
Shi'a Imams
Caliphates

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Córdoba
Fatimid
Almohad
Sokoto
Ottoman







Religious texts



Quran
Sunnah
Hadith
Tafsir
Seerah





Denominations



Sunni
Shia
Ibadi
Black Muslims
Ahmadiyya
Quranism
Non-denominational








Life
Culture






Animals
Art
Calendar
Children
Clothing
Holidays
Mosques
Madrasas
Moral teachings
Music
Philosophy
Political aspects
Qurbani
Science

medieval


Social welfare
Women
LGBT
Islam by country
















Law
Jurisprudence










Economics



Banking
Economic history
Sukuk
Takaful
Murabaha
Riba





Hygiene



Ghusl
Miswak
Najis
Tayammum
Toilet
Wudu








Marriage
Sex






Marriage contract
Mahr
Mahram
Masturbation
Nikah
Nikah Mut‘ah
Zina





Other aspects



Cleanliness
Criminal
Dhabiĥa
Dhimmi
Divorce
Diet
Ethics
Etiquette
Gambling
Gender segregation
Honorifics
Hudud
Inheritance
Jizya
Leadership
Ma malakat aymanukum
Military

POWs


Slavery
Sources of law
Theological

baligh
kalam


















 Islamic studies







Arts



Arabesque
Architecture
Calligraphy
Carpets
Gardens
Geometric patterns
Music
Pottery





Medieval science



Alchemy and chemistry
Astronomy
Cosmology
Geography and cartography
Mathematics
Medicine
Ophthalmology
Physics





Philosophy



Early
Contemporary
Eschatology
Theological





Other areas



Astrology
Creationism (evolution)
Feminism
Inventions
Liberalism and progressivism
Literature

poetry


Psychology
Shu'ubiyya
Conversion to mosques


















Other religions



Christianity

Mormonism
Protestantism


Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Sikhism





Related topics



Apostasy
Criticism of Islam
Cultural Muslim
Islamism

Criticism
Post-Islamism
Qutbism
Salafi movement


Islamophobia

Incidents


Islamic terrorism
Islamic view of miracles
Domestic violence
Nursing
Persecution of Muslims
Quran and miracles
Symbolism








 Islam portal
 Category















v
t
e


Sunni hadith literature



Kutub al-Sittah



Sahih al-Bukhari
Sahih Muslim
Sunan an-Nasa'i al-Sughra
Sunan Abu Dawood
Sunan al-Tirmidhi
Sunan ibn Majah





Primary collections



Sahifah Hammam ibn Munabbih
Musannaf ibn Jurayj
Al-Muwatta
The Musannaf of Abd al-Razzaq
Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal
Sunan al-Darimi
Sahih Ibn Khuzaymah
Sahih Ibn Hibbaan
Al-Mustadrak alaa al-Sahihain
Mawdu'at al-Kubra
Tahdhib al-Athar





Secondary collections



Riyadh as-Saaliheen
Masabih al-Sunnah
Mishkat al-Masabih
Majma al-Zawa'id
Bulugh al-Maram
Kanz al-Ummal





Types



Sahih
Musnad
Collections of fabricated hadith
Musannaf
Al-Zawa'id





Commentaries



Fath al-Bari (explanation of Sahih al-Bukhari)






Hadith terminology
and study




Muqaddimah ibn al-Salah fi 'Ulum al-Hadith
The Interpretation of Conflicting Narrations





Biographical evaluation



al-Tarikh al-Kabir
Al-Kamal fi Asma' al-Rijal












v
t
e


Religion








Major religious groups and religious denominations







Abrahamic




Judaism



Orthodox

Haredi
Hasidic
Modern


Conservative
Reform
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot





Christianity



Catholicism

Eastern Catholic Churches


Eastern Christianity

Church of the East

Assyrian Church of the East


Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy

Ethiopian Orthodoxy




Independent Catholicism

Old Catholicism


Protestantism

Adventism
Anabaptism
Anglicanism
Baptists
Calvinism

Presbyterianism
Congregationalism
Continental Reformed


Lutheranism
Methodism
Pentecostalism
Evangelicalism


Nontrinitarianism

Jehovah's Witnesses
Mormonism
Jesuism


Nondenominational





Islam



Sunni

Hanafi
Maliki
Hanbali
Shafi'i


Shia

Twelver
Isma'ilism
Zaidiyyah


Ahmadi
Ibadi
Non-denominational
Quranism
Zahirism
Salafism

Wahhabism
Ahl al-Hadith


Mahdavia
European Islam
Nation of Islam





Others



Bábism

Azáli Bábism
Bahá'í Faith


Druze
Mandaeism
Rastafari
Samaritanism








Dharmic




Hinduism



Vaishnavism
Shaktism
Shaivism
Ayyavazhi
Smartism
Balinese





Buddhism



Mahayana

Chan

Zen
Thiền
Seon


Pure Land
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Tiantai


Theravada
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Newar
Bon


Navayana





Others



Dravidian
Jainism

Digambara
Śvētāmbara


Sikhism
Gurung shamanism
Bon Lamaism
Kirant Mundhum








Persian



Manichaeism
Yazdânism

Yazidism
Ishikism
Ali-Illahism
Yarsanism


Zoroastrianism





European



Armenian
Baltic

Dievturība
Druwi
Romuva


Caucasian
Celtic

Druidry


Germanic
Hellenism
Italo-Roman
Romanian
Slavic





Uralic



Finnish
Hungarian
Uralic

Mari
Mordvin
Udmurt







Central and
Northern Asian



Burkhanism
Chuvash
Manchu
Mongolian
Siberian
Tengrism





East Asian



Benzhuism
Bimoism
Bon
Cheondoism
Confucianism
Dongbaism
Faism
Hmongism
Jeungsanism
Luoism
Meishanism
Mileism
Muism
Neo-Confucianism
Ryukyuan religion
Shenism
Shigongism
Shinto
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Wuism
Yiguandao





Southeast Asian



Burmese
Satsana Phi
Malaysian
Indonesian

Marapu
Kaharingan
Kebatinan


Philippine
Vietnamese

Caodaism
Đạo Mẫu
Hoahaoism







African




Traditional



Akan
Akamba
Baluba
Bantu
Berber
Bushongo
Cushitic
Dinka
Efik
Fon and Ewe
Guanche
Igbo
Isoko
Lotuko
Lozi
Lugbara
Maasai
Mbuti
San
Serer
Tumbuka
Waaq
Yoruba
Zulu





Diasporic



Candomblé
Kumina
Obeah
Quimbanda
Palo
Santería
Umbanda
Vodou
Voodoo
Winti








Other groups



Bathouism
Bongthingism
Donyi-Polo
Kiratism
Sanamahism
Sarnaism
Aboriginal Australian
Native American
Mesoamerican
Hawaiian
Polynesian





Recent



Discordianism
Eckankar
Jediism
New Age
New Thought
Pastafarianism
Raëlism
Satanism
Scientology
Thelema
Unitarian Universalism
Wicca
















Historical religions







Prehistoric



Paleolithic





Near East



Arabian
Egyptian
Mesopotamian
Semitic

Canaanite
Yahwism







Indo-European




Asia



Proto-Indo-Iranian
Armenian
Ossetian
Vedic
Zoroastrianism

Mithraism
Zurvanism


Gnosticism

Manichaeism







Europe



Celtic
Germanic

Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse


Greek

Gnosticism
Neoplatonism


Manichaeism
Balkan
Roman
Slavic



















Topics







Aspects



Apostasy / Disaffiliation
Behaviour
Beliefs
Clergy
Conversion
Deities
Entheogens
Ethnic religion
Denomination
Faith
Fire
Folk religion
God
Meditation
Monasticism

monk
nun


Mysticism
Mythology
Nature
Ordination
Orthodoxy
Orthopraxy
Prayer
Religious experience
Ritual

liturgy
sacrifice


Spirituality
Supernatural
Symbols
Truth
Water
Worship





Theism



Animism
Deism
Dualism
Henotheism
Monotheism
Nontheism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Transtheism





Religious studies



Anthropology
Cognitive science
Comparative
Development
Evolutionary origin
Evolutionary psychology
History
Philosophy
Neurotheology
Psychology
Sociology
Theology
Theories
Women






Religion and
society




Agriculture
Business
Clergy

monasticism
ordination


Conversion

evangelism
missionary
proselytism


Education
Fanaticism
Freedom

pluralism
syncretism
toleration
universalism


Fundamentalism
Growth
Happiness
Homosexuality
Minorities
National church
National religiosity levels
Religiocentrism
Political science
Populations
Schism
Science
State
Theocracy
Vegetarianism
Video games
Violence

persecution
terrorism
war


Wealth






Secularism and
irreligion




Antireligion
Deism
Agnosticism
Atheism
Criticism
LaVeyan Satanism
Deconstruction
Humanistic Judaism
Irreligion by country
Objectivism
Secular humanism
Secular theology
Secularization
Separation of church and state
Unaffiliated






Overviews
and lists




Index
Outline
Timeline
Abrahamic prophets
Deification
Deities
Founders
Mass gatherings
New religious movements
Organizations
Religions and spiritual traditions
Scholars














Category
Portal









Authority control



GND: 4184103-7











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sunni_Islam&oldid=818388602"					Categories: Sunni IslamHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 Urdu-language sources (ur)Wikipedia pending changes protected pages (level 1)Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing Arabic-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017Articles with unsourced statements from March 2008Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015Articles needing additional references from December 2017All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers