





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




SUNY Downstate Medical Center




Type
Medical school


Established
1860


President
Wayne J. Riley, MD, MPH, MBA, MACP


Students
1,738 [1]



Other students

1,040 residents[1]


Location
Brooklyn, New York
40°39′19″N 73°56′45″W﻿ / ﻿40.6554°N 73.9457°W﻿ / 40.6554; -73.9457Coordinates: 40°39′19″N 73°56′45″W﻿ / ﻿40.6554°N 73.9457°W﻿ / 40.6554; -73.9457


Affiliations
State University of New York


Website
http://www.downstate.edu


SUNY Downstate Medical Center, located in central Brooklyn, New York, is the only academic medical center for health education, research, and patient care serving Brooklyn’s 2.5 million residents. As of Fall 2011, it had a total student body of 1,738 and approximately 8,000 faculty and staff.
Downstate Medical Center comprises a College of Medicine, Colleges of Nursing and Health Related Professions, Schools of Graduate Studies and Public Health, and University Hospital of Brooklyn. It also includes a major research complex and biotechnology facilities.
SUNY Downstate ranks eighth nationally in the number of alumni who are on the faculty of American medical schools. More physicians practicing in New York City graduated from Downstate than from any other medical school. With 1,040 residents (young physicians in training), Downstate's residency program is the 16th largest in the country.
SUNY Downstate Medical Center is the fourth largest employer in Brooklyn. Eighty-six percent of its employees are New York City residents; 68 percent live in Brooklyn. The medical center's total direct, indirect, and induced economic impact on New York State is in excess of $2 billion. SUNY Downstate Medical Center attracted close to $100 million in external research funding in 2011, which includes $26 million from federal sources. It ranks fourth among SUNY campuses in grant expenditures, and second among SUNY's academic health centers.



Contents


1 History
2 Academic profile
3 Patient care

3.1 University Hospital of Brooklyn
3.2 SUNY Downstate at Bay Ridge


4 Research
5 Notable faculty
6 Research centers and major laboratories
7 References in popular culture
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]




2010 was SUNY Downstate's sesquicentennial, celebrating 150 years in medical education. Sesquicentennial Site


In 2010 SUNY Downstate celebrated its sesquicentennial, commemorating the year that the Long Island College Hospital (as it was then known) first opened its doors to students. Yet Downstate traces its roots back even further (to 1856) when a small group of physicians set up a free dispensary in Brooklyn to care for poor immigrants.
Known as the German General Dispensary, its original aim was to care for indigent Germans living in Brooklyn, but changing demographics soon required it to broaden its outreach. In 1857 it was reorganized as a charitable institution and renamed The St. John’s Hospital—the first of many name changes.
Officially chartered by the state in 1858 as the Long Island College Hospital of the City of Brooklyn, it was authorized to operate a hospital and confer medical degrees on candidates who attended two lecture courses and completed a three-year preceptorship under a practicing physician. The notion that care at the hospital bedside should be included as an essential part of medical training was revolutionary for its time, but other medical schools soon adopted the approach and it came to be regarded as essential pedagogy.
In 1860 the school officially opened its doors to 57 (male) students. It was one of only 11 medical schools to admit African American students. The first faculty included many distinguished physicians, such as Dr. Austin Flint, Sr., remembered for his role in introducing the stethoscope into standard medical practice in this country. Dr. Flint delivered the commencement address on July 24, 1860, when the school graduated its first new doctors.
In the following decades The Long Island College Hospital greatly expanded both its facilities and medical school curriculum. By the time of the First World War, admission was opened to women and postgraduate training had been introduced. In 1930 the college and hospital were separated from one another so that each would be under its own governing board. The following year, the school was rechartered as the Long Island College of Medicine.
In 1945, the college purchased a large tract of land that would become the site of the future Downstate Medical Center. The “Downstate” era began on April 5, 1950, with the signing of a merger contract between the State University of New York (SUNY) and the Long Island College of Medicine. The medical center came to be known as Downstate to distinguish it from the SUNY medical center in Syracuse, New York, which is known as “Upstate”. Several years later the current campus was built in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn.
In 1954 President Dwight D. Eisenhower laid the cornerstone for the Basic Sciences Building. In the following years, the complex grew rapidly, with the addition of a student center and residence halls, as well as a nurses' residence. In 1966 Governor Nelson Rockefeller officiated at the dedication of University Hospital of Brooklyn (UHB), Downstate’s own teaching hospital. The School of Graduate Studies, the College of Health Related Professions, and the College of Nursing were established that same year. In 1987 Governor Mario Cuomo and Mayor Edward Koch helped break ground for the new Health Science Education Building, where most student classes now take place.
More recently, the medical center has entered a period of renewed growth and expansion. In addition to the completion of a multimillion-dollar capital improvement program for the hospital and new clinical and research facilities, the campus has expanded to include a Biotechnology Park and Advanced Biotechnology Incubator, and School of Public Health. The School of Public Health was structurally engineered by Leslie E. Robertson Associates, and designed by Ennead Architects.
The Advanced Biotechnology Incubator, designed for start-up and early-stage biotech companies, includes a commercial synthetic chemistry facility. Construction is underway to develop biotech research and manufacturing at the Brooklyn Army Terminal. These initiatives are part of a strategic plan to position SUNY Downstate as the center for biomedical discovery and development in Brooklyn.
Academic profile[edit]
SUNY Downstate offers students a broad professional education that prepares them for practice or careers in any location and community. The vast majority of students are drawn from the New York City metropolitan area. Many have immigrant backgrounds and are members of racial and cultural groups who are underrepresented in the health professions. The differences in background and outlook enhance the quality of the educational experience of all students.
Downstate's Colleges of Medicine, Nursing, and Health Related Professions and its School of Graduate Studies and School of Public Health collectively offer more than 30 health-focused programs.
College of Medicine
The College of Medicine, which grants the MD degree, is the 32nd oldest college of medicine in the country. With approximately 800 enrollees, it is one of the largest colleges of medicine in New York State. It ranks eighth out of 140 accredited medical schools in the nation in the number of alumni who hold faculty positions at U.S. medical schools. More physicians practicing in New York City graduated from Downstate's College of Medicine than from any other medical school.
In addition to granting the MD degree, the College sponsors a combined MD/PhD degree with the School of Graduate Studies.
School of Graduate Studies
Of the School's three multidisciplinary core programs, Neural and Behavioral Science is the oldest. Faculty research in the neurosciences is especially deep, ranging from the molecular to the behavioral. The Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology has concentrations in cardiovascular, fundamental cellular and molecular biology, cancer biology, and more. The Program in Biomedical Engineering, run jointly with the Polytechnic Institute of NYU, features concentrations in neurorobotics, imaging, and materials.
The School of Graduate Studies has also partnered with the College of Nanoscale Science and Engineering (CSNE) of the University at Albany to offer a combined MD/PhD degree program in nanoscale medicine. This clinical scientist education program provides hands-on training in the development and application of nanotechnology to advance health care. MD training at Downstate is coupled with PhD training in either nanoscale science or nanoscale engineering.
PhD Programs:

Molecular and Cellular Biology
Neural and Behavioral Science
Biomedical Engineering

School of Public Health
The first new school established at SUNY Downstate since 1966, it was launched in 2001 as an MPH degree program within the Department of Preventive Medicine and Community Health in the College of Medicine. In 2008 it declared school status and was fully accredited by the Council on Education for Public Health in 2010. It currently offers five master's and three doctoral programs, as well as combined degree programs.
MPH and DrPH Programs

Biostatistics (MPH only)
Community Health Sciences
Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences
Epidemiology
Health Policy and Management (MPH only)

Combined Programs:

MD/MPH
OT/MPH
PT/MPH

College of Health Related Professions
An upper-division undergraduate and graduate school, the College has graduated close to 4,000 allied health professionals since its establishment in 1966. Approximately 80 percent of students have four-year college degrees in other fields upon enrollment. Its direct-entry midwifery program was the first of its kind in the nation.
BS Programs:

Diagnostic Medical Imaging
Physician Assistant

MS Programs:

Medical Informatics
Midwifery
Occupational Therapy

Combined Programs:

BS/DPT in Physical Therapy

Advanced Certificate Programs:

Midwifery

College of Nursing
The College offers an undergraduate, upper-division RN-to-BS degree program for students who are already licensed as professional nurses and an Accelerated BS program for students who hold a degree in another field and seek basic preparation for beginning nursing practice. The College is one of only four nursing schools in New York State to offer master's degree programs in all advanced nursing practice roles.

RN to BS
Accelerated BS

MS Programs:

Nursing (Clinical Nurse Specialist)
Family Nurse Practitioner
Women’s Health Nurse Practitioner
Nurse Anesthesia
Nurse Midwifery

Advanced Certificate Programs:

Family Nurse Practitioner
Women’s Primary Care Nurse Practitioner

Patient care[edit]
University Hospital of Brooklyn[edit]


University Hospital of Brooklyn


Geography


Location
450 Clarkson Avenue
Brooklyn, New York City, United States


Organization


Hospital type
Teaching


Affiliated university
SUNY Downstate College of Medicine


Links


Website
www.downstate.edu/uhb/


University Hospital of Brooklyn (UHB) offers comprehensive, advanced medical care throughout Brooklyn. It includes a full-service, comprehensive hospital site (UHB at Central Brooklyn) plus a free-standing Urgent Care and Ambulatory Surgery Center in Bay Ridge and nine ambulatory satellite sites. UHB is licensed for 882 beds and annually provides care to over 300,000 patients. UHB is an 8-story facility with 8 intensive care and step-down units, 12 operating rooms, an adult and pediatric ER, diagnostic and ambulatory surgery facility, and 75 outpatient clinics. The flagship location for UHB, Central Brooklyn includes three community-based health centers in the neighborhoods of East New York, Bedford-Stuyvesant, and Midwood, plus a freestanding Dialysis Center.
Specialized services

Comprehensive cardiovascular services, including 24/7 angioplasty services and heart surgery;
Comprehensive neurological services, including diagnosis and treatment for stroke, epilepsy, sleep disorders, and Alzheimer's disease;
Adult/pediatric emergency services: the ER receives more than 68,906 patient visits a year [2010 data for University Hospital Central Brooklyn location];
Kidney transplantation and dialysis – the only transplant and pediatric dialysis centers in Brooklyn.
Sports medicine;
HIV/AIDS treatment and support services — Downstate is a designated AIDS treatment center;
Maternal and infant health—Downstate is a designated Regional Perinatal Center.

HEAT (Health and Education Alternatives for Teens) Program
HEAT[2] is a program established and directed by Dr. Jeffrey Birnbaum which offers culturally competent care for youth who are living at high risk of developing HIV/AIDS. HEAT has a special focus on care for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth but does not limit its services to these populations. The program offers comprehensive clinical services for HIV/AIDS patients as well as sexual health and transgender care services.
HEAT is actively involved in community outreach and Dr. Brinbaum has received various awards for his efforts in combating HIV/AIDS [3]
Brooklyn Free Clinic
The Brooklyn Free Clinic (BFC)[4] is a student-run free clinic operated primarily by the students of the College of Medicine. The BFC offers medical and psychiatric care and health maintenance screening to the uninsured populations of Brooklyn.
The clinic hosts an annual conference on health seen through the eyes of medicine, art, technology and community called BFC What's Next.[5] The clinic has won multiple awards for its advertisement campaigns including a gold medal in conjunction with CDMiConnect at the 2014 MMM Awards for their "We Need U" campaign[6] and a bronze medal at the CLIO Healthcare Awards.[7]
SUNY Downstate at Bay Ridge[edit]
SUNY Downstate at Bay Ridge serves the communities of Bay Ridge/Dyker Heights, Bensonhurst, and Sunset Park. It features a walk-in Urgent Care Center, Ambulatory Surgery Center, Advanced Endoscopy Center, and Laser Vision Correction Center. It has onsite laboratory and radiology diagnostic facilities and medical offices for doctors in many clinical specialties.
Research[edit]
SUNY Downstate is an important research facility where scientists and clinicians explore many urgent health problems. Historically, areas of research strength include cardiovascular biology, neuroscience, and instrumentation. Current strengths include learning and memory mechanisms; pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and cardiomyopathy; robotic prosthetic devices; HIV/AIDS; pain and addiction; optical tomography imaging technology; and fundamental cell biology (mechanisms of transcription and translation).
Downstate’s role as the only academic medical center in Brooklyn is central to its powerful role in clinical, translational, and public health research. Downstate’s research spans the entire “bench to bedside” spectrum as an integrated entity, bringing together basic scientists, clinical researchers, and practitioners with common interests.
Downstate is the fourth highest grant recipient of SUNY’s 64 campuses. In FY 2011, sponsored research programs, including those funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), DARPA, and private foundations, totaled over $60 million. Downstate is the only healthcare facility in Brooklyn that holds the Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiology.
Notable faculty[edit]

Alexander Skene, MD - authority on women’s diseases; discovered the paraurethral glands known as Skene’s ducts (1880).


Robert L. Dickinson, MD - published first “modern” pamphlet on voluntary birth control (1931).


Chandler McCuskey Brooks, PhD - the Graduate School’s founder, laid much of the groundwork in spinal cord and hypothalamic physiology, and cardiac pacemaker function (1950s).


Robert Furchgott, PhD - awarded Nobel Prize in Medicine or Physiology for research on nitric oxide (1998).


Carl Axel Gemzell, MD/PhD - first to use FSH to treat anovulatory women.

Research centers and major laboratories[edit]

Alzheimer's Disease Research Program
Brooklyn Center for Health Disparities
Center for Biomedical Imaging
Center for Cardiovascular Muscle Research
Center for Neurorobotics and Neuroengineering
Center for Treatment and Study of Endometriosis
Cancer Research Focus Group
Henri Begleiter Neurodynamics Laboratory (Genetics of Alcoholism)
HIV Center for Women and Children
Northeast Terrorism Preparedness, Training, Education, and Research Center
Transgenic Mouse Core Facility

References in popular culture[edit]

Mos Def, in his 1999 recording of "Got" uses the line "you takin' a ride on the Downstate Medical," indicating that the victim of a violent robbery might be transported by ambulance to SUNY Downstate to receive medical care.
Ol' Dirty Bastard also makes reference to the former Psychiatric care building at nearby affiliated Kings County Hospital in the recording "Brooklyn Zoo," in which he describes himself as having been "In the G Building, takin' all types of medicine..."

See also[edit]

University Hospital of Brooklyn at Long Island College Hospital

References[edit]



^ a b "Facts About SUNY Downstate". 2010-04-28. Retrieved 2010-10-02. 
^ "HEAT". Heatprogram.org. Retrieved 2015-03-04. 
^ Joanna DelBuono (2013-12-12). "Standing O salutes SUNY Downstate's Dr. Jeffrey Birnbaum for his award-winning youth work". Brooklyndaily.com. Retrieved 2015-03-04. 
^ "About". Brooklyn Free Clinic. 2013-12-28. Retrieved 2015-03-04. 
^ "whatsnext2014". Bfcconference2014.wix.com. Retrieved 2015-03-04. 
^ "CDMiConnect and Brooklyn Free Clinic for "We Need U" | MM&M Awards". Awards.mmm-online.com. Retrieved 2015-03-04. 
^ "CLIO Healthcare Awards | Integrated Campaign - Grand CLIO Winners". Cliohealthcare.com. Retrieved 2015-03-04. 



External links[edit]

Official Site
SUNY Downstate Library Resources
Brooklyn College B.A.-M.D. Program
Clarence Dennis Papers (1927-2003) - National Library of Medicine finding aid
The Clarence Dennis Collection - Profiles in Science, National Library of Medicine







v
t
e


State University of New York



University centers



Albany
Binghamton
Buffalo
Stony Brook








Other doctoral-
granting institutions



Ceramics (Alfred)
Cornell University

Agriculture and Life Sciences
Human Ecology
Industrial and Labor Relations
Veterinary Medicine


Downstate Medical (Brooklyn)
Environmental Science and Forestry (Syracuse)
Optometry (Manhattan)
Polytechnic Institute (Albany, Utica)
Upstate Medical (Syracuse)





Comprehensive colleges



Buffalo State
Brockport
Cortland
Empire State (multi-site)
Fredonia
Geneseo
New Paltz
Old Westbury
Oneonta
Oswego
Plattsburgh
Potsdam
Purchase





Technology colleges



Alfred State
Canton
Cobleskill
Delhi
Farmingdale
Maritime
Morrisville





Community colleges



Adirondack
Broome
Cayuga
Clinton
Columbia-Greene
Corning
Dutchess
Erie
Fashion Institute of Technology (Manhattan)
Finger Lakes
Fulton-Montgomery
Genesee
Herkimer
Hudson Valley
Jamestown
Jefferson
Mohawk Valley
Monroe
Nassau
Niagara
North Country
Onondaga
Orange
Rockland
Schenectady
Suffolk
Sullivan
Tompkins Cortland
Ulster
Westchester





Other



Chancellor
Construction Fund
Eye Institute
Faculty Council of Community Colleges
Student Assembly of the State University of New York
Keyishian v. Board of Regents
Levin Institute
Open SUNY
Ranger School
State University Police
SUNY Athletic Conference
SUNY Press
System Administration Building








 Category

radio stations
TV stations


List of units
 Commons












v
t
e


Colleges and universities in New York City



Comprehensive



Columbia
CUNY
Fordham
LIU
The New School
NYU
Pace
St. John's
Touro
Yeshiva





Liberal arts
colleges



Barnard
Boricua
SUNY Empire State
King's
Manhattan College
Marymount Manhattan
Mercy
Mount Saint Vincent
Nyack
St. Francis
St. Joseph's
Wagner





Arts and
engineering



AADA
AMDA
Bard
Christie's
Cooper Union
Cornell Tech
FIT
Juilliard
LIM
Manhattan School of Music
NYAA
NYFA
NYIT
NYSS
Pratt
SUNY Maritime
SVA
Vaughn





Health and law



Brooklyn Law
Einstein
Mount Sinai
NYLS
NYMC
Pacific
Phillips Beth Israel
Podiatric
Rockefeller
SUNY Downstate
SUNY Optometry
Weill Cornell
Cornell Grad School of Medicine





Theological



ATS
GTS
Hebrew Union
JTS
NYTS
UTS





Vocational



Bramson ORT
Briarcliffe
DeVry
Metropolitan
Monroe





Other



Bank Street
Berkeley
NYIF
Teachers












v
t
e


Hospitals in New York City



Manhattan



Bellevue
Coler
Columbia University–Irving
Gracie Square
Gouverneur
Harlem
Joint Diseases
Lenox Hill
Lower Manhattan
Manhattan Eye, Ear, and Throat
Manhattan Psychiatric
VA Manhattan Campus
Memorial Sloan Kettering
Metropolitan
Morgan Stanley Children's
Mount Sinai
Mount Sinai Beth Israel
Mount Sinai St. Luke's
Mount Sinai West
New York Eye and Ear of Mount Sinai
NewYork-Presbyterian
NYU Langone
Rockefeller
Sloane
Special Surgery





Brooklyn



Brookdale
Brooklyn
VA Brooklyn Campus
Coney Island
Interfaith
Kingsbrook
Kings County
Maimonides
Mount Sinai Brooklyn
New York Community
New York Methodist
NYU Lutheran
SUNY Downstate
Woodhull
Wyckoff Heights





The Bronx



Bronx Psychiatric
Bronx-Lebanon
Calvary
James J. Peters VA Medical Center
Jacobi
Lincoln
Montefiore

Moses
Weiler
Wakefield


North Central Bronx
St. Barnabas





Queens



Creedmoor
Elmhurst
Floating
Flushing
Forest Hills
Jamaica
Long Island Jewish
New York–Presbyterian Queens
Queens
Queens Children's Psychiatric
St. Albans
Zucker Hillside





Staten Island



Bayley Seton
Richmond University
South Beach Psychiatric
Staten Island University





Networks



NYC Health + Hospitals
Mount Sinai
NewYork-Presbyterian
Northwell Health
NYU Langone
VA New York Harbor











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SUNY_Downstate_Medical_Center&oldid=803696886"					Categories: Teaching hospitals in New York CityHospitals in BrooklynUniversities and colleges in New York CityNursing schools in New York (state)Hospitals established in 1860Educational institutions established in 1860Universities and colleges in BrooklynSUNY Downstate Medical CenterEast Flatbush, BrooklynSchools of medicine in New York CityV-12 Navy College Training ProgramSUNY Downstate Medical Center alumniHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2010All articles needing additional referencesCoordinates on Wikidata