Not to be confused with the Supreme Court of Judicature.






This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: parts of the article, particularly those on the court's establishment and history, are thought to read like a "press release" or an "apologia". The affected parts of the article can possibly be improved with an addition of post-2010/2015 sources to counterbalance). Please help improve this article if you can. (December 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Supreme Court of the United Kingdom


Welsh: Goruchaf Lys y Deyrnas Unedig
Scots: Supreme Coort o the Unitit Kinrick



Badge of the Supreme Court



Established
1 October 2009


Country
United Kingdom


Location
Middlesex Guildhall, London


Composition method
Appointed by the Monarch on advice of the Prime Minister


Authorized by
Constitutional Reform Act 2005, Part 3[1]


Judge term length
Life tenure with mandatory retirement at the age of 70 or 75 depending on date of appointment


No. of positions
12


Website
www.supremecourt.uk


President


Currently
Baroness Hale of Richmond


Since
5 September 2017


Deputy President


Currently
Lord Mance


Since
20 September 2017


The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is the supreme court in all matters under English and Welsh law, Northern Ireland law and Scottish civil law. It is the court of last resort and the highest appellate court in the United Kingdom, although the High Court of Justiciary remains the court of last resort for criminal law in Scotland. The Supreme Court also has jurisdiction to resolve disputes relating to devolution in the United Kingdom and concerning the legal powers of the three devolved governments (in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) or laws made by the devolved legislatures.
The Supreme Court was established by Part 3 of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 and started work on 1 October 2009. It assumed the judicial functions of the House of Lords, which had been exercised by the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (commonly called "Law Lords"), the 12 judges appointed as members of the House of Lords to carry out its judicial business. Its jurisdiction over devolution matters had previously been exercised by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
The United Kingdom has a doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty, so the Supreme Court is much more limited in its powers of judicial review than the constitutional or supreme courts of some other countries. It cannot overturn any primary legislation made by Parliament. However, it can overturn secondary legislation if, for example, that legislation is found to be ultra vires to the powers in primary legislation allowing it to be made. Further, under section 4 of the Human Rights Act 1998, the Supreme Court, like some other courts in the United Kingdom, may make a declaration of incompatibility, indicating that it believes that the legislation subject to the declaration is incompatible with one of the rights in the European Convention on Human Rights. Such a declaration can apply to primary or secondary legislation. The legislation is not overturned by the declaration, and neither Parliament nor the government is required to agree with any such declaration. However, if they do accept a declaration, ministers can exercise powers under section 10 of the act to amend the legislation by statutory instrument to remove the incompatibility or ask Parliament to amend the legislation.
The current President of the Supreme Court is Baroness Hale of Richmond, and its Deputy President is Lord Mance.



Contents


1 History
2 Jurisdiction and powers
3 Other supreme courts in the United Kingdom
4 Justices

4.1 Acting judges
4.2 Appointment process


5 Building
6 Badge
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History[edit]
The creation of a Supreme Court for the United Kingdom was first mooted in a consultation paper published by the Department of Constitutional Affairs in July 2003.[2] Although the paper noted that there had been no criticism of the then-current Law Lords or any indication of an actual bias, it argued that the separation of the judicial functions of the Judicial Committee of the House of Lords from the legislative functions of the House of Lords should be made explicit. The paper noted the following concerns:

Whether there was any longer sufficient transparency of independence from the executive and the legislature to give assurance of the independence of the judiciary.[2]
The requirement for the appearance of impartiality and independence limited the ability of the Law Lords to contribute to the work of the House itself, thus reducing the value to both them and the House of their membership.[2]
It was not always understood by the public that judicial decisions of "the House of Lords" were in fact taken by the Judicial Committee and that non-judicial members were never involved in the judgments. Conversely, it was felt that the extent to which the Law Lords themselves had decided to refrain from getting involved in political issues in relation to legislation on which they might later have had to adjudicate was not always appreciated.[2] The new President of the Court, Lord Phillips, has claimed that the old system had confused people and that with the Supreme Court there would for the first time be a clear separation of powers among the judiciary, the legislature and the executive.[3]
Space within the House of Lords was at a constant premium and a separate supreme court would ease the pressure on the Palace of Westminster.[2]

The main argument against a new Supreme Court was that the previous system had worked well and kept costs down.[4] Reformers expressed concern that this second main example of a mixture of the legislative, judicial and executive might conflict with professed values under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Officials who make or execute laws have an interest in court cases that put those laws to the test. When the state invests judicial authority in those officials or even their day-to-day colleagues, it puts the independence and impartiality of the courts at risk. Consequently, it was hypothesised closely connected decisions of the Law Lords to debates had by friends or on which the Lord Chancellor had expressed a view might be challenged on Human Rights grounds on the basis that they had not constituted a fair trial.[5]
Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury, later President of the Supreme Court, expressed fear that the new court could make itself more powerful than the House of Lords committee it succeeded, saying that there is a real risk of "judges arrogating to themselves greater power than they have at the moment". Lord Phillips said such an outcome was "a possibility", but was "unlikely".[6]
The reforms were controversial and were brought forward with little consultation but were subsequently extensively debated in Parliament.[7] During 2004, a select committee of the House of Lords scrutinised the arguments for and against setting up a new court.[8] The Government estimated the set-up cost of the Supreme Court at £56.9 million.[9]
The Supreme Court was established by Part 3 of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 and started work on 1 October 2009.[1][10] It assumed the judicial functions of the House of Lords, which had been exercised by the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (commonly called "Law Lords"), the 12 professional judges appointed as members of the House of Lords to carry out its judicial business. Its jurisdiction over devolution matters had previously been exercised by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
The first case heard by the Supreme Court was HM Treasury v Ahmed, which concerned "the separation of powers", according to Lord Phillips, its inaugural President. At issue was the extent to which Parliament has, by the United Nations Act 1946, delegated to the executive the power to legislate. Resolution of this issue depended upon the approach properly to be adopted by the court in interpreting legislation which may affect fundamental rights at common law or under the European Convention on Human Rights.
Because of the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty, the Supreme Court is much more limited in its powers of judicial review than the constitutional or supreme courts of some other countries. It cannot overturn any primary legislation made by Parliament.[11] However, it can overturn secondary legislation if, for example, that legislation is found to be ultra vires to the powers in primary legislation allowing it to be made. Further, under section 4 of the Human Rights Act 1998, the Supreme Court, like some other courts in the United Kingdom, may make a declaration of incompatibility, indicating that it believes that the legislation subject to the declaration is incompatible with one of the rights in the European Convention on Human Rights.[12] Such a declaration can apply to primary or secondary legislation. The legislation is not overturned by the declaration, and neither Parliament nor the government is required to agree with any such declaration. However, if they do accept a declaration, ministers can exercise powers under section 10 of the act to amend the legislation by statutory instrument to remove the incompatibility or ask Parliament to amend the legislation.[13]
The current President of the Supreme Court is Baroness Hale of Richmond, and its Deputy President is Lord Mance.[14]
Jurisdiction and powers[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






United Kingdom






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the United Kingdom




Constitution


Constitution

Cabinet Manual
Erskine May


Taxation








The Crown

British Monarchy


Monarch

Queen Elizabeth II


Heir apparent

The Prince of Wales


Royal family
Succession to the British throne
Royal prerogative








Executive

HM Government


Prime Minister

Theresa May


Cabinet

Current ministry


Her Majesty's Civil Service
Departments
Executive agencies
Public bodies

Privy Council


Crown-in-Council

Queen Elizabeth II










Legislature

Parliament
(56th Parliament)

Crown-in-Parliament

Queen Elizabeth II

House of Lords

Lord Speaker

The Lord Fowler



House of Commons

Speaker

John Bercow


Leader of the Opposition

Jeremy Corbyn





Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition
Shadow Cabinet
State Opening of Parliament
Prime Minister's Questions
Act of Parliament
Statutory Instruments








Judiciary

Supreme Court


President

Lord Neuberger


Deputy President

Lady Hale


Judges of the Supreme Court



Courts of the United Kingdom
Courts of England and Wales
Courts of Scotland
Courts of Northern Ireland








Devolution


Joint Ministerial Committee
Scotland

Government
Parliament


Wales

Government
National Assembly


Reserved matters
Northern Ireland

Executive
Assembly










Administrative geography


England

Subdivisions of England
Local government in England


Scotland

Subdivisions of Scotland
Local government in Scotland


Wales

Local government in Wales


Northern Ireland

Local government in Northern Ireland










Elections


Parliament constituencies
Political parties
Last election
Next election
Referendums








Foreign relations


History
Foreign policy
UK and the United Nations
Politics of the European Union
Commonwealth of Nations






 United Kingdom portal


Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e









The Middlesex Guildhall in London is the location of the Supreme Court


The main role of the Supreme Court is to hear appeals from the courts in England and Wales and also from the courts in Northern Ireland, and also appeals from the Court of Session in Scotland regarding civil (but not criminal-law) cases or matters.[15]
For Scottish civil cases decided prior to September 2015, permission to appeal from the Court of Session was not required and any such case can proceed to the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom if two Advocates certify that an appeal is suitable. The entry into force of the Courts Reform (Scotland) Act 2014 has essentially brought the procedure for current and future Scottish civil cases into line with England, Wales and Northern Ireland,[16] where permission to appeal is required, either from the Court of Appeal or from a Justice of the Supreme Court itself.
The Supreme Court's focus is on cases that raise points of law of general public importance. As with the former Appellate Committee of the House of Lords, appeals from many fields of law are likely to be selected for hearing, including commercial disputes, family matters, judicial review claims against public authorities and issues under the Human Rights Act 1998. The Supreme Court also hears some criminal appeals, but not from Scotland, as there is no general right of appeal from the High Court of Justiciary, Scotland's highest criminal court, other than with respect to devolution issues.
The Supreme Court also determines "devolution issues" (as defined by the Scotland Act 1998, the Northern Ireland Act 1998 and the Government of Wales Act 2006). These are legal proceedings about the powers of the three devolved administrations—the Northern Ireland Executive and Northern Ireland Assembly, the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament, and the Welsh Government and the National Assembly for Wales. Devolution issues were previously heard by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council and most are about compliance with rights under the European Convention on Human Rights, brought into national law by the Devolution Acts and the Human Rights Act 1998.
Ordinarily, all twelve justices do not all hear every case. Typically a case is heard by a panel of five justices, though sometimes the panel may consist of three, seven or nine members. The justices are also members of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council and spend some of their time in that capacity.
Other supreme courts in the United Kingdom[edit]
The High Court of Justiciary, the Court of Session, and the Office of the Accountant of Court comprise the College of Justice, and are known as the Supreme Courts of Scotland.[17]
Before 1 October 2009 there were two other courts known as supreme court, namely the Supreme Court of England and Wales (known as the Supreme Court of Judicature until 1981), which was created in the 1870s under the Judicature Acts, and the Supreme Court of Judicature in Northern Ireland, each of which consisted of a Court of Appeal, a High Court of Justice and a Crown Court. When the provisions of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 came into force these became known as the Senior Courts of England and Wales and the Court of Judicature of Northern Ireland respectively.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council also retains jurisdiction over certain matters. The judicial functions of the House of Lords have all been abolished.
Justices[edit]
Main article: Justice of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
The court is composed of the President and Deputy President and ten Justices of the Supreme Court. They are not subject to term limits but may be removed from office on the address of Parliament.[18] Like all British judges, Supreme Court justices are obliged to retire at age 70 if first appointed to a judicial office after 31 March 1995 or at age 75 otherwise.[19][20] The President and Deputy President of the court are separately appointed to those roles.
Ten Lords of Appeal in Ordinary (Law Lords) holding office on 1 October 2009 became the first justices of the 12-member Supreme Court.[21] The 11th place on the Supreme Court was filled by Lord Clarke of Stone-cum-Ebony (formerly the Master of the Rolls), who was the first Justice to be appointed directly to the Supreme Court.[22] One of the former Law Lords, Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury, was appointed to replace Lord Clarke as Master of the Rolls,[23] and so did not move to the new court. Sir John Dyson became the 12th and final justice of the Supreme Court on 13 April 2010.[24] In 2010, Queen Elizabeth II granted Justices who are not peers the title Lord or Lady, by warrant under the royal sign-manual.[25][26]
The Senior Law Lord on 1 October 2009, Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers, became the Supreme Court's first President,[27] and the Second Senior Law Lord, Lord Hope of Craighead, became the first Deputy President.
On 30 September 2010 Lord Saville of Newdigate became the first Justice to retire,[28] followed by Lord Collins of Mapesbury on 7 May 2011, although the latter remained as an acting Justice until the end of July 2011.
In June 2011 Lord Rodger of Earlsferry became the first Justice to die in office after a short illness.[29]
Acting judges[edit]
In addition to the ten permanent Justices, the President may request other senior judges drawn from two groups to sit as "acting judges" of the Supreme Court.[30]

The first group is those judges who hold 'office as a senior territorial judge': judges of the Court of Appeal of England and Wales, judges of the Court of Appeal of Northern Ireland and judges of the First or Second Division of the Inner House of the Court of Session in Scotland.
The second group is known as the 'supplementary panel'. The President may approve in writing retired senior judges' membership of this panel if they are under 75 years of age (a system similar to senior status in the United States Federal Courts of Appeal).

Appointment process[edit]
The Constitutional Reform Act 2005 makes provision for a new appointment process for Justices of the Supreme Court. A selection commission is to be formed when vacancies arise. This is to be composed of the President and Deputy President of the Supreme Court and a member of the Judicial Appointments Commission of England and Wales, the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland and the Northern Ireland Judicial Appointments Commission. In October 2007, the Ministry of Justice announced that this appointment process would be adopted on a voluntary basis for appointments of Lords of Appeal in Ordinary.[31]
The commission selects one person for the vacancy and notifies the Lord Chancellor of its choice. The Lord Chancellor then either

approves the commission's selection
rejects the commission's selection, or
asks the commission to reconsider its selection.

If the Lord Chancellor approves the person selected by the commission, the Prime Minister must then recommend that person to the Monarch for appointment.[32]
New judges appointed to the Supreme Court after its creation will not necessarily receive peerages; however, they are given the courtesy title of Lord or Lady upon appointment.[25][33] The President and Deputy President are appointed to those roles rather than being the most senior by tenure in office.
Building[edit]
Main article: Middlesex Guildhall




Court 1 in the Supreme Court building


The court is housed in Middlesex Guildhall – which it shares with the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council – in the City of Westminster.
The Constitutional Reform Act 2005 gave time for a suitable building to be found and fitted out before the Law Lords moved out of the Houses of Parliament, where they had previously used a series of rooms in the Palace of Westminster.[34]
After a lengthy survey of suitable sites, including Somerset House, the Government announced that the new court would be at the Middlesex Guildhall, in Parliament Square, Westminster. That decision was examined by the Constitutional Affairs Committee,[35] and the grant of planning permission by Westminster City Council for refurbishment works was challenged in a judicial review by the conservation group SAVE Britain's Heritage.[36] It was also reported that English Heritage had been put under great pressure to approve the alterations.[37] Feilden + Mawson, supported by Foster & Partners, were the appointed architects.[38]
The building had been used as the Middlesex Quarter Sessions House, adding later its County Council chamber, and lastly as a Crown Court.
Badge[edit]




The emblem with stylised depictions of the four floral emblems.


The official badge of the Supreme Court was granted by the College of Arms in October 2008.[39] It comprises both the Greek letter omega (representing finality) and the symbol of Libra (symbolising the scales of justice), in addition to the four floral emblems of the United Kingdom: a Tudor rose, representing England, conjoined with the leaves of a leek, representing Wales; a flax blossom for Northern Ireland; and a thistle, representing Scotland.[40]
Two adapted versions of its official badge are used by the Supreme Court. One features the words "The Supreme Court" and the letter omega in black (in the official badge granted by the College of Arms, the interior of the Latin and Greek letters are gold and white, respectively), and displays a simplified version of the crown (also in black) and larger, stylised versions of the floral emblems; this modified version of the badge is featured on the new Supreme Court website,[41] as well as in the forms that will be used by the Supreme Court.[42] A further variant omits the crown entirely and is featured prominently throughout the building.[43]
Another emblem is formed from a more abstract set of depictions of the four floral emblems and is used in the carpets of the Middlesex Guildhall designed by Sir Peter Blake, creator of such works as the cover of The Beatles' 1967 album, Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band.[44][45]
See also[edit]

Courts of the United Kingdom
Courts of England and Wales
Courts of Northern Ireland
Courts of Scotland
2009 Judgments of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
2010 Judgments of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
2011 Judgments of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
2012 Judgments of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
2013 Judgments of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
2014 Judgments of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
2015 Judgments of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
2016 Judgments of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
2017 Judgments of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
List of House of Lords cases
UKSCblog

References[edit]


^ a b "Part 3, Constitutional Reform Act 2005". Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. 4. 24 March 2005. p. 3. Retrieved 2 September 2009. 
^ a b c d e "Constitutional Reform: A Supreme Court for the United Kingdom". Department of Constitutional Affairs. July 2003. 
^ "New Supreme Court opens with media barred". The Daily Telegraph. London. 1 October 2009. Archived from the original on 4 October 2009. Retrieved 24 May 2010. For the first time, we have a clear separation of powers between the legislature, the judiciary and the executive in the United Kingdom. This is important. It emphasises the independence of the judiciary, clearly separating those who make the law from those who administer it. 
^ Wakeham report 2000, Chapter 9, Recommendation 57.
^ "The Supreme Court is an unnecessary attack on the constitution". The Daily Telegraph. London. 1 October 2009. Archived from the original on 5 October 2009. Retrieved 24 May 2010. The Government argued that there must be a separation in order to comply with Article Six of the European Convention on Human Rights, which guarantees a fair trial. 
^ Rozenberg, Joshua (8 September 2009). "Fear over UK Supreme Court impact". BBC News. 
^ See A Le Sueur, 'From Appellate Committee to Supreme Court: A Narrative', chap 5 in L. Blom-Cooper, G. Drewry and B. Dickson (eds),The Judicial House of Lords (Oxford University Press, 2009); Queen Mary School of Law Legal Studies Research Paper No. 17/2009. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1374357
^ "Lords Select Committee on the Constitutional Reform Bill First Report". 
^ "Written Answer of the Ministry of Justice to question posed by Lord Steinberg (Col. WA102". Lords Hansard. 26 March 2008. 
^ Statutory Instrument 2009 No. 1604 The Constitutional Reform Act 2005 (Commencement No. 11) Order 2009 (Coming into force 2009-10-01)
^ "Britain's new Supreme Court" The Times Literary Supplement, 2 September 2009
^ http://www.supremecourt.uk/faqs.html#1b
^ Mental Health Act 1983 (Remedial) Order 2001, Naval Discipline Act 1957 (Remedial) Order 2004 and Marriage Act 1949 (Remedial) Order 2007.
^ Court, The Supreme. "Biographies of the Justices – The Supreme Court". www.supremecourt.uk. Retrieved 24 September 2017. 
^ Scottish Courts website
^ "New powers for Scotland's appeal court come into force
^ "Scottish Court Service: An Introduction" (PDF). Scottish Court Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 23 May 2008. The Supreme Courts are made up of the Court of Session, the High Court of Justiciary and the Accountant of Court's Office 
^ Section 33 of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005
^ Judicial Pensions and Retirement Act 1993
^ Pannick, David (26 March 2009). "Seventy is far too early for a supreme court judge to retire". The Times. London. 
^ Constitutional Reform Act 2005, section 24
^ "Justice of the UK Supreme Court". London, United Kingdom: 10 Downing Street. 20 April 2009. Archived from the original on 8 April 2010. Retrieved 30 August 2009. 
^ Frances Gibb (23 July 2009). "Lord Neuberger named Master of the Rolls". The Times. London. Retrieved 30 August 2009. 
^ Frances Gibb (23 March 2010). "New Supreme Court justice – Sir John Dyson". 
^ a b "No. 59746". The London Gazette. 1 April 2011. pp. 6177–6178. 
^ "Press release: Courtesy titles for Justices of the Supreme Court" (PDF). Supreme Court of the United Kingdom. 13 December 2010. Retrieved 9 March 2014. 
^ "Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers appointed as senior Lord of Appeal in Ordinary". 
^ The Guardian — Supreme Court vacancy
^ BBC News – Supreme Court judge Lord Rodger of Earlsferry dies
^ Constitutional Reform Act 2005, section 38
^ "Supreme Court – new appointments process". Ministry of Justice. Retrieved 16 May 2010. 
^ Constitutional Reform Act 2005, sections 25–31
^ "Courtesy titles for Justices of the Supreme Court" (PDF). Supreme Court of the United Kingdom. 13 December 2010. Retrieved 14 December 2010. 
^ "Truly the Supremes? Reflections on the New Court, UKSC Blog". Archived from the original on 5 January 2010. Retrieved 7 October 2009. 
^ "Minutes of Oral Evidence Taken before the Constitutional Affairs Committee 17 April 2007". Retrieved 23 May 2008. 
^ "The Queen on the application of Save Britain's Heritage v. Westminster City Council". High Court (Administrative Court). Retrieved 23 May 2008. 
^ Binney, Marcus (22 June 2006). "Lord Falconer's supreme blunder". The Times. London. Retrieved 26 October 2008. 
^ "Questions to the Department for Constitutional Affairs, 15 January 2007 (Col. 877W)". Commons Hansard. 
^ "The College of Arms Newsletter". College of Arms. December 2008. Retrieved 25 February 2009. 
^ "New artwork: Supreme Court emblem". The Supreme Court. Retrieved 29 November 2015. 
^ "The Supreme Court". The Supreme Court. Retrieved 16 May 2010. 
^ https://www.supremecourt.uk/docs/sc001_0409x1.pdf
^ "In pictures: UK Supreme Court". BBC News. 15 July 2009. Retrieved 18 August 2009. 
^ "Inside the UK Supreme Court". BBC News. 15 July 2009. Retrieved 18 August 2009. 
^ "THE WIDER VIEW: Inside the imposing interior of Britain's new £36m Supreme Court". Daily Mail. London. 2 August 2009. Retrieved 18 August 2009. 


Further reading[edit]

The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom: History, Art, Architecture Chris Miele ed. (Merrell) ISBN 978-1-85894-508-8
Le Sueur, ed. (18 March 2004), Building the UK's New Supreme Court: National and Comparative Perspectives, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-926462-7, retrieved 16 May 2010 
Morgan, Derek (ed). Constitutional Innovation: the creation of a Supreme Court for the United Kingdom (A special issue of the Legal Studies, the Journal of the Society of Legal Scholars).

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Supreme Court of the United Kingdom.



Supreme Court of the United Kingdom official website
Ministry of Justice, Supreme Court site
"Grand designs". BBC News. 7 March 2007. Retrieved 7 March 2007. 
UK Supreme Court: Much ado about nothing? in the Harvard Law Record







v
t
e


Departments of Her Majesty's Government



Ministerial



Attorney General's Office
Cabinet Office
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
Department for Communities and Local Government
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Department for Education
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Department for Exiting the European Union
Department for International Development
Department for International Trade
Department for Transport
Department for Work and Pensions
Department of Health
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Her Majesty's Treasury
Home Office
Ministry of Defence
Ministry of Justice
Northern Ireland Office
Office of the Advocate General for Scotland
Office of the Leader of the House of Commons
Office of the Leader of the House of Lords
Scotland Office
UK Export Finance
Wales Office










Non-ministerial



Charity Commission for England and Wales
Competition and Markets Authority
Crown Prosecution Service
Food Standards Agency
Forestry Commission
Government Actuary's Department
Government Legal Department
Her Majesty's Land Registry
Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs
National Crime Agency
National Savings and Investments
Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets
Office of Qualifications and Examinations Regulation
Office of Rail and Road
Ordnance Survey
Serious Fraud Office
Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
The National Archives
UK Statistics Authority
UK Trade & Investment
Water Services Regulation Authority








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


 Law of the United Kingdom



Common fields



Constitutional law
Civil liberties
Company and insolvency law
Competition law
Labour law
Commercial law
European Union law








Parallel fields



Scots delict and English tort law
Scots and English contract law
Scots and English land law
Trusts
Scots and English administrative law
Scots and English criminal law
Scots and English family law
Scots and English civil procedure





Related systems



English law
Northern Ireland law
Scots law
Welsh law
Law of the British Virgin Islands
Law of Australia
Law of Canada
Law of India
Law of the Republic of Ireland
Law of New Zealand
Law of the United States
Anglo-Saxon law
Law of Hong Kong
Common law
Equity
English case law





See also



Legal services in the United Kingdom






United Kingdom law category










v
t
e


Supreme Courts of Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria












v
t
e


Judicial functions of the House of Lords



Judgments



All
Notable
2007
2008
2009





Trials



Trials of Peers





Lords



List of Lords of Appeal





See also



Law Lords (all
peerages)
Supreme Court of the United Kingdom












v
t
e


Supreme Court of the United Kingdom



Justices



President: Lady Hale
Deputy President: Lord Mance


Lord Kerr
Lord Wilson
Lord Sumption
Lord Reed
Lord Carnwath
Lord Hughes
Lord Hodge
Lady Black
Lord Lloyd-Jones
Lord Briggs








Chief executive



Mark Ormerod





Former justices



Lord Saville
Lord Collins
Lord Rodger
Lord Phillips
Lord Brown
Lord Dyson
Lord Walker
Lord Hope
Lord Toulson
Lord Neuberger
Lord Clarke





Judgments



2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
List





Location



Middlesex Guildhall












v
t
e


Judiciary of England and Wales



Courts




Current



Supreme Court
Privy Council
Court of Appeal
High Court
Court of Protection
Crown Court
High Court of Chivalry





Former



Assize Court
Court for Crown Cases Reserved
Court of Common Pleas
Court of Chancery
Court of Exchequer
Court of High Commission
Court of King's Bench
Star Chamber








Justices




Current



Lord Chief Justice
Master of the Rolls
Court of Appeal judge
High Court judge





Former



Lord Chancellor
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary
Chief Baron of the Exchequer
Justice of the King's Bench
Puisne Justice of Chester








Law Officers




Current



Attorney General
Solicitor General





Former



King's Advocate









Coordinates: 51°30′01″N 0°07′41″W﻿ / ﻿51.50028°N 0.12806°W﻿ / 51.50028; -0.12806





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Supreme_Court_of_the_United_Kingdom&oldid=812760463"					Categories: Non-ministerial departments of the United Kingdom GovernmentSupreme Court of the United KingdomNational supreme courts2009 establishments in the United KingdomConstitutional courtsHidden categories: EngvarB from January 2017Use dmy dates from January 2017Articles needing cleanup from December 2016All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from December 2016Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from December 2016Articles containing Welsh-language textArticles containing Scots-language textArticles needing additional references from September 2016All articles needing additional referencesCoordinates on Wikidata