





This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (August 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of the Politics series


Basic forms of government


Power structure





Separation




Associated state
Dominion
Chiefdom




Federalism




Federation
Confederation
Devolution




Integration




Empire
Hegemony
Unitary state




Administrative division





Power source





Democracy
power of many




Direct
Representative
Liberal
Social
Demarchy
others




Oligarchy
power of few




Aristocracy
Plutocracy
Kraterocracy
Stratocracy
Timocracy
Meritocracy
Technocracy
Geniocracy
Noocracy
Kritarchy
Particracy
Ergatocracy
Netocracy




Autocracy
power of one




Despotism
Dictatorship
Military dictatorship




Others




Anocracy
Anarchy
Theocracy







Power ideology





Monarchy vs. Republic
socio-political ideologies




Absolute
Legalist
Constitutional
Parliamentary
Directorial
Semi-presidential
Presidential




Authoritarian vs. Libertarian
socio-economic ideologies




Tribalism
Despotism
Feudalism
Colonialism
Minarchism
Distributism
Anarchism
Socialism
Communism
Totalitarianism




Global vs. Local
geo-cultural ideologies




Commune
City-state
National government
Intergovernmental organisation
World government







Politics portal





v
t
e





A supranational union is a type of multinational political union where negotiated power is delegated to an authority by governments of member states. The concept of supranational union is sometimes used to describe the European Union (EU), as a new type of political entity.[1] The EU is the only entity which provides for international popular elections,[dubious – discuss] going beyond the level of political integration normally afforded by international treaty. The term "supranational" is sometimes used in a loose, undefined sense in other contexts, sometimes as a substitute for international, transnational or global. Another method of decision-making in international organisations is intergovernmentalism, in which state governments play a more prominent role.



Contents


1 Origin as a legal concept
2 Distinguishing features of a supranational union
3 Supranationalism in the European Union

3.1 Categorising European supranationalism


4 Comparing the European Union and the United States
5 Democratic deficit in the EU and other supranational unions
6 Other international organisations with some degree of integration
7 See also
8 Notes and references
9 External links



Origin as a legal concept[edit]
After the dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, Albert Einstein spoke and wrote frequently in the late 1940s in favor of a "supranational" organization to control all military forces except for local police forces, including nuclear weapons. He thought this might begin with the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union, and grow to encompass most other nations, presenting this as the only way to avoid nuclear war. He broached the idea in a November 1945 and November 1947 articles in The Atlantic Monthly that described how the constitution of such an organization might be written. In an April 1948 address at Carnegie Hall, he reiterated: "There is only one path to peace and security: the path of supranational organization."[2] Thanks to his celebrity, Einstein's ideas on the subject generated much discussion and controversy, but the proposal did not generate much support in the West and the Soviet Union viewed it with hostility.
With its founding Statute of 1949 and its Convention of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which came into force in 1953, the Council of Europe created a system based on human rights and the rule of law. Robert Schuman, French Foreign minister, initiated the debate on supranational democracy in his speeches at the United Nations,[3] at the signing of the Council's Statutes and at a series of other speeches across Europe and North America.[4]
The term "supranational" occurs in an international treaty for the first time (twice) in the Treaty of Paris, 18 April 1951. This new legal term defined the Community method in creating the European Coal and Steel Community and the beginning of the democratic re-organisation of Europe. It defines the relationship between the High Authority or European Commission and the other four institutions. In the treaty, it relates to a new democratic and legal concept.
The Founding Fathers of the European Community and the present European Union said that supranationalism was the cornerstone of the governmental system. This is enshrined in the Europe Declaration made on 18 April 1951, the same day as the European Founding Fathers signed the Treaty of Paris.[5]
"By the signature of this Treaty, the participating Parties give proof of their determination to create the first supranational institution and that thus they are laying the true foundation of an organised Europe. This Europe remains open to all nations. We profoundly hope that other nations will join us in our common endeavour."
This declaration of principles that included their judgement for the necessary future developments was signed by Konrad Adenauer (West Germany), Paul van Zeeland and Joseph Meurice (Belgium), Robert Schuman (France), Count Sforza (Italy), Joseph Bech (Luxembourg), and Dirk Stikker and Jan van den Brink (The Netherlands). It was made to recall future generations to their historic duty of uniting Europe based on liberty and democracy under the rule of law. Thus, they viewed the creation of a wider and deeper Europe as intimately bound to the healthy development of the supranational or Community system.[5]
This Europe was open to all nations who were free to decide, a reference/or an invitation and encouragement of liberty to the Iron Curtain countries. The term supranational does not occur in succeeding treaties, such as the Treaties of Rome, the Maastricht Treaty, the Treaty of Nice or the Constitutional Treaty or the very similar Treaty of Lisbon.
Distinguishing features of a supranational union[edit]
A supranational union is a supranational polity which lies somewhere between a confederation that is an association of States and a federation that is a state.[1] The European Economic Community was described by its founder Robert Schuman as midway between confederalism which recognises the complete independence of States in an association and federalism which seeks to fuse them in a super-state.[6] The EU has supranational competences, but it possesses these competences only to the extent that they are conferred on it by its member states (Kompetenz-Kompetenz).[1] Within the scope of these competences, the union exercises its powers in a sovereign manner, having its own legislative, executive, and judicial authorities.[1] The supranational Community also has a chamber for organised civil society including economic and social associations and regional bodies.[7]
Unlike states in a federal super-state, member states retain ultimate sovereignty, although some sovereignty is shared with, or ceded to, the supranational body. Supranational agreements encourage stability and trust, because governments cannot break international accords at a whim. The supranational action may be time-limited. This was the case with the European Coal and Steel Community, which was agreed for 50 years with the possibility of renewal. Supranational accords may be permanent, such as an agreement to outlaw war between the partners. Full sovereignty can be reclaimed by withdrawing from the supranational arrangements but the member state may also lose existing advantages offered by unrestricted access to participating states, such as economies of scale.
A supranational union, because it is an agreement between sovereign states, is based on international treaties. The European treaties in general are different from classical treaties as they are constitutionalizing treaties, that is, they provide the basis for a European level of governance and rule of law. These treaties are similar to the British constitution, in that they are not necessarily a single document. They are based on treaties between its member governments but normally have to undergo closer scrutiny than other treaties because they are more far-ranging, affecting many areas of citizens' lives and livelihoods.
Decision-making is partly intergovernmental and partly supranational within the Community areas. The latter provides a higher degree of institutional scrutiny both via the Parliament and through the Consultative Committees. Intergovernmentalism provides for less democratic oversight, especially where the institution such as the Council of Ministers or the European Council takes place behind closed doors, rather than in a parliamentary chamber.[citation needed]
A supranational authority may have some independence from member state governments in specific areas, although not as much independence as with a federal government.[citation needed] Supranational institutions, like federal governments, imply the possibility of pursuing agendas in ways that the delegating states did not initially envision. Democratic supranational Communities, however, are defined by treaty and by law.
The union has legal supremacy over its member states only to the extent that its member state governments have conferred competences on the union. It is up to the individual governments to assure that they have full democratic backing in each of the member states. The citizens of the member states, though retaining their nationality and national citizenship, additionally become citizens of the union, as is the case with the European Union[1]
The European Union, the only clear example of a supranational union, has a parliament with legislative oversight, elected by its citizens.[1] To this extent, a supranational union like the European Union has characteristics that are not entirely dissimilar to the characteristics of a federal state like the United States of America. However, the differences in scale become apparent if one compares the United States federal budget with the budget of the European Union (which amounts only to about one percent of combined GDP) or the size of the federal civil service of the United States with the Civil Service of the European Union.[8]
Because decisions in some EU structures are taken by majority votes, it is possible for a member state to be obliged by the other members to implement a decision.[citation needed] The states retain the competence for adding this additional supranational competence.[citation needed]
Supranationalism in the European Union[edit]



European Union






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
European Union




Executive


Juncker Commission
President Juncker (EPP)
Vice Presidents
College
Civil Service
Secretary-General Italianer








Legislature
President Tajani (EPP)

Largest groups

EPP (Manfred Weber)
S&D (Gianni Pittella)


8th session (2014–19)

751 MEPs


Bureau

Vice Presidents
Quaestor


Conference
Legislative procedure

Council of the EU
Presidency

Configurations

General
Foreign
Justice and Home
Economic

Euro




Legislative procedure
Voting
Secretariat

Secretary-General

Uwe Corsepius


Directorates-general
COREPER










Judiciary


Court of Justice

Members
Rulings


General Court








Central Bank


President Draghi

ESCB
Euro
EMU
Eurozone













Court of Auditors


Budget
OLAF








Other bodies


Agencies
Investment Bank
CoR
EESC
Ombudsman
National parliaments








Policies and issues


Foreign relations

High Representative

Federica Mogherini


Ext. Action Service
Foreign Policy
Defence Policy
Customs Union
Enlargement


Budget
Four Freedoms

Economic Area
Area of FS&J
Schengen Area


Policies

Agricultural
Energy
Fisheries
Regional


Citizenship

Identity
Pro-Europeanism
Euroscepticism


Integration

Supranationalism
Federalism
United States of Europe
Multi-speed
Opt-outs
Enhanced co-op
Withdrawal










Elections


1979, 1984, 1989
1994, 1999, 2004, 2009
2014 (last election)
Political parties
Constituencies





Referendums








Law


Treaty on European Union
Acquis

Primacy
Subsidiarity


Treaties

Rome
Single European Act
Maastricht
Amsterdam
Nice
Lisbon

Article 50




Fundamental Rights
Membership
Treaties of Accession

1972, 1979, 1985, 1994, 2003, 2005, 2011










European Council


President Tusk (EPP)

Parties
List of meetings











Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





Historically the concept was introduced and made a concrete reality by Robert Schuman when the French Government agreed to the principle in the Schuman Declaration and accepted the Schuman Plan confined to specific sectors of vital interest of peace and war. Thus commenced the European Community system beginning with the European Coal and Steel Community. The six founder States (France, Italy, Germany, The Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg) agreed on the goal: making "war not only unthinkable but materially impossible". They agreed about the means: putting the vital interests, namely coal and steel production, under a common High Authority, subject to common democratic and legal institutions. They agreed on the European rule of law and a new democratic procedure.
The five institutions (besides the High Authority) were a Consultative Committee (a chamber representing civil society interests of enterprises, workers and consumers), a parliament, and a Council of government ministers. A Court of Justice would decide disputes coming from governments, public or private enterprises, consumer groups, any other group interests or even an individual. A complaint could be lodged in a local tribunal or national courts, where appropriate. Member states have yet to fulfil and develop the articles in the Paris and Rome treaties for full democracy in the European Parliament and other institutions such as the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions.
Schuman described supranational unions as a new stage in human development. It contrasted with destructive nationalisms of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries that began in a glorious patriotism and ended in wars.[9] He traced the beginning concept of supranationality back to the nineteenth century, such as the Postal Union, and the term supranational is used around the time of the First World War. Democracy, which he defined as "in the service of the people and acting in agreement with it", was a fundamental part of a supranational community. However, governments only began to hold direct elections to the European Parliament in 1979, and then not according to the treaties. A single electoral statute was specified in the treaty for Europe's first community of coal and steel in 1951. Civil society (largely non-political) was to have its own elected chamber in the Consultative Committees specific to each Community as democratically agreed, but the process was frozen (as were Europe's parliamentary elections) by Charles de Gaulle and other politicians who opposed the Community method.
Today supranationalism only exists in the two European Communities inside the EU: the Economic Community (often called the European Community although it does not legally cover all State activities) and Euratom (the European Atomic Energy Community, a non-proliferation community, in which certain potentialities have been frozen or blocked). Supranational Communities provide powerful but generally unexploited and innovatory means for democratic foreign policy, by mobilising civil society to the democratically agreed goals of the Community.
The first Community of Coal and Steel was agreed only for fifty years. Opposition, mainly by enterprises which had to pay a small European tax of less than 1% and government ministers in the Council, led to its democratic mandate not being renewed. Its jurisprudence and heritage remains part of the European Community system.
De Gaulle attempted to turn the European Commission into a political secretariat under his control in the Fouchet Plan but this move was thwarted by such democrats in the Benelux countries as Paul-Henri Spaak, Joseph Luns and Joseph Bech as well as a large wave of other pro-Europeans in all the Community countries.
The supranational Community method came under attack, not only from de Gaulle but also from other nationalists and Communists. In the post-de Gaulle period, rather than holding pan-European elections under a single statute as specified in all the treaties, governments held and continue to hold separate national elections for the European Parliament. These often favour the major parties and discriminate against smaller, regional parties.[10] Rather than granting elections to organised civil society in the consultative committees, governments created a three-pillar system under the Amsterdam Treaty and Maastricht Treaty, mixing intergovernmental and supranational systems. Two pillars governing External policy and Justice and Home affairs are not subject to the same democratic controls as the Community system.
In the Lisbon Treaty and the earlier nearly identical Constitutional Treaty, the democratic independence of the five key institutions is further blurred. This moves the project from full democratic supranationalism in the direction of not just intergovernmentalism but the politicisation of the institutions, and control by two or three major party political organisations. The Commission defines key legal aspects of the supranational system because its members must be independent of commercial, labour, consumer, political or lobby interests (Article 9 of the Paris Treaty). The Commission was to be composed of a small number of experienced personalities, whose impartiality was beyond question. As such, the early presidents of the Commission and the High Authority were strong defenders of European democracy against national, autocratic practice or the rule of the strong over the weak.
The idea in the Constitutional and Lisbon Treaties is to run the European Commission as a political office. Governments would prefer to have a national member in the Commission, although this is against the principle of supranational democracy. (The original concept was that the Commission should act as a single impartial college of independent, experienced personalities having public confidence. One of the Communities was defined in the treaty with a Commission with fewer members than the number of its member states.) Thus, the members of the Commission are becoming predominantly party-political, and composed of sometimes rejected, disgraced or unwanted national politicians.
The first president of the High Authority was Jean Monnet, who never joined a political party, as was the case with most of the other members of the Commissions. They came from diverse liberal professions, having made recognised European contributions.
Governments also wish to retain the secrecy of their deliberations in the Council of Ministers or the European Council, which discusses matters of the most vital interest to European citizens. While some institutions such as the European Parliament have their debates open to the public, others such as the Council of Ministers and numerous committees are not. Schuman wrote in his book, Pour l'Europe[11] (For Europe), that in a democratic supranational Community "the Councils, committees and other organs should be placed under the control of public opinion that was effectual without paralysing their activity nor useful initiatives".
Categorising European supranationalism[edit]
Joseph H. H. Weiler, in his seminal[peacock term] work The Dual Character of Supranationalism, states that there are two main facets to European supranationalism, although these seem to be true of many supranational systems. These are:

Normative supranationalism: The Relationships and hierarchy which exist between Community policies and legal measures on one hand and the competing policies and legal measures of the member states on the other (the executive dimension)
Decisional supranationalism: The institutional framework and decision making by which such measures are initiated, debated, formulated, promulgated and, finally, executed (the legislative-judicial dimension)

In many ways, the split sees the separation of powers confined to merely two branches.
Comparing the European Union and the United States[edit]






This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: The table is illegible on mobile Please help improve this section if you can. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In the Lisbon Treaty, the distribution of competences in various policy areas between member states and the European Union is redistributed in three categories. In 19th century U.S., it had exclusive competences only. Competences not explicitly listed belong to lower levels of governance.




EU exclusive competence


The Union has exclusive competence to make directives and conclude international agreements when provided for in a Union legislative act.




the customs union
the establishing of the competition rules necessary for the functioning of the internal market
monetary policy for the member states whose currency is the euro
the conservation of marine biological resources under the common fisheries policy
common commercial (trade) policy











EU shared competence


Member states cannot exercise competence in areas where the Union has done so.




the internal market
social policy, for the aspects defined in this Treaty
economic, social and territorial cohesion
agriculture and fisheries, excluding the conservation of marine biological resources
environment
consumer protection
transport
trans-European Networks
energy
the area of freedom, security and justice
common safety concerns in public health matters, for the aspects defined in this Treaty
Common Foreign and Security Policy











EU supporting competence


The Union can carry out actions to support, co-ordinate or supplement member states' actions.




the protection and improvement of human health
industry
culture
tourism
education, youth, sport and vocational training
civil protection (disaster prevention)
administrative cooperation











U.S. exclusive competence


U.S. federal government in the 19th century.[12]




Internal improvements
Subsidies (mainly to shipping)
Tariffs
Disposal of public lands
Immigration law
Foreign policy
Copyrights
Patents
Currency











Democratic deficit in the EU and other supranational unions[edit]
See also: Democratic deficit in the European Union
In a supranational union, the problem of how to reconcile the principle of equality among nation states, which applies to international (intergovernmental) organisations, and the principle of equality among citizens, which applies within nation states[13] is resolved by taking a sectoral approach. This allows an innovatory, democratic broadening the number of actors to be included. These are present not only in the classical Parliament which has slightly different functions but also in the Consultative Committees such as the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions which the treaties give powers equivalent to parliaments in their own areas but which are at present still developing their potential. In the European Union, the Lisbon Treaty mixes two principles (classical parliamentary government with a politically elected government) and a supranational community with a totally independent European Commission.[14] Governments are also trying to treat the Lisbon Treaty as a simple classical treaty, or even an amendment to one, which does not require citizens' support or democratic approval. The proposed Lisbon Treaty and the earlier Constitutional draft still retain in the European Union elements of a supranational union, as distinct from a federal state on the lines of the United States of America.[13] But this is at the expense of the democratic potentialities of a full supranational union as conceived in the first Community.
Other international organisations with some degree of integration[edit]




Global map showing several regional organisations of non-overlapping memberships as of the early-2000s.


The only union generally recognised as having achieved the status of a supranational union is the European Union.[15]
There are a number of other regional organisations that, while not supranational unions, have adopted or intend to adopt policies that may lead to a similar sort of integration in some respects.

African Union (AU)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
Central American Integration System (SICA)
Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (Gulf Cooperation council) (GCC)
Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU)
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Union of South American Nations (USAN)
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Union State
Turkic Council (TurkKon)
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI)

Other organisations that have also discussed greater integration include:

Arab League into an "Arab Union"
Pacific Islands Forum into the "Pacific Union"
Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia into the "Eurasian Union"
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) into the "Latin American Union"

See also[edit]


Continental union
Democratic globalization
Devolution
Economic union
Federation
History of the European Coal and Steel Community (1945–57)
International human rights law
International parliament
List of economic communities
List of free trade agreements
List of supranational environmental agencies
Multi-level governance
Robert Schuman
Schuman Declaration
Supranational aspects of international organizations
Transnational citizenship
United Nations Parliamentary Assembly
World government


Notes and references[edit]


^ a b c d e f Kiljunen, Kimmo (2004). The European Constitution in the Making. Centre for European Policy Studies. pp. 21–26. ISBN 978-92-9079-493-6. 
^ Albert Einstein, Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown/Bonanza, 1954), p. 147 (emphasis in original); cf. pp. 118-61. See also Walter Isaacson, Einstein: His Life and Universe (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2007), ch. 22, pp. 487-500.
^ Schuman's speeches at the United Nations 1948. 1949 ,
^ "Schuman Project". www.schuman.info. 
^ a b Der Schuman Plan. Vertrag ueber die Gruendung der europaeischen Gemeinschaft fuer Kohl und Stahl, p21 Ulrich Sahm mit einem Vorwort von Walter Hallstein. Frankfurt 1951. Schuman or Monnet? The real Architect of Europe. Robert Schuman's speeches and texts on the origin, purpose and future of Europe p 129. Bron 2004
^ La Communaute du Charbon et de l'Acier p 7 Paul Reuter, preface by Robert Schuman. Paris 1953
^ "Schuman Project". www.schuman.info. 
^ Kiljunen, Kimmo (2004). The European Constitution in the Making. Centre for European Policy Studies. pp. 45–46. ISBN 978-92-9079-493-6. 
^ Schuman, Robert. [Pour l'Europe] Paris, 1963
^ "European Parliament study, The European Elections, EU legislation, national provisions and civic participation" (PDF). 
^ Pour l'Europe, page 146
^ Lowi, T. The End of the Republican Era (ISBN 0-8061-2887-9), University of Oklahoma Press, 1995–2006. p. 6.
^ a b Pernice, Ingolf; Katharina Pistor (2004). "Institutional settlements for an enlarged European Union". In George A. Bermann and Katharina Pistor. Law and governance in an enlarged European Union: essays in European law. Hart Publishing. pp. 3–38. ISBN 978-1-84113-426-0. 
^ http://www.Schuman.info/ComHonest.htm/ Should the Commission be elected politically or be independent?
^ Bauböck, Rainer (2007). "Why European Citizenship? Normative Approaches to Supranational Union". Theoretical Inquiries in Law. Berkeley Electronic Press. 8 (2, Article 5). doi:10.2202/1565-3404.1157. ISSN 1565-3404. Retrieved 2009-08-01. A normative theory of supranational citizenship will necessarily be informed by the EU as the only present case and will be addressed to the EU in most of its prescriptions 


External links[edit]

"Towards Unity". Retrieved 5 July 2009. 
"Robert Schuman and supranational union of Europe". Retrieved 15 November 2009. 

"Supranational Alliance". Retrieved 20 February 2011. 






v
t
e


Autonomous types of first-tier subdivision administration



Federalism



Asymmetric federalism
Confederation
Corporative federalism
Dual federalism
Federacy
Federal monarchy
Federal republic
Federated state
Federation
Fiscal federalism
Symmetric federalism





Unitary state



Devolution
Regional state





See also



Constituent state
Autonomy

Autonomous area


Decentralization
Home rule
Multinational state
Personal union
Subsidiarity
Supranationalism
Tribal sovereignty












v
t
e


Globalization






Journals
Outline
Studies





Aspects



Alter-globalization
Anti-globalization
Counter-hegemonic globalization
Cultural globalization
Deglobalization
Democratic globalization
Economic globalization
Environmental globalization
Financial globalization
Global citizenship

education


Global governance
Global health
History of

archaic
early modern


Military globalization
Political globalization
Trade globalization
Workforce globalization





Issues




Global



Disease
Digital divide
Labor arbitrage
Population
Warming
Water crisis





Other



Brain drain

reverse


Climate change
Climate justice
Development aid
Economic inequality
Endangered languages
Fair trade
Forced migration
Human rights
Illicit financial flows
Invasive species
Investor-state disputes
New international division of labour
North–South divide
Offshoring
Race to the bottom

pollution havens


Transnational crime
McDonaldization
Westernization
American imperialism
British Empire
World war








Theories



Capital accumulation
Dependency
Development
Earth system
Fiscal localism
Modernization

ecological
history of


Primitive accumulation
Social change
World history
World-systems





Notable
scholars



Samir Amin
Arjun Appadurai
K. Anthony Appiah
Daniele Archibugi
Giovanni Arrighi
Ravi Batra
Jean Baudrillard
Zygmunt Bauman
Ulrich Beck
Walden Bello
Jagdish Bhagwati
Robert Brenner
Manuel Castells
Noam Chomsky
Alfred Crosby
Christopher Chase-Dunn
Andre G. Frank
Thomas Friedman
Anthony Giddens
Peter Gowan
Michael Hardt
David Harvey
David Held
Paul Hirst
Michael Hudson
Paul James
Ibn Khaldun
Naomi Klein
Antonio Negri
George Ritzer
Jeffrey Sachs
Saskia Sassen
John R. Saul
Vandana Shiva
Joseph Stiglitz
John Urry
Immanuel Wallerstein








 Portal
 Category











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Supranational_union&oldid=807833002"					Categories: Supranational unionsFederalismImperialismEuropean Union lawTheoriesHidden categories: Use British English from March 2013Articles that may contain original research from August 2008All articles that may contain original researchAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from August 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2010All articles with peacock termsArticles with peacock terms from February 2017Articles needing cleanup from February 2017All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from February 2017Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from February 2017Use dmy dates from March 2013