This article is about the medical specialty. For other uses, see Surgery (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Surgeons repairing a ruptured Achilles tendon on a man


Surgery (from the Greek: χειρουργική cheirourgikē (composed of χείρ, "hand", and ἔργον, "work"), via Latin: chirurgiae, meaning "hand work") is a medical specialty that uses operative manual and instrumental techniques on a patient to investigate or treat a pathological condition such as a disease or injury, to help improve bodily function or appearance or to repair unwanted ruptured areas.
The act of performing surgery may be called a "surgical procedure", "operation", or simply "surgery". In this context, the verb "operate" means to perform surgery. The adjective "surgical" means pertaining to surgery; e.g. surgical instruments or surgical nurse. The patient or subject on which the surgery is performed can be a person or an animal. A surgeon is a person who practices surgery and a surgeon's assistant is a person who practices surgical assistance. A surgical team is made up of surgeon, surgeon's assistant, anesthesia provider, circulating nurse and surgical technologist. Surgery usually spans minutes to hours, but it is typically not an ongoing or periodic type of treatment. The term "surgery" can also refer to the place where surgery is performed, or simply the office of a physician, dentist, or veterinarian.



Contents


1 Definitions

1.1 Types of surgery
1.2 Terminology


2 Description of surgical procedure

2.1 Location
2.2 Preoperative care
2.3 Staging for surgery
2.4 Surgery
2.5 Post-operative care


3 Epidemiology

3.1 USA


4 Special populations

4.1 Elderly people
4.2 Children
4.3 Vulnerable populations


5 In low- and middle-income countries
6 Human rights
7 History

7.1 Ancient Egypt
7.2 India and China
7.3 Ancient Greece
7.4 Early modern Europe
7.5 Modern surgery

7.5.1 Infection and antisepsis




8 Surgical specialties
9 National societies
10 See also
11 Notes and references
12 External links



Definitions[edit]
Surgery is a technology consisting of a physical intervention on tissues.
As a general rule, a procedure is considered surgical when it involves cutting of a patient's tissues or closure of a previously sustained wound. Other procedures that do not necessarily fall under this rubric, such as angioplasty or endoscopy, may be considered surgery if they involve "common" surgical procedure or settings, such as use of a sterile environment, anesthesia, antiseptic conditions, typical surgical instruments, and suturing or stapling. All forms of surgery are considered invasive procedures; so-called "noninvasive surgery" usually refers to an excision that does not penetrate the structure being excised (e.g. laser ablation of the cornea) or to a radiosurgical procedure (e.g. irradiation of a tumor).
Types of surgery[edit]
Surgical procedures are commonly categorized by urgency, type of procedure, body system involved, degree of invasiveness, and special instrumentation.

Based on timing: Elective surgery is done to correct a non-life-threatening condition, and is carried out at the patient's request, subject to the surgeon's and the surgical facility's availability. A semi-elective surgery is one that must be done to avoid permanent disability or death, but can be postponed for a short time. Emergency surgery is surgery which must be done promptly to save life, limb, or functional capacity.
Based on purpose: Exploratory surgery is performed to aid or confirm a diagnosis. Therapeutic surgery treats a previously diagnosed condition. Cosmetic surgery is done to subjectively improve the appearance of an otherwise normal structure.
By type of procedure: Amputation involves cutting off a body part, usually a limb or digit; castration is also an example. Resection is the removal of all of an internal organ or body part, or a key part (lung lobe; liver quadrant) of such an organ or body part that has its own name or code designation. Replantation involves reattaching a severed body part. Reconstructive surgery involves reconstruction of an injured, mutilated, or deformed part of the body. Excision is the cutting out or removal of only part of an organ, tissue, or other body part from the patient. Transplant surgery is the replacement of an organ or body part by insertion of another from different human (or animal) into the patient. Removing an organ or body part from a live human or animal for use in transplant is also a type of surgery.
By body part: When surgery is performed on one organ system or structure, it may be classed by the organ, organ system or tissue involved. Examples include cardiac surgery (performed on the heart), gastrointestinal surgery (performed within the digestive tract and its accessory organs), and orthopedic surgery (performed on bones or muscles).
By degree of invasiveness of surgical procedures: Minimally-invasive surgery involves smaller outer incision(s) to insert miniaturized instruments within a body cavity or structure, as in laparoscopic surgery or angioplasty. By contrast, an open surgical procedure such as a laparotomy requires a large incision to access the area of interest.
By equipment used: Laser surgery involves use of a laser for cutting tissue instead of a scalpel or similar surgical instruments. Microsurgery involves the use of an operating microscope for the surgeon to see small structures. Robotic surgery makes use of a surgical robot, such as the Da Vinci or the Zeus surgical systems, to control the instrumentation under the direction of the surgeon.

Terminology[edit]
See also: List of surgical procedures

Excision surgery names often start with a name for the organ to be excised (cut out) and end in -ectomy.
Procedures involving cutting into an organ or tissue end in -otomy. A surgical procedure cutting through the abdominal wall to gain access to the abdominal cavity is a laparotomy.
Minimally invasive procedures involving small incisions through which an endoscope is inserted end in -oscopy. For example, such surgery in the abdominal cavity is called laparoscopy.
Procedures for formation of a permanent or semi-permanent opening called a stoma in the body end in -ostomy.
Reconstruction, plastic or cosmetic surgery of a body part starts with a name for the body part to be reconstructed and ends in -oplasty. Rhino is used as a prefix for "nose", therefore a rhinoplasty is reconstructive or cosmetic surgery for the nose.
Repair of damaged or congenital abnormal structure ends in -rraphy.
Reoperation (return to the operating room) refers to a return to the operating theater after an initial surgery is performed to re-address an aspect of patient care best treated surgically. Reasons for reoperation include persistent bleeding after surgery, development of or persistence of infection.

Description of surgical procedure[edit]
Location[edit]
At a hospital, modern surgery is often performed in an operating theater using surgical instruments, an operating table for the patient, and other equipment. Among United States hospitalizations for nonmaternal and nonneonatal conditions in 2012, more than one-fourth of stays and half of hospital costs involved stays that included operating room (OR) procedures.[1] The environment and procedures used in surgery are governed by the principles of aseptic technique: the strict separation of "sterile" (free of microorganisms) things from "unsterile" or "contaminated" things. All surgical instruments must be sterilized, and an instrument must be replaced or re-sterilized if it becomes contaminated (i.e. handled in an unsterile manner, or allowed to touch an unsterile surface). Operating room staff must wear sterile attire (scrubs, a scrub cap, a sterile surgical gown, sterile latex or non-latex polymer gloves and a surgical mask), and they must scrub hands and arms with an approved disinfectant agent before each procedure.
Preoperative care[edit]
Main article: Preoperative care
Prior to surgery, the patient is given a medical examination, receives certain pre-operative tests, and their physical status is rated according to the ASA physical status classification system. If these results are satisfactory, the patient signs a consent form and is given a surgical clearance. If the procedure is expected to result in significant blood loss, an autologous blood donation may be made some weeks prior to surgery. If the surgery involves the digestive system, the patient may be instructed to perform a bowel prep by drinking a solution of polyethylene glycol the night before the procedure. Patients are also instructed to abstain from food or drink (an NPO order after midnight on the night before the procedure), to minimize the effect of stomach contents on pre-operative medications and reduce the risk of aspiration if the patient vomits during or after the procedure.
Some medical systems have a practice of routinely performing chest x-rays before surgery. The premise behind this practice is that the physician might discover some unknown medical condition which would complicate the surgery, and that upon discovering this with the chest x-ray, the physician would adapt the surgery practice accordingly.[2] In fact, medical specialty professional organizations recommend against routine pre-operative chest x-rays for patients who have an unremarkable medical history and presented with a physical exam which did not indicate a chest x-ray.[2] Routine x-ray examination is more likely to result in problems like misdiagnosis, overtreatment, or other negative outcomes than it is to result in a benefit to the patient.[2] Likewise, other tests including complete blood count, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, basic metabolic panel, and urinalysis should not be done unless the results of these tests can help evaluate surgical risk.[3]
Staging for surgery[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In the pre-operative holding area, the patient changes out of his or her street clothes and is asked to confirm the details of his or her surgery. A set of vital signs are recorded, a peripheral IV line is placed, and pre-operative medications (antibiotics, sedatives, etc.) are given. When the patient enters the operating room, the skin surface to be operated on, called the operating field, is cleaned and prepared by applying an antiseptic such as chlorhexidine gluconate or povidone-iodine to reduce the possibility of infection. If hair is present at the surgical site, it is clipped off prior to prep application. The patient is assisted by an anesthesiologist or resident to make a specific surgical position, then sterile drapes are used to cover the surgical site or at least a wide area surrounding the operating field; the drapes are clipped to a pair of poles near the head of the bed to form an "ether screen", which separates the anesthetist/anesthesiologist's working area (unsterile) from the surgical site (sterile).[4]
Anesthesia is administered to prevent pain from an incision, tissue manipulation and suturing. Based on the procedure, anesthesia may be provided locally or as general anesthesia. Spinal anesthesia may be used when the surgical site is too large or deep for a local block, but general anesthesia may not be desirable. With local and spinal anesthesia, the surgical site is anesthetized, but the patient can remain conscious or minimally sedated. In contrast, general anesthesia renders the patient unconscious and paralyzed during surgery. The patient is intubated and is placed on a mechanical ventilator, and anesthesia is produced by a combination of injected and inhaled agents. Choice of surgical method and anesthetic technique aims to reduce the risk of complications, shorten the time needed for recovery and minimise the surgical stress response.
Surgery[edit]
An incision is made to access the surgical site. Blood vessels may be clamped or cauterized to prevent bleeding, and retractors may be used to expose the site or keep the incision open. The approach to the surgical site may involve several layers of incision and dissection, as in abdominal surgery, where the incision must traverse skin, subcutaneous tissue, three layers of muscle and then the peritoneum. In certain cases, bone may be cut to further access the interior of the body; for example, cutting the skull for brain surgery or cutting the sternum for thoracic (chest) surgery to open up the rib cage. Whilst in surgery aseptic technique is used to prevent infection or further spreading of the disease. The surgeons' and assistants' hands, wrists and forearms are washed thoroughly for at least 4 minutes to prevent germs getting into the operative field, then sterile gloves are placed onto their hands. An antiseptic solution is applied to the area of the patient's body that will be operated on.Sterile drapes are placed around the operative site. Surgical masks are worn by the surgical team to avoid germs on droplets of liquid from their mouths and noses from contaminating the operative site.
Work to correct the problem in body then proceeds. This work may involve: 

excision – cutting out an organ, tumor,[5] or other tissue.
resection – partial removal of an organ or other bodily structure.
reconnection of organs, tissues, etc., particularly if severed. Resection of organs such as intestines involves reconnection. Internal suturing or stapling may be used. Surgical connection between blood vessels or other tubular or hollow structures such as loops of intestine is called anastomosis.
Reduction – the movement or realignment of a body part to its normal position. e.g. Reduction of a broken nose involves the physical manipulation of the bone or cartilage from their displaced state back to their original position to restore normal airflow and aesthetics.
ligation – tying off blood vessels, ducts, or "tubes".
grafts – may be severed pieces of tissue cut from the same (or different) body or flaps of tissue still partly connected to the body but resewn for rearranging or restructuring of the area of the body in question. Although grafting is often used in cosmetic surgery, it is also used in other surgery. Grafts may be taken from one area of the patient's body and inserted to another area of the body. An example is bypass surgery, where clogged blood vessels are bypassed with a graft from another part of the body. Alternatively, grafts may be from other persons, cadavers, or animals.
insertion of prosthetic parts when needed. Pins or screws to set and hold bones may be used. Sections of bone may be replaced with prosthetic rods or other parts. Sometime a plate is inserted to replace a damaged area of skull. Artificial hip replacement has become more common. Heart pacemakers or valves may be inserted. Many other types of prostheses are used.
creation of a stoma, a permanent or semi-permanent opening in the body
in transplant surgery, the donor organ (taken out of the donor's body) is inserted into the recipient's body and reconnected to the recipient in all necessary ways (blood vessels, ducts, etc.).
arthrodesis – surgical connection of adjacent bones so the bones can grow together into one. Spinal fusion is an example of adjacent vertebrae connected allowing them to grow together into one piece.
modifying the digestive tract in bariatric surgery for weight loss.
repair of a fistula, hernia, or prolapse
other procedures, including:




clearing clogged ducts, blood or other vessels
removal of calculi (stones)
draining of accumulated fluids
debridement- removal of dead, damaged, or diseased tissue



Blood or blood expanders may be administered to compensate for blood lost during surgery. Once the procedure is complete, sutures or staples are used to close the incision. Once the incision is closed, the anesthetic agents are stopped or reversed, and the patient is taken off ventilation and extubated (if general anesthesia was administered).[6]
Post-operative care[edit]
After completion of surgery, the patient is transferred to the post anesthesia care unit and closely monitored. When the patient is judged to have recovered from the anesthesia, he/she is either transferred to a surgical ward elsewhere in the hospital or discharged home. During the post-operative period, the patient's general function is assessed, the outcome of the procedure is assessed, and the surgical site is checked for signs of infection. There are several risk factors associated with postoperative complications, such as immune deficienty and obesity. Obesity has long been considered a risk factor for adverse post-surgical outcomes. It has been linked to many disorders such as obesity hypoventilation syndrome, atelectasis and pulmonary embolism, adverse cardiovascular effects, and wound healing complications.[7] If removable skin closures are used, they are removed after 7 to 10 days post-operatively, or after healing of the incision is well under way.
It is not uncommon for surgical drains (see Drain (surgery)) to be required to remove blood or fluid from the surgical wound during recovery. Mostly these drains stay in until the volume tapers off, then they are removed. These drains can become clogged, leading to abscess.
Postoperative therapy may include adjuvant treatment such as chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or administration of medication such as anti-rejection medication for transplants. Other follow-up studies or rehabilitation may be prescribed during and after the recovery period.
The use of topical antibiotics on surgical wounds to reduce infection rates has been questioned.[8] Antibiotic ointments are likely to irritate the skin, slow healing, and could increase risk of developing contact dermatitis and antibiotic resistance.[8] It has been also been suggested that topical antibiotics should only be used when a person shows signs of infection and not as a preventative.[8] A systematic review published by Cochrane (organisation) in 2016, though, concluded that topical antibiotics applied over certain types of surgical wounds reduce the risk of surgical site infections, when compared to no treatment or use of Antiseptics.[9] The review also did not find conclusive evidence to suggest that topical antibiotics increased the risk of local skin reactions or antibiotic resistance.
Through a retrospective analysis of national administrative data, the association between mortality and day of elective surgical procedure suggests a higher risk in procedures carried out later in the working week and on weekends. The odds of death were 44% and 82% higher respectively when comparing procedures on a Friday to a weekend procedure. This “weekday effect” has been postulated to be from several factors including poorer availability of services on a weekend, and also, decrease number and level of experience over a weekend.[10]
Epidemiology[edit]
USA[edit]
in 2011, of the 38.6 million hospital stays in U.S. hospitals, 29% included at least one operating room procedure. These stays accounted for 48% of the total $387 billion in hospital costs.[11]
The overall number of procedures remained stable from 2001 to 2011. In 2011, over 15 million operating room procedures were performed in U.S. hospitals.[12]
Data from 2003 to 2011 showed that U.S. hospital costs were highest for the surgical service line; the surgical service line costs were $17,600 in 2003 and projected to be $22,500 in 2013.[13] For hospital stays in 2012 in the United States, private insurance had the highest percentage of surgical expenditure.[14] in 2012, mean hospital costs in the United States were highest for surgical stays.[14]
Special populations[edit]
Elderly people[edit]
Older adults have widely varying physical health. Frail elderly people are at significant risk of post-surgical complications and the need for extended care. Assessment of older patients before elective surgery can accurately predict the patients' recovery trajectories.[15] One frailty scale uses five items: unintentional weight loss, muscle weakness, exhaustion, low physical activity, and slowed walking speed. A healthy person scores 0; a very frail person scores 5. Compared to non-frail elderly people, people with intermediate frailty scores (2 or 3) are twice as likely to have post-surgical complications, spend 50% more time in the hospital, and are three times as likely to be discharged to a skilled nursing facility instead of to their own homes.[15] Frail elderly patients (score of 4 or 5) have even worse outcomes, with the risk of being discharged to a nursing home rising to twenty times the rate for non-frail elderly people.
Children[edit]
Surgery on children requires considerations which are not common in adult surgery. Children and adolescents are still developing physically and mentally making it difficult for them to make informed decisions and give consent for surgical treatments. Bariatric surgery in youth is among the controversial topics related to surgery in children.
See also: Pediatric surgery and Pediatric plastic surgery
Vulnerable populations[edit]
Doctors perform surgery with the consent of the patient. Some patients are able to give better informed consent than others. Populations such as incarcerated persons, people living with dementia, the mentally incompetent, persons subject to coercion, and other people who are not able to make decisions with the same authority as a typical patient have special needs when making decisions about their personal healthcare, including surgery.
In low- and middle-income countries[edit]
In 2014, the Lancet Commission on Global Surgery was launched to examine the case for surgery as an integral component of global health care and to provide recommendations regarding the delivery of surgical and anesthesia services in low and middle income countries.[16] Amongst the conclusions in this study, two primary conclusions were reached:

Five billion people worldwide lack access to safe, timely, and affordable surgical and anesthesia care. Areas in which especially large proportions of the population lack access include Sub-Saharan Africa, the Indian Subcontinent, Central Asia and, to a lesser extent, Russia and China. Of the estimated 312.9 million surgical procedures undertaken worldwide in 2012, only 6.3% were done in countries comprising the poorest 37.3% of the world's population.
An additional 143 million surgical procedures are needed each year to prevent unnecessary death and disability.

Globally, there are few studies comparing outcomes from surgery across different income level countries, although evidence suggests significantly poorer outcomes from surgery performed in lower income settings. One major prospective study of 10,745 adult patients undergoing emergency abdominal surgery from 357 centres in 58 high-, middle-, and low-income countries found that mortality is three times higher in low- compared with high-HDI countries even when adjusted for prognostic factors.[17] In this study the overall global mortality rate was 1·6 per cent at 24 hours (high 1·1 per cent, middle 1·9 per cent, low 3·4 per cent; P < 0·001), increasing to 5·4 per cent by 30 days (high 4·5 per cent, middle 6·0 per cent, low 8·6 per cent; P < 0·001). Of the 578 patients who died, 404 (69·9 per cent) did so between 24 h and 30 days following surgery (high 74·2 per cent, middle 68·8 per cent, low 60·5 per cent). Patient safety factors were suggested to play an important role, with use of the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist associated with reduced mortality at 30 days.
Taking a similar approach, a unique global study of 1,409 children undergoing emergency abdominal surgery from 253 centres in 43 countries showed that adjusted mortality in children following surgery may be as high as 7 times greater in low-HDI and middle-HDI countries compared with high-HDI countries, translating to 40 excess deaths per 1000 procedures performed in these settings. Internationally, the most common operations performed were appendectomy, small bowel resection, pyloromyotomy and correction of intussusception. After adjustment for patient and hospital risk factors, child mortality at 30 days was significantly higher in low-HDI (adjusted OR 7.14 (95% CI 2.52 to 20.23), p<0.001) and middle-HDI (4.42 (1.44 to 13.56), p=0.009) countries compared with high-HDI countries.[18]
Human rights[edit]
Access to surgical care is increasingly recognized as an integral aspect of healthcare, and therefore is evolving into a normative derivation of human right to health.[19] The ICESCR Article 12.1 and 12.2 define the human right to health as “the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health”[20] In the August 2000, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) interpreted this to mean “right to the enjoyment of a variety of facilities, goods, services, and conditions necessary for the realization of the highest attainable health”.[21] Surgical care can be thereby viewed as a positive right- an entitlement to protective healthcare.[21]
Woven through the International Human and Health Rights literature is the right to be free from surgical disease. The 1966 ICESCR Article 12.2a described the need for “provision for the reduction of the stillbirth-rate and of infant mortality and for the healthy development of the child”[22] which was subsequently interpreted to mean “requiring measures to improve… emergency obstetric services”.[21] Article 12.2d of the ICESCR stipulates the need for “the creation of conditions which would assure to all medical service and medical attention in the event of sickness”,[23] and is interpreted in the 2000 comment to include timely access to “basic preventative, curative services… for appropriate treatment of injury and disability.”.[24] Obstetric care shares close ties with reproductive rights, which includes access to reproductive health.[24]
Surgeons and public health advocates, such as Kelly McQueen, have described surgery as “Integral to the right to health”.[25] This is reflected in the establishment of the WHO Global Initiative for Emergency and Essential Surgical Care in 2005,[26] the 2013 formation of the Lancet Commission for Global Surgery,[27] the 2015 World Bank Publication of Volume 1 of its Disease Control Priorities “Essential Surgery”,[28] and the 2015 World Health Assembly 68.15 passing of the Resolution for Strengthening Emergency and Essential Surgical Care and Anesthesia as a Component of Universal Health Coverage.[29] The Lancet Commission for Global Surgery outlined the need for access to “available, affordable, timely and safe” surgical and anesthesia care;[30] dimensions paralleled in ICESCR General Comment No. 14, which similarly outlines need for available, accessible, affordable and timely healthcare.[21]
History[edit]
Main articles: History of surgery, Prehistoric medicine, and History of general anesthesia




Plates vi & vii of the Edwin Smith Papyrus, an Egyptian surgical treatise


Ancient Egypt[edit]
Surgical treatments date back to the prehistoric era. The oldest for which there is evidence is trepanation,[31] in which a hole is drilled or scraped into the skull, thus exposing the dura mater in order to treat health problems related to intracranial pressure and other diseases. Prehistoric surgical techniques are seen in Ancient Egypt, where a mandible dated to approximately 2650 BC shows two perforations just below the root of the first molar, indicating the draining of an abscessed tooth. Surgical texts from ancient Egypt date back about 3500 years ago. Surgical operations were performed by priests, specialized in medical treatments similar to today,[32] and used sutures to close wounds.[33] Infections were treated with honey.[34]
India and China[edit]




Sushruta, the author of Sushruta Samhita, one of the oldest texts on surgery


Remains from the early Harappan periods of the Indus Valley Civilization (c. 3300 BC) show evidence of teeth having been drilled dating back 9,000 years.[35] Susruta[36] was an ancient Indian surgeon commonly credited as the author of the treatise Sushruta Samhita. He is dubbed as the "founding father of surgery" and his period is usually placed between the period of 1200–600 BC.[37] One of the earliest known mention of the name is from the Bower Manuscript where Sushruta is listed as one of the ten sages residing in the Himalayas.[38][38] Texts also suggest that he learned surgery at Kasi from Lord Dhanvantari, the god of medicine in Hindu mythology.[39] It is one of the oldest known surgical texts and it describes in detail the examination, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of numerous ailments, as well as procedures on performing various forms of cosmetic surgery, plastic surgery and rhinoplasty.[40]
Instruments resembling surgical tools have also been found in the archaeological sites of Bronze Age China dating from the Shang Dynasty, along with seeds likely used for herbalism.[41]
Ancient Greece[edit]




Hippocrates stated in the oath (c. 400 BC) that general physicians must never practice surgery and that surgical procedures are to be conducted by specialists


In ancient Greece, temples dedicated to the healer-god Asclepius, known as Asclepieia (Greek: Ασκληπιεία, sing. Asclepieion Ασκληπιείον), functioned as centers of medical advice, prognosis, and healing.[42] In the Asclepieion of Epidaurus, some of the surgical cures listed, such as the opening of an abdominal abscess or the removal of traumatic foreign material, are realistic enough to have taken place.[6] The Greek Galen was one of the greatest surgeons of the ancient world and performed many audacious operations—including brain and eye surgery—that were not tried again for almost two millennia.
In the Middle East, surgery was developed to a high degree in the Islamic world. Abulcasis (Abu al-Qasim Khalaf ibn al-Abbas Al-Zahrawi), an Andalusian-Arab physician and scientist who practised in the Zahra suburb of Córdoba, wrote medical texts that influenced European surgical procedures.[citation needed]
Early modern Europe[edit]




Ambroise Paré (c. 1510–1590), father of modern military surgery.






12th century medieval eye surgery in Italy


In Europe, the demand grew for surgeons to formally study for many years before practicing; universities such as Montpellier, Padua and Bologna were particularly renowned. In the 12th century, Rogerius Salernitanus composed his Chirurgia, laying the foundation for modern Western surgical manuals. Barber-surgeons generally had a bad reputation that was not to improve until the development of academic surgery as a specialty of medicine, rather than an accessory field.[43] Basic surgical principles for asepsis etc., are known as Halsteads principles.
There were some important advances to the art of surgery during this period. The professor of anatomy at the University of Padua, Andreas Vesalius, was a pivotal figure in the Renaissance transition from classical medicine and anatomy based on the works of Galen, to an empirical approach of 'hands-on' dissection. In his anatomic treatis, De humani corporis fabrica, he exposed the many anatomical errors in Galen and advocated that all surgeons should train by engaging in practical dissections themselves.
The second figure of importance in this era was Ambroise Paré (sometimes spelled "Ambrose"[44]), a French army surgeon from the 1530s until his death in 1590. The practice for cauterizing gunshot wounds on the battlefield had been to use boiling oil; an extremely dangerous and painful procedure. Paré began to employ a less irritating emollient, made of egg yolk, rose oil and turpentine. He also described more efficient techniques for the effective ligation of the blood vessels during an amputation.
Modern surgery[edit]
The discipline of surgery was put on a sound, scientific footing during the Age of Enlightenment in Europe. An important figure in this regard was the Scottish surgical scientist, John Hunter, generally regarded as the father of modern scientific surgery.[45] He brought an empirical and experimental approach to the science and was renowned around Europe for the quality of his research and his written works. Hunter reconstructed surgical knowledge from scratch; refusing to rely on the testimonies of others, he conducted his own surgical experiments to determine the truth of the matter. To aid comparative analysis, he built up a collection of over 13,000 specimens of separate organ systems, from the simplest plants and animals to humans.
He greatly advanced knowledge of venereal disease and introduced many new techniques of surgery, including new methods for repairing damage to the Achilles tendon and a more effective method for applying ligature of the arteries in case of an aneurysm.[46] He was also one of the first to understand the importance of pathology, the danger of the spread of infection and how the problem of inflammation of the wound, bone lesions and even tuberculosis often undid any benefit that was gained from the intervention. He consequently adopted the position that all surgical procedures should be used only as a last resort.[47]
Other important 18th- and early 19th-century surgeons included Percival Pott (1713–1788) who described tuberculosis on the spine and first demonstrated that a cancer may be caused by an environmental carcinogen (he noticed a connection between chimney sweep's exposure to soot and their high incidence of scrotal cancer). Astley Paston Cooper (1768–1841) first performed a successful ligation of the abdominal aorta, and James Syme (1799–1870) pioneered the Symes Amputation for the ankle joint and successfully carried out the first hip disarticulation.
Modern pain control through anesthesia was discovered in the mid-19th century. Before the advent of anesthesia, surgery was a traumatically painful procedure and surgeons were encouraged to be as swift as possible to minimize patient suffering. This also meant that operations were largely restricted to amputations and external growth removals. Beginning in the 1840s, surgery began to change dramatically in character with the discovery of effective and practical anaesthetic chemicals such as ether, first used by the American surgeon Crawford Long, and chloroform, discovered by Scottish obstetrician James Young Simpson and later pioneered by John Snow, physician to Queen Victoria.[48] In addition to relieving patient suffering, anaesthesia allowed more intricate operations in the internal regions of the human body. In addition, the discovery of muscle relaxants such as curare allowed for safer applications.
Infection and antisepsis[edit]
Unfortunately, the introduction of anesthetics encouraged more surgery, which inadvertently caused more dangerous patient post-operative infections. The concept of infection was unknown until relatively modern times. The first progress in combating infection was made in 1847 by the Hungarian doctor Ignaz Semmelweis who noticed that medical students fresh from the dissecting room were causing excess maternal death compared to midwives. Semmelweis, despite ridicule and opposition, introduced compulsory handwashing for everyone entering the maternal wards and was rewarded with a plunge in maternal and fetal deaths, however the Royal Society dismissed his advice.




Joseph Lister, pioneer of antiseptic surgery


Until the pioneering work of British surgeon Joseph Lister in the 1860s, most medical men believed that chemical damage from exposures to bad air (see "miasma") was responsible for infections in wounds, and facilities for washing hands or a patient's wounds were not available.[49] Lister became aware of the work of French chemist Louis Pasteur, who showed that rotting and fermentation could occur under anaerobic conditions if micro-organisms were present. Pasteur suggested three methods to eliminate the micro-organisms responsible for gangrene: filtration, exposure to heat, or exposure to chemical solutions. Lister confirmed Pasteur's conclusions with his own experiments and decided to use his findings to develop antiseptic techniques for wounds. As the first two methods suggested by Pasteur were inappropriate for the treatment of human tissue, Lister experimented with the third, spraying carbolic acid on his instruments. He found that this remarkably reduced the incidence of gangrene and he published his results in The Lancet.[50] Later, on 9 August 1867, he read a paper before the British Medical Association in Dublin, on the Antiseptic Principle of the Practice of Surgery, which was reprinted in The British Medical Journal.[51][52][53] His work was groundbreaking and laid the foundations for a rapid advance in infection control that saw modern antiseptic operating theatres widely used within 50 years.
Lister continued to develop improved methods of antisepsis and asepsis when he realised that infection could be better avoided by preventing bacteria from getting into wounds in the first place. This led to the rise of sterile surgery. Lister introduced the Steam Steriliser to sterilize equipment, instituted rigorous hand washing and later implemented the wearing of rubber gloves. These three crucial advances – the adoption of a scientific methodology toward surgical operations, the use of anaesthetic and the introduction of sterilised equipment – laid the groundwork for the modern invasive surgical techniques of today.
The use of X-rays as an important medical diagnostic tool began with their discovery in 1895 by German physicist Wilhelm Röntgen. He noticed that these rays could penetrate the skin, allowing the skeletal structure to be captured on a specially treated photographic plate.







Hieronymus Fabricius, Operationes chirurgicae, 1685









John Syng Dorsey wrote the first American textbook on surgery









An operation in 1753, painted by Gaspare Traversi.




Surgical specialties[edit]


General surgery
Breast
Cardiothoracic
Colorectal
Craniofacial surgery
Dental surgery
Endocrine
Gynaecology
Neurosurgery
Ophthalmology
Oncological
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Transplant
Orthopaedic surgery
Otolaryngology
Paediatric (Pediatric)
Plastic
Podiatric surgery
Skin
Trauma
Urology
Vascular


National societies[edit]


American College of Surgeons
American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons
American College of Foot and Ankle Surgeons
Royal Australasian College of Surgeons
Royal Australasian College of Dental Surgeons
Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland
Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh
Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow
Royal College of Surgeons of England


See also[edit]


Medicine portal




Anesthesia
ASA physical status classification system
Biomaterial
Cardiac surgery
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT; for outpatient surgical procedures medical coding)
Surgical drain
Endoscopy
Fluorescence image-guided surgery
Hypnosurgery
ICD-10-PCS (International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition, Procedural Coding System; inpatient surgical procedures medical coding)
Jet ventilation
List of surgical procedures
Minimally invasive procedure
Operative report
Perioperative mortality
Remote surgery
Robotic surgery
Surgeon's assistant
Surgical Outcomes Analysis and Research
Surgical Sieve
Trauma surgery
Reconstructive surgery
Rheumasurgery
WHO Surgical Safety Checklist


Notes and references[edit]


^ Fingar KR, Stocks C, Weiss AJ, Steiner CA (December 2014). "Most Frequent Operating Room Procedures Performed in U.S. Hospitals, 2003–2012". HCUP Statistical Brief #186. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
^ a b c American College of Radiology. "Five Things Physicians and Patients Should Question". Choosing Wisely: an initiative of the ABIM Foundation. American College of Radiology. Retrieved August 17, 2012 , citing

"American College of Radiology ACR Appropriateness Criteria". American College of Radiology. 2000. Retrieved 4 September 2012.  Last reviewed 2011.
Gómez-Gil, E.; Trilla, A.; Corbella, B.; Fernández-Egea, E.; Luburich, P.; De Pablo, J.; Ferrer Raldúa, J.; Valdés, M. (2002). "Lack of clinical relevance of routine chest radiography in acute psychiatric admissions". General hospital psychiatry. 24 (2): 110–113. doi:10.1016/s0163-8343(01)00179-7. PMID 11869746. 
Archer, C.; Levy, A. R.; McGregor, M. (1993). "Value of routine preoperative chest x-rays: A meta-analysis". Canadian Journal of Anesthesia. 40 (11): 1022–1027. doi:10.1007/BF03009471. PMID 8269561. 
Munro, J.; Booth, A.; Nicholl, J. (1997). "Routine preoperative testing: A systematic review of the evidence". Health technology assessment (Winchester, England). 1 (12): i–iv; 1–62. PMID 9483155. 
Grier, D. J.; Watson, L. J.; Hartnell, G. G.; Wilde, P. (1993). "Are routine chest radiographs prior to angiography of any value?". Clinical radiology. 48 (2): 131–133. doi:10.1016/S0009-9260(05)81088-8. PMID 8004892. 
Gupta, S. D.; Gibbins, F. J.; Sen, I. (1985). "Routine chest radiography in the elderly". Age and ageing. 14 (1): 11–14. doi:10.1093/ageing/14.1.11. PMID 4003172. 
Amorosa JK; Bramwit MP; Mohammed TL; Reddy GP; et al. "ACR Appropriateness Criteria routine chest radiographs in ICU patients". National Guideline Clearinghouse. Retrieved 4 September 2012. 


^ American Society for Clinical Pathology, "Five Things Physicians and Patients Should Question", Choosing Wisely: an initiative of the ABIM Foundation, American Society for Clinical Pathology, retrieved August 1, 2013 , which cites



Keay, L.; Lindsley, K.; Tielsch, J.; Katz, J.; Schein, O. (2012). Keay, Lisa, ed. "Routine preoperative medical testing for cataract surgery". The Cochrane Library (2): CD007293. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD007293.pub3. PMC 4261928 . PMID 22419323. 
Katz, R. I.; Dexter, F.; Rosenfeld, K.; Wolfe, L.; Redmond, V.; Agarwal, D.; Salik, I.; Goldsteen, K.; Goodman, M.; Glass, P. S. A. (2011). "Survey Study of Anesthesiologistsʼ and Surgeonsʼ Ordering of Unnecessary Preoperative Laboratory Tests". Anesthesia & Analgesia. 112 (1): 207–212. doi:10.1213/ANE.0b013e31820034f0. PMID 21081771. 
Munro, J.; Booth, A.; Nicholl, J. (1997). "Routine preoperative testing: A systematic review of the evidence". Health technology assessment (Winchester, England). 1 (12): i–iv; 1–62. PMID 9483155. 
Reynolds, T. M.; National Institute for Health Clinical Excellence; Clinical Science Reviews Committee of the Association for Clinical Biochemistry (2006). "National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines on preoperative tests: The use of routine preoperative tests for elective surgery". Annals of Clinical Biochemistry. 43 (Pt 1): 13–16. doi:10.1258/000456306775141623. PMID 16390604. 
Capdenat Saint-Martin, E.; Michel, P.; Raymond, J. M.; Iskandar, H.; Chevalier, C.; Petitpierre, M. N.; Daubech, L.; Amouretti, M.; Maurette, P. (1998). "Description of local adaptation of national guidelines and of active feedback for rationalising preoperative screening in patients at low risk from anaesthetics in a French university hospital". Quality in health care : QHC. 7 (1): 5–11. doi:10.1136/qshc.7.1.5. PMC 2483578 . PMID 10178152. 




^ Martin, Shirley (2007). Minor Surgical Procedures for Nurses and Allied Healthcare Professionals. England: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. p. 122. ISBN 978-0-470-01990-0. 
^ Wagman LD. "Principles of Surgical Oncology" in Pazdur R, Wagman LD, Camphausen KA, Hoskins WJ (Eds) Cancer Management: A Multidisciplinary Approach. 11 ed. 2008.
^ a b Askitopoulou, H., Konsolaki, E., Ramoutsaki, I., Anastassaki, E. Surgical cures by sleep induction as the Asclepieion of Epidaurus. The history of anesthesia: proceedings of the Fifth International Symposium, by José Carlos Diz, Avelino Franco, Douglas R. Bacon, J. Rupreht, Julián Alvarez. Elsevier Science B.V., International Congress Series 1242(2002), pp. 11–17. [1]
^ Doyle S. L.; Lysaght J.; Reynolds J. V. (2010). "Obesity and post-operative complications in patients undergoing non-bariatric surgery". Obesity Reviews. 11 (12): 875–886. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2009.00700.x. 
^ a b c American Academy of Dermatology (February 2013), "Five Things Physicians and Patients Should Question", Choosing Wisely: an initiative of the ABIM Foundation, American Academy of Dermatology, retrieved 5 December 2013 , which cites

Sheth, V. M.; Weitzul, S. (2008). "Postoperative topical antimicrobial use". Dermatitis : contact, atopic, occupational, drug. 19 (4): 181–189. PMID 18674453. 


^ Heal, Clare F; Banks, Jennifer L; Lepper, Phoebe D; Kontopantelis, Evangelos; van Driel, Mieke L. Topical antibiotics for preventing surgical site infection in wounds healing by primary intention. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2016. doi:10.1002/14651858.cd011426.pub2. 
^ Aylin P, Alexandrescu R, Jen MH, Mayer EK, Bottle A (2013). "Day of week of procedure and 30 day mortality for elective surgery: retrospective analysis of hospital episode statistics". BMJ. 346: f2424. doi:10.1136/bmj.f2424. PMC 3665889 . PMID 23716356. 
^ Weiss AJ, Elixhauser A, Andrews RM (February 2014). "Characteristics of Operating Room Procedures in U.S. Hospitals, 2011". HCUP Statistical Brief #170. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
^ Weiss AJ, Elixhauser A (March 2014). "Trends in Operating Room Procedures in U.S. Hospitals, 2001—2011". HCUP Statistical Brief #171. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
^ Weiss AJ, Barrett ML, Steiner CA (July 2014). "Trends and Projections in Inpatient Hospital Costs and Utilization, 2003–2013". HCUP Statistical Brief #175. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
^ a b Moore B, Levit K, Elixhauser A (October 2014). "Costs for Hospital Stays in the United States, 2012". HCUP Statistical Brief #181. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
^ a b Makary MA, Segev DL, Pronovost PJ, et al. (June 2010). "Frailty as a predictor of surgical in older patients". J. Am. Coll. Surg. 210 (6): 901–8. doi:10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2010.01.028. PMID 20510798. Lay summary (28 December 2010). 
^ Meara JG, Leather AJ, Hagander L, Alkire BC, Alonso N (2015). "Global Surgery 2030: evidence and solutions for achieving health, welfare, and economic development". Lancet. 386 (9993): 569–624. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60160-X. PMID 25924834. 
^ GlobalSurg Collaborative (2016). "Mortality of emergency abdominal surgery in high-, middle- and low-income countries". British Journal of Surgery. 103 (8): 971–988. doi:10.1002/bjs.10151. PMID 27145169. 
^ GlobalSurg Collaborative (2016). "Determinants of morbidity and mortality following emergency abdominal surgery in children in low-income and middle-income countries". BMJ Global Health. 1 (4): e000091. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2016-000091. PMC 5321375 . PMID 28588977. 
^ Marks S. Normative Expansion of the Right to Health and the Proliferation of Human Rights. George Washington International Law Review. 2016:101-44
^ UN General Assembly. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights- United Nations Treaty Series. In: Nations U, editor. 1966
^ a b c d UN Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights. CESCR General Comment No. 14: The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health (Art. 12) 2000
^ UN General Assembly. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights- United Nations Treaty Series. In: Nations U, editor. 1966.
^ 2. UN General Assembly. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights- United Nations Treaty Series. In: Nations U, editor. 1966.
^ a b UN Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights. CESCR General Comment No. 14: The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health (Art. 12) 2000.
^ McQueen KA, Ozgediz D, Riviello R, Hsia RY, Jayaraman S, Sullivan SR, et al. Essential surgery: Integral to the right to health. Health and human rights. 2010 Jun 15;12(1):137-52. PubMed PMID 20930260. Epub 2010/10/12. eng
^ World Health Organization. Global Initiative for Emergency and Essential Surgical Care 2017 [cited 2017 October 23rd]. Available from: http://www.who.int/surgery/globalinitiative/en/
^ Meara JG, Leather AJ, Hagander L, Alkire BC, Alonso N, Ameh EA, et al. Global Surgery 2030: evidence and solutions for achieving health, welfare, and economic development. International journal of obstetric anesthesia. 2015 April;25:75-8. PubMed PMID 26597405. Epub 2015/11/26. eng
^ Debas HT, Donker P, Gawande A, Jamison DT, Kruk ME, Mock CN, editors. Essential Surgery. Disease Control Priorities. 3rd ed. Washington, DC, USA: International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / World Bank Group; 2015
^ Price R, Makasa E, Hollands M. World Health Assembly Resolution WHA68.15: "Strengthening Emergency and Essential Surgical Care and Anesthesia as a Component of Universal Health Coverage"-Addressing the Public Health Gaps Arising from Lack of Safe, Affordable and Accessible Surgical and Anesthetic Services. World J Surg. 2015 Sep;39(9):2115-25. PubMed PMID 26239773. Epub 2015/08/05. eng
^ Meara JG, Leather AJ, Hagander L, Alkire BC, Alonso N, Ameh EA, et al. Global Surgery 2030: evidence and solutions for achieving health, welfare, and economic development. International journal of obstetric anesthesia. 2015 April;25:75-8. PubMed PMID 26597405. Epub 2015/11/26. eng.
^ Capasso, Luigi (2002). Principi di storia della patologia umana: corso di storia della medicina per gli studenti della Facoltà di medicina e chirurgia e della Facoltà di scienze infermieristiche (in Italian). Rome: SEU. ISBN 88-87753-65-2. OCLC 50485765. 
^ Shiffman, Melvin. Cosmetic Surgery: Art and Techniques. Springer. p. 20. ISBN 978-3-642-21837-8. 
^ Sullivan R (1996). "The Identity and Work of the Ancient Egyptian Surgeon". Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 89 (8): 469. 
^ James P. Allen, The Art of Medicine in Ancient Egypt. (New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2005) 72.
^ "Stone age man used dentist drill". BBC News. 6 April 2006. Retrieved 24 May 2010. 
^ Monier-Williams, A Sanskrit Dictionary (1899)
^ Singh, P.B.; Pravin S. Rana (2002). Banaras Region: A Spiritual and Cultural Guide. Varanasi: Indica Books. p. 31. ISBN 81-86569-24-3. 
^ a b Kutumbian, pages XXXII–XXXIII
^ Monier-Williams, A Sanskrit Dictionary, s.v. "suśruta"
^ History of plastic surgery in India. Rana RE, Arora BS, – J Postgrad Med
^ Hong, Francis (2004). "History of Medicine in China" (PDF). McGill Journal of Medicine. 8 (1): 7984. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 December 2013. 
^ Risse, G.B. Mending bodies, saving souls: a history of hospitals. Oxford University Press, 1990. p. 56 [2]
^ Sven Med Tidskr. (2007). "From barber to surgeon- the process of professionalization". Svensk medicinhistorisk tidskrift. 11 (1): 69–87. PMID 18548946. 
^ Levine JM (March 1992). "Historical notes on pressure ulcers: the cure of Ambrose Paré". Decubitus. 5 (2): 23–4, 26. PMID 1558689. 
^ Moore, Wendy (2005). The Knife Man: The Extraordinary Life and Times of John Hunter, Father of Modern Surgery. Crown Publishing Group. ISBN 9780767916523. Retrieved 2013-02-07. 
^ "John Hunter: "the father of scientific surgery": Resources from the collection of the P.I. Nixon Library". Archived from the original on 26 October 2013. Retrieved 2012-12-17. 
^ "John Hunter: 'Founder of Scientific Surgery'". Retrieved 2012-12-17. 
^ Gordon, H. Laing (November 2002). Sir James Young Simpson and Chloroform (1811–1870). The Minerva Group, Inc. p. 108. ISBN 978-1-4102-0291-8. Retrieved 11 November 2011. 
^ Robinson, Victor (2005-06). The Story of Medicine. Kessinger Publishing. p. 420. ISBN 9781419154317.  Check date values in: |date= (help)
^ The Lancet, "On a new method of treating compound fracture, abscess, etc.: with observation on the conditions of suppuration".
Five articles running from:
Volume 89, Issue 2272, 16 March 1867, pages 326–329 (Originally published as Volume 1, Issue 2272)
to:
Volume 90, Issue 2291, 27 July 1867, pages 95–96 Originally published as Volume 2, Issue 2291
^ Lister J (21 September 1867). "On the Antiseptic Principle in the Practice of Surgery". The British Medical Journal. 2 (351): 245–260. doi:10.1136/bmj.2.351.246. PMC 2310614 . PMID 20744875. . Reprinted in Lister, BJ (2010). "The classic: On the antiseptic principle in the practice of surgery. 1867". Clinical orthopaedics and related research. 468 (8): 2012–6. doi:10.1007/s11999-010-1320-x. PMC 2895849 . PMID 20361283. 
^ Lister, Joseph. "Modern History Sourcebook: Joseph Lister (1827–1912): Antiseptic Principle Of The Practice Of Surgery, 1867". Fordham University. Retrieved 2 September 2011. Modernized version of text
^ Lister, Joseph. "On the Antiseptic Principle of the Practice of Surgery by Baron Joseph Lister". Project Gutenberg. Retrieved 2 September 2011.  E-text, audio at Project Gutenberg.


External links[edit]

Find more aboutSurgeryat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity








v
t
e


Medicine






Outline
History





Specialties
and
subspecialties





Surgery






Cardiac surgery
Cardiothoracic surgery
Colorectal surgery
Eye surgery
General surgery
Neurosurgery
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Orthopedic surgery
Hand surgery
Otolaryngology (ENT)
Pediatric surgery
Plastic surgery
Reproductive surgery
Surgical oncology
Thoracic surgery
Transplant surgery
Trauma surgery
Urology

Andrology


Vascular surgery








Internal medicine






Allergy / Immunology
Angiology
Cardiology
Endocrinology
Gastroenterology

Hepatology


Geriatrics
Hematology
Hospital medicine
Infectious disease
Nephrology
Oncology
Pulmonology
Rheumatology








Obstetrics and gynaecology






Gynaecology
Gynecologic oncology
Maternal–fetal medicine
Obstetrics
Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
Urogynecology








Diagnostic






Radiology

Interventional radiology
Nuclear medicine


Pathology

Anatomical pathology
Clinical pathology
Clinical chemistry
Clinical immunology
Cytopathology
Medical microbiology
Transfusion medicine










Other specialties






Addiction medicine
Adolescent medicine
Anesthesiology
Dermatology
Disaster medicine
Diving medicine
Emergency medicine

Mass-gathering medicine


Family medicine
General practice
Hospital medicine
Intensive-care medicine
Medical genetics
Neurology

Clinical neurophysiology


Occupational medicine
Ophthalmology
Oral medicine
Pain management
Palliative care
Pediatrics

Neonatology


Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R)
Preventive medicine
Psychiatry
Public health
Radiation oncology
Reproductive medicine
Sexual medicine
Sleep medicine
Sports medicine
Transplantation medicine
Tropical medicine

Travel medicine


Venereology








Medical education



Medical school
Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery
Bachelor of Medical Sciences
Master of Medicine
Master of Surgery
Doctor of Medicine
Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine
MD–PhD





Related topics



Allied health

Dentistry
Podiatry
Physiotherapy


Nanomedicine
Molecular oncology
Personalized medicine
Veterinary medicine
Physician

Chief physician


History of medicine








 Book












v
t
e


Neurosurgical and other procedures (ICD-9-CM V3 01–05+89.1, ICD-10-PCS 00–01)



Skull



Craniotomy
Decompressive craniectomy
Cranioplasty





CNS




Brain




thalamus and globus pallidus:



Thalamotomy
Thalamic stimulator
Pallidotomy





ventricular system:



Ventriculostomy
Suboccipital puncture
Intracranial pressure monitoring





cerebrum:



Psychosurgery

Lobotomy
Bilateral cingulotomy


Hemispherectomy
Anterior temporal lobectomy





pituitary gland:



Hypophysectomy





hippocampus:



Amygdalohippocampectomy








Brain biopsy








Cerebral meninges



Meningeal biopsy





Spinal cord and spinal canal



Spinal cord and roots

Cordotomy
Rhizotomy


Vertebrae and intervertebral discs: see Template:Bone, cartilage, and joint procedures





Medical imaging



Computed tomography of the head
Cerebral angiography
Pneumoencephalography
Echoencephalography/Transcranial Doppler
Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain
Brain PET
Myelography





Diagnostic



Electroencephalography
Lumbar puncture
Polysomnography





CPRs



Glasgow Coma Scale
Mini–mental state examination
National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale
CHADS2 score








PNS




Cranial and peripheral nerves



Nerve block
Vagotomy





Sympathetic nerves or ganglia



Ganglionectomy
Sympathectomy

Endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy







Nerves (general)



Axotomy
Neurectomy
Nerve biopsy





Diagnostic



Nerve conduction study
Electromyography





Medical imaging



Magnetic resonance neurography















v
t
e


Surgery involving the endocrine system (ICD-9-CM V3 06–07, ICD-10-PCS 0G)



Pancreas



Islet cell transplantation

see also digestive system procedures







Pituitary



Hypophysectomy
Transsphenoidal surgery

Combined rapid anterior pituitary evaluation panel







Thyroid



Thyroidectomy
Parathyroidectomy
Tests

Radioactive iodine uptake test
Sestamibi parathyroid scan
TRH stimulation test







Adrenal gland



Adrenalectomy
Tests

Dexamethasone suppression test
ACTH stimulation test
Captopril suppression test


Fluid deprivation test





Pineal gland



Pinealectomy












v
t
e


Eye surgery and other procedures (ICD-9-CM V3 08–16+95.0–95.2, ICD-10-PCS 08)



Adnexa




Eyelids



Blepharoplasty

East Asian blepharoplasty


Epicanthoplasty
Tarsorrhaphy





Lacrimal system



Dacryocystorhinostomy
Punctoplasty








Globe




Cornea



Radial keratotomy
LASIK
Keratomileusis
Epikeratophakia
Corneal transplantation
Photorefractive keratectomy
Intrastromal corneal ring segment
Corneal collagen cross-linking





Iris, ciliary body,
sclera, and anterior chamber



Glaucoma surgery: Trabeculectomy
Iridectomy





Lens



Phacoemulsification
Cataract surgery
Capsulorhexis





Retina, choroid,
vitreous, and posterior chamber



Vitrectomy





Orbit and eyeball



Enucleation of the eye








Extraocular muscles



Harada–Ito procedure
Strabismus surgery
Botulinum toxin therapy of strabismus





Medical imaging



Fluorescein angiography
Fundus photography
Corneal topography
Optical coherence tomography


Electrodiagnosis: Electrooculography
Electroretinography
Electronystagmography





Eye examination



Gonioscopy
Dilated fundus examination
Ocular tonometry
Ophthalmoscopy
Retinoscopy
Color perception test
Visual field test/Perimetry





Radiotherapy



Plaque radiotherapy












v
t
e


Operations, surgery and other procedures on the ear (ICD-9-CM V3 18–20+95.4, ICD-10-PCS 09)



Outer ear



Otoplasty





Middle ear



Myringotomy
Stapedectomy
Tympanoplasty
Tympanocentesis
Myringoplasty





Inner ear



Mastoidectomy
Epley maneuver





Diagnosis



Caloric reflex test
ABR
Electronystagmography












v
t
e


Procedures relating to the mouth and pharynx (ICD-9-CM V3 25–29, ICD-10-PCS 09)



Mouth




lip:



Labial frenectomy
Lip lift
Lip augmentation
Cheiloplasty





tongue:



Lingual frenectomy
Genioglossus advancement
Glossectomy





teeth:



see Template:Endodontology





gingiva:



see Template:Periodontology








Stomatoplasty








Oropharynx




palate:



Palatoplasty
Pharyngeal flap surgery





tonsil:



Tonsillectomy
Adenoidectomy





uvula:



Uvulotomy
Uvulopalatoplasty








Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty















v
t
e


Tests, surgery and other procedures involving the respiratory system (ICD-9-CM V3 21–22, 30–34, ICD-10-PCS 0B)



Upper RT



nose
Rhinoplasty
Septoplasty
Alarplasty
Rhinectomy
Rhinomanometry
Acoustic rhinometry


sinus
Sinusotomy


larynx
Laryngoscopy
Laryngectomy
Laryngotomy

Thyrotomy


Laryngotracheal reconstruction





Lower RT



trachea
Cricothyrotomy
Tracheoesophageal puncture
Tracheotomy


bronchus
Bronchoscopy


lung
Pneumonectomy
Lobectomy
Wedge resection
Lung transplantation
Decortication of lung
Heart-lung transplant





Chest wall, pleura,
mediastinum, and diaphragm



pleura/pleural cavity
Thoracentesis
Pleurodesis
Thoracoscopy
Thoracotomy
Chest tube


mediastinum
Mediastinoscopy


Nuss procedure





Medical imaging



Bronchography
CT pulmonary angiogram
High-resolution computed tomography
Spiral CT
Ventilation/perfusion scan





CPRs



Pneumonia severity index
CURB-65





Lung function test



Body plethysmography
Spirometry
Bronchial challenge test
Capnography
Diffusion capacity





Cytology



Sputum culture
Bronchoalveolar lavage





Respiratory therapy/
intubation



Artificial respiration
CPR
Hyperbaric medicine
Decompression chamber
Heliox
Mechanical ventilation
Nebulizer
Negative pressure ventilator
Oxygen therapy
Positive pressure ventilation
Postural drainage
Surgical airway management












v
t
e


Surgery and other procedures involving the heart (ICD-9-CM V3 35–37+89.4+99.6, ICD-10-PCS 02)



Surgery and IC




Heart valves
and septa



Valve repair
Valvulotomy
Mitral valve repair
Valvuloplasty

aortic
mitral


Valve replacement
Aortic valve repair
Aortic valve replacement

Ross procedure
Percutaneous aortic valve replacement


Mitral valve replacement


production of septal defect in heart
enlargement of existing septal defect

Atrial septostomy
Balloon septostomy


creation of septal defect in heart

Blalock–Hanlon procedure




shunt from heart chamber to blood vessel
atrium to pulmonary artery

Fontan procedure


left ventricle to aorta

Rastelli procedure


right ventricle to pulmonary artery

Sano shunt




compound procedures
for transposition of great vessels

Jatene procedure
Mustard procedure


for univentricular defect

Norwood procedure
Kawashima procedure




shunt from blood vessel to blood vessel
systemic circulation to pulmonary artery shunt

Blalock–Taussig shunt


SVC to the right PA

Glenn procedure







Cardiac vessels



CHD
Angioplasty
Bypass/Coronary artery bypass

MIDCAB
Off-pump CAB
TECAB




Coronary stent
Bare-metal stent
Drug-eluting stent


Bentall procedure
Valve-sparing aortic root replacement





Other



Pericardium
Pericardiocentesis
Pericardial window
Pericardiectomy


Myocardium
Cardiomyoplasty
Dor procedure
Septal myectomy
Ventricular reduction
Alcohol septal ablation


Conduction system
Maze procedure

Cox maze and minimaze


Catheter ablation

Cryoablation
Radiofrequency ablation


Pacemaker insertion


Left atrial appendage occlusion
Cardiotomy
Heart transplantation








Diagnostic
tests and
procedures



Electrophysiology
Electrocardiography

Vectorcardiography


Holter monitor
Implantable loop recorder
Cardiac stress test

Bruce protocol


Electrophysiology study


Cardiac imaging
Angiocardiography
Echocardiography

TTE
TEE


Myocardial perfusion imaging
Cardiovascular MRI
Ventriculography

Radionuclide ventriculography


Cardiac catheterization/Coronary catheterization
Cardiac CT
Cardiac PET


sound
Phonocardiogram





Function tests



Impedance cardiography
Ballistocardiography
Cardiotocography





Pacing



Cardioversion
Transcutaneous pacing












v
t
e


Vascular surgery ICD-9-CM V3 38–39, ICD-10-PCS 03–6



Vascular and
Endovascular surgery




Arterial disease



Vascular bypass
Angioplasty
Atherectomy
Endarterectomy

Carotid endarterectomy


Stenting

Carotid stenting







Venous disease



Ambulatory phlebectomy
Laser surgery
Sclerotherapy
Vein stripping





Arterial and venous access



Venous cutdown
Arteriotomy
Phlebotomy





Aortic aneurysm / dissection:



Endovascular aneurysm repair
Open aortic surgery





Other



Cardiopulmonary bypass
Cardioplegia
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Vascular access
Revascularization
First rib resection
Seldinger technique
Vascular snare








Medical imaging




Angiography



Digital subtraction angiography

Cerebral angiography
Aortography
Fluorescein angiography
Radionuclide angiography
Magnetic resonance angiography







Venography



Portography
Impedance phlebography





Ultrasound



Intravascular ultrasound
Carotid ultrasonography








Other diagnostic



Angioscopy
Ankle brachial pressure index
Toe pressure
Tilt table test












v
t
e


Operations/surgeries and other procedures of the blood and lymphatic system (ICD-9-CM V3 40–41, ICD-10-PCS 07)



Bone marrow



Stem cell transplantation/Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation





Thymus



Thymectomy
Thymus transplantation





Spleen



Splenectomy
Spleen transplantation





Lymph nodes



Lymphadenectomy
Neck dissection
Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection
Lymph node biopsy





Tonsils



see Template:Procedures on the mouth and pharynx





Imaging



Lymphogram












v
t
e


Surgical procedures involving the digestive system (ICD-9-CM V3 42–54, ICD-10-PCS 0D)



Digestive tract




Upper GI tract




SGs / Esophagus



Esophagectomy
Heller myotomy
Sialography
Impedance–pH monitoring
Esophageal pH monitoring
Esophageal motility study





Stomach



Bariatric surgery

Adjustable gastric band
Gastric bypass surgery
Sleeve gastrectomy
Vertical banded gastroplasty surgery


Collis gastroplasty
Gastrectomy

Billroth I
Billroth II
Roux-en-Y


Gastroenterostomy
Gastropexy
Gastrostomy

Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy


Hill repair
Nissen fundoplication
Pyloromyotomy





Medical imaging



Endoscopy: Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
Barium swallow
Upper gastrointestinal series








Lower GI tract




Small bowel



Bariatric surgery

Duodenal switch
Jejunoileal bypass


Bowel resection
Ileostomy
Intestine transplantation
Jejunostomy
Partial ileal bypass surgery
Strictureplasty





Large bowel



Appendicectomy
Colectomy
Colonic polypectomy
Colostomy
Hartmann's operation





Rectum



Abdominoperineal resection / Miles operation
Lower anterior resection
Total mesorectal excision





Anal canal



Anal sphincterotomy
Anorectal manometry
Lateral internal sphincterotomy
Rubber band ligation
Transanal hemorrhoidal dearterialization





Medical imaging



Endoscopy: Colonoscopy
Anoscopy
Capsule endoscopy
Enteroscopy
Proctoscopy
Sigmoidoscopy


Abdominal ultrasonography
Defecography
Double-contrast barium enema
Endoanal ultrasound
Enteroclysis
Lower gastrointestinal series
Small-bowel follow-through
Transrectal ultrasonography
Virtual colonoscopy





Stool tests



Fecal fat test
Fecal pH test
Stool guaiac test











Accessory




Liver



Artificial extracorporeal liver support

Bioartificial liver devices
Liver dialysis


Hepatectomy
Liver biopsy
Liver transplantation
Portal hypertension

Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt [TIPS]
Distal splenorenal shunt procedure







Gallbladder, bile duct



Cholecystectomy
Cholecystostomy
ERCP
Hepatoportoenterostomy


Medical imaging: Cholangiography

IV
MRCP
PTC


Cholecystography
Cholescintigraphy





Pancreas



Frey's procedure
Pancreas transplantation
Pancreatectomy
Pancreaticoduodenectomy
Puestow procedure








Abdominopelvic




Peritoneum



Diagnostic peritoneal lavage
Intraperitoneal injection
Laparoscopy
Omentopexy
Paracentesis
Peritoneal dialysis





Hernia



Hernia repair: Inguinal hernia surgery
Femoral hernia repair








Other



Laparotomy

Exploratory laparotomy


Rapid urease test / Urea breath test





CPRs



MELD
PELD
UKELD
Child–Pugh score
Ranson criteria
Milan criteria












v
t
e


Urologic surgical and other procedures (ICD-9-CM V3 55–59+89.2, ICD-10-PCS 0T)



Kidney



Nephrostomy (Percutaneous nephrostomy)
Nephrotomy
Endoscopy

Nephroscopy


Renal biopsy
Nephrectomy
Kidney transplantation
Nephropexy





Ureter



Ureterostomy
Urinary diversion
Ureterosigmoidostomy
Ureterolysis
Ureteroscopy





Urinary bladder



Cystectomy
Suprapubic cystostomy
Cystoscopy





Urethra



Urethropexy
Urethrotomy
Urethral sounding
Urethroplasty
Urethral bulking injections
Cystourethrography





General




Medical imaging:



Pyelogram (Intravenous pyelogram, Retrograde pyelogram)
Kidneys, ureters, and bladder x-ray
Radioisotope renography
Cystography
Retrograde urethrogram
Voiding cystourethrogram
Urodynamic testing

Cystometry







other:



Urinary catheterization
Dialysis
Lithotripsy:

Laser lithotripsy


Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy















v
t
e


Female genital surgical and other procedures (gynecological surgery) (ICD-9-CM V3 65–71, ICD-10-PCS 0U)



Adnexa




Ovaries



Oophorectomy
Salpingoophorectomy





Fallopian tubes



Falloposcopy
Salpingectomy
Tubal ligation
Essure
Tubal reversal








Uterus




general:



Genitoplasty
Hysterectomy
Hysterotomy
Pelvic exenteration
Uterine artery embolization
Transplantation





uterine cavity:



Hysteroscopy
Vacuum aspiration





endometrium:



Endometrial biopsy
Endometrial ablation





myometrium:



Uterine myomectomy





cervix:



Colposcopy
Cervical conization

LEEP


Cervical cerclage
Cervical screening (pap test)
Cervicectomy








Vagina



Vaginectomy
Culdoscopy
Culdocentesis
Episiotomy

Husband stitch


Hymenotomy
Colpocleisis
Hymenorrhaphy
Vaginal wet mount
Vaginal transplantation





Vulva



Vulvectomy
Female genital mutilation
Labiaplasty
Clitoral hood reduction
Vestibulectomy





Medical imaging



Gynecologic ultrasonography
Hysterosalpingography












v
t
e


Obstetrical surgery and other procedures (ICD-9-CM V3 72–75, ICD-10-PCS 1)



Diagnostic







Pregnancy test








Leopold's maneuvers








Cardiotocography
Fetoscopy
Fetal scalp blood testing
Fetal scalp stimulation test





sampling:



fetal tissue
Chorionic villus sampling
Amniocentesis
blood
Triple test
Percutaneous umbilical cord blood sampling
Apt test
Kleihauer–Betke test
lung maturity
Lecithin–sphingomyelin ratio
Lamellar body count
Fetal fibronectin test





obstetric ultrasonography:



Nuchal scan
Anomaly scan





antenatal testing:



Fetal movement counting
Contraction stress test
Nonstress test
Vibroacoustic stimulation
Biophysical profile

Amniotic fluid index










Intervention



Fetal surgery
Fetendo
Podalic version

External cephalic version


Amnioinfusion





Delivery




Vaginal delivery




Induction



Artificial rupture of membranes
Episiotomy
Symphysiotomy
Forceps in childbirth
Ventouse in childbirth
Odón Device





Dystocia management



McRoberts maneuver
Woods' screw maneuver
Zavanelli maneuver





Third stage of labor



Manual placenta removal








Caesarean section



Elective
On maternal request
EXIT procedure
Resuscitative hysterotomy





Postpartum hemorrhage



Hysterectomy
B-Lynch suture
Sengstaken–Blakemore tube















v
t
e


Orthopedic surgery, operations/surgeries and other procedures on bones and joints (ICD-9-CM V3 76–81, ICD-10-PCS 0P–S)



Bones




Facial



Jaw reduction
Dentofacial osteotomy
Genioplasty/Mentoplasty

Chin augmentation


Orthognathic surgery





Spine



Coccygectomy
Laminotomy
Laminectomy
Laminoplasty
Corpectomy
Facetectomy
Foraminotomy
Vertebral fixation
Percutaneous vertebroplasty





Upper extremity



Acromioplasty





Lower extremity



Femoral head ostectomy
Astragalectomy
Distraction osteogenesis
Ilizarov apparatus





General



Ostectomy
Bone grafting
Osteotomy
Epiphysiodesis
Reduction
Internal fixation
External fixation
Tension band wiring








Cartilage



Articular cartilage repair

Microfracture surgery


Knee cartilage replacement therapy
Autologous chondrocyte implantation





Joints




Spine



Arthrodesis

Spinal fusion


Intervertebral discs

Discectomy
Annuloplasty
Arthroplasty







Upper extremity



Shoulder surgery

Shoulder replacement
Bankart repair
Weaver–Dunn procedure


Ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction
Hand surgery

Brunelli procedure







Lower extremity



Hip resurfacing
Hip replacement
Rotationplasty
Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
Knee replacement/Unicompartmental knee arthroplasty
Ankle replacement
Broström procedure
Triple arthrodesis





General



Arthrotomy
Arthroplasty
Synovectomy
Arthroscopy
Replacement joint
imaging: Arthrogram
Arthrocentesis















v
t
e


Orthopedic surgery, operations/surgeries and other procedures on muscle/soft tissue (ICD-9-CM V3 82–84, ICD-10-PCS 0K–L)



Muscle, tendon,
fascia, and bursa




muscle:



Myotomy

Heller myotomy


Muscle biopsy





tendon:



Tenotomy
Tendon transfer





fascia:



Fasciotomy





bursa:



Bursectomy








Other



Amputation

Hemipelvectomy
Hemicorporectomy


Replantation












v
t
e


Operations/surgeries and other procedures of the breast (ICD-9-CM V3 85, ICD-10-PCS 0H)



Breast surgery



Breast-conserving surgery

Lumpectomy


Mastectomy

Radical mastectomy




Mammoplasty

Breast implant
Breast reduction plasty

SPAIR




Mastopexy
Breast reconstruction


Breast biopsy

Fine-needle aspiration




Interventions on the Lactiferous ducts

Ductal lavage
Ductoscopy
Microdochectomy
Central duct excision







Breast imaging



Mammography

Positron emission mammography


Tomosynthesis
Xeromammography
Galactography
Breast MRI
Breast ultrasound

Automated whole-breast ultrasound


Scintimammography
Tactile imaging





Other



Breast cancer screening
Breast self-examination












v
t
e


Operations/surgeries and other procedures of the skin and subcutaneous tissue (ICD-9-CM V3 86, ICD-10-PCS 0H)



Skin







Escharotomy
Suture
Skin grafting
Mohs surgery
Free flap
Rotation flap
TRAM flap
Electrodesiccation and curettage
Cryosurgery
Skin biopsy








Rhytidectomy
Liposuction
Z-plasty








Medical imaging
Wood's lamp








Hair



Hair transplantation









Authority control



LCCN: sh85130766
GND: 4009987-8
NDL: 00562311











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Surgery&oldid=817480780"					Categories: SurgeryHidden categories: Articles with inconsistent citation formatsCS1 Italian-language sources (it)CS1 errors: datesArticles needing additional references from June 2016All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from December 2010Articles containing Greek-language textArticles containing Latin-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2016Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers