See also: Sustainable engineering and Ecological design
Sustainable design (also called environmentally sustainable design, environmentally conscious design, etc.) is the philosophy of designing physical objects, the built environment, and services to comply with the principles of social, economic, and ecological sustainability.[1]



Contents


1 Theory

1.1 Conceptual problems

1.1.1 Diminishing returns
1.1.2 Unsustainable investment
1.1.3 Waste prevention


1.2 Sustainable design principles

1.2.1 Bill of Rights for the Planet




2 Applications
3 Examples

3.1 Beauty and sustainable design
3.2 Emotionally durable design
3.3 Sustainable architecture
3.4 Sustainable landscape and garden design
3.5 Sustainable agriculture
3.6 Domestic machinery and furniture

3.6.1 Improvements to heating, cooling, ventilation and water heating


3.7 Energy sector
3.8 Design for sustainable manufacturing
3.9 Water sector


4 Terminology
5 Sustainable technologies
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Theory[edit]
The intention of sustainable design is to "eliminate negative environmental impact completely through skillful, sensitive design".[1] Manifestations of sustainable design require renewable resources, impact the environment minimally, and connect people with the natural environment.
Great design is sustainable design: Rather than considering green building design as an externality, architects must think about it as a set of principles for great design. This includes better user experience and comfort, doing more with less to enable the building to easily achieve peak performance, and maximizing the effectives of durable, quality materials. Rather than the well-known edict “form follows function,” it’s time to think “form follows environment.” [2]
Beyond the "elimination of negative environmental impact", sustainable design must create projects that are meaningful innovations that can shift behaviour. A dynamic balance between economy and society, intended to generate long-term relationships between user and object/service and finally to be respectful and mindful of the environmental and social differences.[3]
Conceptual problems[edit]
Diminishing returns[edit]
The principle that all directions of progress run out, ending with diminishing returns, is evident in the typical 'S' curve of the technology life cycle and in the useful life of any system as discussed in industrial ecology and life cycle assessment. Diminishing returns are the result of reaching natural limits. Common business management practice is to read diminishing returns in any direction of effort as an indication of diminishing opportunity, the potential for accelerating decline and a signal to seek new opportunities elsewhere.[citation needed] (see also: law of diminishing returns, marginal utility and Jevons paradox.)
Unsustainable investment[edit]
A problem arises when the limits of a resource are hard to see, so increasing investment in response to diminishing returns may seem profitable as in the Tragedy of the Commons, but may lead to a collapse. This problem of increasing investment in diminishing resources has also been studied in relation to the causes of civilization collapse by Joseph Tainter among others.[4] This natural error in investment policy contributed to the collapse of both the Roman and Mayan, among others. Relieving over-stressed resources requires reducing pressure on them, not continually increasing it whether more efficiently or not.[5]
Waste prevention[edit]




Plans for Floriade 2012 in Venlo, the Netherlands: "The Greenest Building in the Netherlands - no external fuel, electricity, water or sewage."


Negative Effects of Waste
About 80 million tonnes of waste in total are generated in the U.K. alone, for example, each year.[6] And with reference to only household waste, between 1991/92 and 2007/08, each person in England generated an average of 1.35 pounds of waste per day.[7]
Experience has now shown that there is no completely safe method of waste disposal. All forms of disposal have negative impacts on the environment, public health, and local economies. Landfills have contaminated drinking water. Garbage burned in incinerators has poisoned air, soil, and water. The majority of water treatment systems change the local ecology. Attempts to control or manage wastes after they are produced fail to eliminate environmental impacts.
The toxic components of household products pose serious health risks and aggravate the trash problem. In the U.S., about eight pounds in every ton of household garbage contains toxic materials, such as heavy metals like nickel, lead, cadmium, and mercury from batteries, and organic compounds found in pesticides and consumer products, such as air freshener sprays, nail polish, cleaners, and other products.[8] When burned or buried, toxic materials also pose a serious threat to public health and the environment.
The only way to avoid environmental harm from waste is to prevent its generation. Pollution prevention means changing the way activities are conducted and eliminating the source of the problem. It does not mean doing without, but doing differently. For example, preventing waste pollution from litter caused by disposable beverage containers does not mean doing without beverages; it just means using refillable bottles.
Waste prevention strategies In planning for facilities, a comprehensive design strategy is needed for preventing generation of solid waste. A good garbage prevention strategy would require that everything brought into a facility be recycled for reuse or recycled back into the environment through biodegradation. This would mean a greater reliance on natural materials or products that are compatible with the environment.
Any resource-related development is going to have two basic sources of solid waste — materials purchased and used by the facility and those brought into the facility by visitors. The following waste prevention strategies apply to both, although different approaches will be needed for implementation:[9]

use products that minimize waste and are nontoxic
compost or anaerobically digest biodegradable wastes
reuse materials onsite or collect suitable materials for offsite recycling
consuming less resources means creating less waste, therefore it reduces the impact on the environment.

Sustainable design principles[edit]




The California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, California, is a sustainable building designed by Renzo Piano. It opened on September 27, 2008






One Central Park, Sydney


While the practical application varies among disciplines , some common principles are as follows:

Low-impact materials: choose non-toxic, sustainably produced or recycled materials which require little energy to process
Energy efficiency: use manufacturing processes and produce products which require less energy
Emotionally durable design: reducing consumption and waste of resources by increasing the durability of relationships between people and products, through design
Design for reuse and recycling: "Products, processes, and systems should be designed for performance in a commercial 'afterlife'."[10]
Design impact measures for total carbon footprint and life-cycle assessment for any resource used are increasingly required and available.^[11] Many are complex, but some give quick and accurate whole-earth estimates of impacts. One measure estimates any spending as consuming an average economic share of global energy use of 8,000 BTU (8,400 kJ) per dollar and producing CO2 at the average rate of 0.57 kg of CO2 per dollar (1995 dollars US) from DOE figures.[12]
Sustainable design standards and project design guides are also increasingly available and are vigorously being developed by a wide array of private organizations and individuals. There is also a large body of new methods emerging from the rapid development of what has become known as 'sustainability science' promoted by a wide variety of educational and governmental institutions.
Biomimicry: "redesigning industrial systems on biological lines ... enabling the constant reuse of materials in continuous closed cycles..."[13]
Service substitution: shifting the mode of consumption from personal ownership of products to provision of services which provide similar functions, e.g., from a private automobile to a carsharing service. Such a system promotes minimal resource use per unit of consumption (e.g., per trip driven).[14]
Renewable resource: materials should come from nearby (local or bioregional), sustainably managed renewable sources that can be composted when their usefulness has been exhausted.
Robust eco-design: robust design principles are applied to the design of a pollution sources.[15]

Bill of Rights for the Planet[edit]
A model of the new design principles necessary for sustainability is exemplified by the "Bill of Rights for the Planet" or "Hannover Principles" - developed by William McDonough Architects for EXPO 2000 that was held in Hannover, Germany.[citation needed]

The Bill of Rights:


Insist on the right of humanity and nature to co-exist in a healthy, supportive, diverse, and sustainable conditions.
Recognize Interdependence. The elements of human design interact with and depend on the natural world, with broad and diverse implications at every scale. Expand design considerations to recognizing even distant effects.
Respect relationships between spirit and matter. Consider all aspects of human settlement including community, dwelling, industry, and trade in terms of existing and evolving connections between spiritual and material consciousness.
Accept responsibility for the consequences of design decisions upon human well-being, the viability of natural systems, and their right to co-exist.
Create safe objects of long-term value. Do not burden future generations with requirements for maintenance or vigilant administration of potential danger due to the careless creations of products, processes, or standards.
Eliminate the concept of waste. Evaluate and optimize the full life-cycle of products and processes, to approach the state of natural systems in which there is no waste.
Rely on natural energy flows. Human designs should, like the living world, derive their creative forces from perpetual solar income. Incorporating this energy efficiently and safely for responsible use.
Understand the limitations of design. No human creation lasts forever and design does not solve all problems. Those who create and plan should practice humility in the face of nature. Treat nature as a model and mentor, not an inconvenience to be evaded or controlled.
Seek constant improvement by the sharing of knowledge. Encourage direct and open communication between colleagues, patrons, manufacturers and users to link long term sustainable considerations with ethical responsibility, and re-establish the integral relationship between natural processes and human activity.

These principles were adopted by the World Congress of the International Union of Architects (UIA) in June 1993 at the American Institute of Architects' (AIA) Expo 93 in Chicago. Further, the AIA and UIA signed a "Declaration of Interdependence for a Sustainable Future." In summary, the declaration states that today's society is degrading its environment and that the AIA, UIA, and their members are committed to:

Placing environmental and social sustainability at the core of practices and professional responsibilities
Developing and continually improving practices, procedures, products, services, and standards for sustainable design
Educating the building industry, clients, and the general public about the importance of sustainable design
Working to change policies, regulations, and standards in government and business so that sustainable design will become the fully supported standard practice
Bringing the existing built environment up to sustainable design standards.

In addition, the Interprofessional Council on Environmental Design (ICED), a coalition of architectural, landscape architectural, and engineering organizations, developed a vision statement in an attempt to foster a team approach to sustainable design. ICED states: The ethics, education and practices of our professions will be directed to shape a sustainable future. . . . To achieve this vision we will join . . . as a multidisciplinary partnership."
These activities are an indication that the concept of sustainable design is being supported on a global and interprofessional scale and that the ultimate goal is to become more environmentally responsive. The world needs facilities that are more energy efficient and that promote conservation and recycling of natural and economic resources.[16]
Applications[edit]
Applications of this philosophy range from the microcosm — small objects for everyday use, through to the macrocosm — buildings, cities, and the Earth's physical surface. It is a philosophy that can be applied in the fields of architecture, landscape architecture, urban design, urban planning, engineering, graphic design, industrial design, interior design, fashion design and human-computer interaction.
Sustainable design is mostly a general reaction to global environmental crises, the rapid growth of economic activity and human population, depletion of natural resources, damage to ecosystems, and loss of biodiversity.[17] In 2013, eco architecture writer Bridgette Meinhold surveyed emergency and long-term sustainable housing projects that were developed in response to these crises in her book, “Urgent Architecture: 40 Sustainable Housing Solutions for a Changing World.”[18][19] Featured projects focus on green building, sustainable design, eco-friendly materials, affordability, material reuse, and humanitarian relief. Construction methods and materials include repurposed shipping containers, straw bale construction, sandbag homes, and floating homes.[20]
The limits of sustainable design are reducing. Whole earth impacts are beginning to be considered because growth in goods and services is consistently outpacing gains in efficiency. As a result, the net effect of sustainable design to date has been to simply improve the efficiency of rapidly increasing impacts. The present approach, which focuses on the efficiency of delivering individual goods and services, does not solve this problem. The basic dilemmas include: the increasing complexity of efficiency improvements; the difficulty of implementing new technologies in societies built around old ones; that physical impacts of delivering goods and services are not localized, but are distributed throughout the economies; and that the scale of resource use is growing and not stabilizing.
Examples[edit]
Beauty and sustainable design[edit]
Because standards of sustainable design appear to emphasize ethics over aesthetics, some designers and critics have complained that it lacks inspiration. Pritzker Architecture Prize winner Frank Gehry has called green building "bogus,"[21] and National Design Awards winner Peter Eisenman has dismissed it as "having nothing to do with architecture."[22] In 2009, The American Prospect asked whether "well-designed green architecture" is an "oxymoron."[23]
Others claim that such criticism of sustainable design is misguided. A leading advocate for this alternative view is architect Lance Hosey, whose book The Shape of Green: Aesthetics, Ecology, and Design (2012) was the first dedicated to the relationships between sustainability and beauty. Hosey argues not just that sustainable design needs to be aesthetically appealing in order to be successful, but also that following the principles of sustainability to their logical conclusion requires reimagining the shape of everything designed, creating things of even greater beauty. Reviewers have suggested that the ideas in The Shape of Green could "revolutionize what it means to be sustainable."[24] Small and large buildings are beginning to successfully incorporate principles of sustainability into award-winning designs. Examples include One Central Park and the Science Faculty building, UTS.
Emotionally durable design[edit]




Stain Teacups: Bethan Laura Wood, 2009


According to Jonathan Chapman of Carnegie Mellon University, USA, emotionally durable design reduces the consumption and waste of natural resources by increasing the resilience of relationships established between consumers and products."[25] Essentially, product replacement is delayed by strong emotional ties.[26] In his book, Emotionally Durable Design: Objects, Experiences & Empathy, Chapman describes how "the process of consumption is, and has always been, motivated by complex emotional drivers, and is about far more than just the mindless purchasing of newer and shinier things; it is a journey towards the ideal or desired self, that through cyclical loops of desire and disappointment, becomes a seemingly endless process of serial destruction".[27] Therefore, a product requires an attribute, or number of attributes, which extend beyond utilitarianism.[28]
According to Chapman, 'emotional durability' can be achieved through consideration of the following five elements:

Narrative: How users share a unique personal history with the product.
Consciousness: How the product is perceived as autonomous and in possession of its own free will.
Attachment: Can a user be made to feel a strong emotional connection to a product?
Fiction: The product inspires interactions and connections beyond just the physical relationship.
Surface: How the product ages and develops character through time and use.

As a strategic approach, "emotionally durable design provides a useful language to describe the contemporary relevance of designing responsible, well made, tactile products which the user can get to know and assign value to in the long-term."[29] According to Hazel Clark and David Brody of Parsons The New School for Design in New York, “emotionally durable design is a call for professionals and students alike to prioritise the relationships between design and its users, as a way of developing more sustainable attitudes to, and in, design things.”[30]


Play media


Discussion by Julianna Osk Hafberg of Likka Fashion Brand at the Reykjavík Art Museum


Sustainable architecture[edit]
Main article: Sustainable architecture




Sustainable building design


Sustainable architecture is the design of sustainable buildings. Sustainable architecture attempts to reduce the collective environmental impacts during the production of building components, during the construction process, as well as during the lifecycle of the building (heating, electricity use, carpet cleaning etc.) This design practice emphasizes efficiency of heating and cooling systems; alternative energy sources such as solar hot water, appropriate building siting, reused or recycled building materials; on-site power generation - solar technology, ground source heat pumps, wind power; rainwater harvesting for gardening, washing and aquifer recharge; and on-site waste management such as green roofs that filter and control stormwater runoff. This requires close cooperation of the design team, the architects, the engineers, and the client at all project stages, from site selection, scheme formation, material selection and procurement, to project implementation.[31]
Sustainable architects design with sustainable living in mind.[32] Sustainable vs green design is the challenge that designs not only reflect healthy processes and uses but are powered by renewable energies and site specific resources. A test for sustainable design is — can the design function for its intended use without fossil fuel — unplugged. This challenge suggests architects and planners design solutions that can function without pollution rather than just reducing pollution. As technology progresses in architecture and design theories and as examples are built and tested, architects will soon be able to create not only passive, null-emission buildings, but rather be able to integrate the entire power system into the building design. In 2004 the 59 home housing community, the Solar Settlement, and a 60,000 sq ft (5,600 m2) integrated retail, commercial and residential building, the Sun Ship, were completed by architect Rolf Disch in Freiburg, Germany. The Solar Settlement is the first housing community worldwide in which every home, all 59, produce a positive energy balance.[33]
An essential element of Sustainable Building Design is indoor environmental quality including air quality, illumination, thermal conditions, and acoustics. The integrated design of the indoor environment is essential and must be part of the integrated design of the entire structure. ASHRAE Guideline 10-2011 addresses the interactions among indoor environmental factors and goes beyond traditional standards.[34]
Concurrently, the recent movements of New Urbanism and New Classical Architecture promote a sustainable approach towards construction, that appreciates and develops smart growth, architectural tradition and classical design.[35][36] This in contrast to modernist and globally uniform architecture, as well as leaning against solitary housing estates and suburban sprawl.[37] Both trends started in the 1980s. The Driehaus Architecture Prize is an award that recognizes efforts in New Urbanism and New Classical Architecture, and is endowed with a prize money twice as high as that of the modernist Pritzker Prize.[38]
Sustainable landscape and garden design[edit]
Main articles: Sustainable landscape architecture, Sustainable landscaping, and Sustainable gardening
Sustainable landscape architecture is a category of sustainable design and energy-efficient landscaping concerned with the planning and design of outdoor space. Plants and materials may be bought from local growers to reduce energy used in transportation. Design techniques include planting trees to shade buildings from the sun or protect them from wind, using local materials, and on-site composting and chipping not only to reduce green waste hauling but to increase organic matter and therefore carbon in the soil.
Some designers and gardeners such as Beth Chatto also use drought-resistant plants in arid areas (xeriscaping) and elsewhere so that water is not taken from local landscapes and habitats for irrigation. Water from building roofs may be collected in rain gardens so that the groundwater is recharged, instead of rainfall becoming surface runoff and increasing the risk of flooding.
Areas of the garden and landscape can also be allowed to grow wild to encourage bio-diversity. Native animals may also be encouraged in many other ways: by plants which provide food such as nectar and pollen for insects, or roosting or nesting habitats such as trees, or habitats such as ponds for amphibians and aquatic insects. Pesticides, especially persistent pesticides, must be avoided to avoid killing wildlife.
Soil fertility can be managed sustainably by the use of many layers of vegetation from trees to ground-cover plants and mulches to increase organic matter and therefore earthworms and mycorrhiza; nitrogen-fixing plants instead of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers; and sustainably harvested seaweed extract to replace micronutrients.
Sustainable landscapes and gardens can be productive as well as ornamental, growing food, firewood and craft materials from beautiful places.
Sustainable landscape approaches and labels include organic farming and growing, permaculture, agroforestry, forest gardens, agroecology, vegan organic gardening, ecological gardening and climate-friendly gardening.
Sustainable agriculture[edit]

Main: Organic farming

Sustainable agriculture adheres to three main goals:

Environmental Health,
Economic Profitability,
Social and Economic Equity.

A variety of philosophies, policies and practices have contributed to these goals. People in many different capacities, from farmers to consumers, have shared this vision and contributed to it. Despite the diversity of people and perspectives, the following themes commonly weave through definitions of sustainable agriculture.
There are strenuous discussions — among others by the agricultural sector and authorities — if existing pesticide protocols and methods of soil conservation adequately protect topsoil and wildlife. Doubt has risen if these are sustainable, and if agrarian reforms would permit an efficient agriculture with fewer pesticides, therefore reducing the damage to the ecosystem.
For more information on the subject of sustainable agriculture: "UC Davis: Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education Program".[39]
Domestic machinery and furniture[edit]
Main article: Home appliances
Automobiles, home appliances and furnitures can be designed for repair and disassembly (for recycling), and constructed from recyclable materials such as steel, aluminum and glass, and renewable materials, such as Zelfo, wood and plastics from natural feedstocks. Careful selection of materials and manufacturing processes can often create products comparable in price and performance to non-sustainable products. Even mild design efforts can greatly increase the sustainable content of manufactured items.
Improvements to heating, cooling, ventilation and water heating[edit]


Absorption refrigerator
Annualized geothermal solar
Earth cooling tubes
Geothermal heat pump
Heat recovery ventilation
Hot water heat recycling
Passive cooling
Renewable heat
Seasonal thermal energy storage (STES)
Solar air conditioning
Solar hot water


Energy sector[edit]
Main articles: Solar energy and Alternative energy
See also: Solar thermal collector, Solar panel, and Passive solar building design
Sustainable technology in the energy sector is based on utilizing renewable sources of energy such as solar, wind, hydro, bioenergy, geothermal, and hydrogen. Wind energy is the world's fastest growing energy source; it has been in use for centuries in Europe and more recently in the United States and other nations. Wind energy is captured through the use of wind turbines that generate and transfer electricity for utilities, homeowners and remote villages. Solar power can be harnessed through photovoltaics, concentrating solar, or solar hot water and is also a rapidly growing energy source.[40]
The availability, potential, and feasibility of primary renewable energy resources must be analyzed early in the planning process as part of a comprehensive energy plan. The plan must justify energy demand and supply and assess the actual costs and benefits to the local, regional, and global environments. Responsible energy use is fundamental to sustainable development and a sustainable future. Energy management must balance justifiable energy demand with appropriate energy supply. The process couples energy awareness, energy conservation, and energy efficiency with the use of primary renewable energy resources.[41]
Design for sustainable manufacturing[edit]
Sustainable manufacturing can be defined as the creation of a manufactured product through a concurrent improvement in the resulting effect on factory and product sustainability. The concept of sustainable manufacturing demands a renewed design of production systems in order to condition the related sustainability on product life cycle and Factory operations.

Designing sustainable production systems imply, on the one hand, the analysis and optimization of intra-factory aspects that are related to manufacturing plants. Such aspects can regard the resource consumption restrain, the process efficiency, the ergonomics for the factory workers, the elimination of hazardous substances, the minimization of factory emissions and waste as well as internal emissions, the integrated management of information in the production facilities, and the technological updating of machines and plants.
Other inter-factories aspects concern the sustainable design of manufactured products, product chain dematerialisation, management of the background and foreground supply chains, support of circular economy paradigm, and the labelling for sustainability.

Water sector[edit]
Main articles: Reclaimed water, Rainwater harvesting, and Stormwater harvesting




A 35,003 litre rainwater harvesting tank in Kerala


Sustainable water technologies have become an important industry segment with several companies now providing important and scalable solutions to supply water in a sustainable manner.
Beyond the use of certain technologies, Sustainable Design in Water Management also consists very importantly in correct implementation of concepts. Among one of these principal concepts is the fact normally in developed countries 100% of water destined for consumption, that is not necessarily for drinking purposes, is of potable water quality. This concept of differentiating qualities of water for different purposes has been called "fit-for-purpose".[42] This more rational use of water achieves several economies, that are not only related to water itself, but also the consumption of energy, as to achieve water of drinking quality can be extremely energy intensive for several reasons.
Terminology[edit]
In some countries the term sustainable design is known as ecodesign, green design or environmental design. Victor Papanek, embraced social design and social quality and ecological quality, but did not explicitly combine these areas of design concern in one term. Sustainable design and design for sustainability are more common terms, including the triple bottom line (people, planet and profit).[citation needed]
In the EU, the concept of sustainable design is referred to as ecodesign. Little discussions have however taken place over the importance of this concept in the run-up to the circular economy package, that the European Commission will be tabling by the end of 2015. To this effect, an Ecothis.EU campaign was launched to raise awareness about the economic and environmental consequences of not including eco-design as part of the circular economy package.[43]
Sustainable technologies[edit]
Sustainable technologies use less energy, fewer limited resources, do not deplete natural resources, do not directly or indirectly pollute the environment, and can be reused or recycled at the end of their useful life.[44] There is significant overlap with appropriate technology, which emphasizes the suitability of technology to the context, in particular considering the needs of people in developing countries. However, the most appropriate technology may not be the most sustainable one; and a sustainable technology may have high cost or maintenance requirements that make it unsuitable as an "appropriate technology," as that term is commonly used.
See also[edit]


Sustainable development portal
Energy portal
Design portal




Active daylighting
Active solar
Agroforestry
BREEAM
Bright green environmentalism
Building Information Modeling
Building services engineering
Circles of Sustainability
Climate-friendly gardening
Cool roof
Cradle to Cradle
Daylighting
Earth embassy
Eco-innovation
Ecodistrict
Ecological Restoration
Excellence in Design for Greater Efficiencies
Ecosa Institute
Ecosystem services
Energy plus house
Environmentally friendly
Green chemistry
Green library
Green transport
History of passive solar building design
Landscape ecology
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
List of energy storage projects
List of low-energy building techniques
List of sustainable agriculture topics
Metadesign
Passive solar
Passive solar design
Principles of Intelligent Urbanism
Renewable resource
Source reduction
Superinsulation
Sustainable art
Terreform ONE
Vertical garden
Water conservation
Water Management
Watershed
Zero energy building


References[edit]



^ a b McLennan, J. F. (2004), The Philosophy of Sustainable Design
^ "Architect and Interiors India" (PDF). 
^ "Sustainable Design Research". 
^ JA Tainter 1988 The Collapse of Complex Societies Cambridge Univ. Press ISBN 978-0521386739
^ Buzz Holling 1973 Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems
^ Waste and recycling, DEFRA
^ Household waste, Office for National Statistics.
^ US EPA, "Expocast"
^ Various. "Guiding Principles of Sustainable Design." Chapter 9: Waste Prevention.
^ Anastas, P. L. and Zimmerman, J. B. (2003). "Through the 12 principles of green engineering". Environmental Science and Technology. March 1. 95-101A.
^ D. Vallero and C. Brasier (2008), Sustainable Design: The Science of Sustainability and Green Engineering. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, ISBN 0470130628.
^ US DOE 20 yr Global Product & Energy Study.
^ Paul Hawken, Amory B. Lovins, and L. Hunter Lovins (1999). Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next Industrial Revolution. Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-35316-8
^ Ryan, Chris (2006). "Dematerializing Consumption through Service Substitution is a Design Challenge". Journal of Industrial Ecology. 4(1). doi:10.1162/108819800569230
^ Ben-Gal I., Katz R. and Bukchin J., "Robust Eco-Design: A New Application for Quality Engineering", IIE Transactions, Vol. 40 (10), p. 907 - 918.
^ Various. "Guiding Principles of Sustainable Design". THE PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABILITY.
^ Fan Shu-Yang, Bill Freedman, and Raymond Cote (2004). "Principles and practice of ecological design". Environmental Reviews. 12: 97–112.
^ Meinhold, Bridgette. Urgent Architecture: 40 Sustainable Housing Solutions for a Changing World. W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. Retrieved 26 May 2014. 
^ Vidal, John. "Humanitarian intent: Urgent Architecture from ecohomes to shelters – in pictures". theguardian.com. Retrieved 26 May 2014. 
^ "URGENT ARCHITECTURE: Inhabitat Interviews Author Bridgette Meinhold About Her New Book". YouTube.com. Retrieved 26 May 2014. 
^ Michael Arndt, "Architect Gehry on LEED Buildings: Humbug", Bloomberg Businessweek, April 07, 2010]
^ Intercontinental Curatorial Project, Interview with Peter Eisenman, June 18, 2009
^ Kriston Capps, "Green Building Blues," The American Prospect, February 12, 2009
^ Claire Easley. "Not Pretty? Then It's Not Green". Builder. 
^ Chapman, J., ‘Design for [Emotional] Durability’, Design Issues, vol xxv, Issue 4, Autumn, pp29-35, 2009 doi:10.1162/desi.2009.25.4.29
^ Page, Tom (2014). "Product attachment and replacement: implications for sustainable design" (PDF). Int. J. Sustainable Design. Retrieved 9/1/15.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Chapman, J., Emotionally Durable Design: Objects, Experiences and Empathy, Earthscan, London, 2005
^ Page, Tom (2014). "Product attachment and replacement: implications for sustainable design" (PDF). Int. J. Sustainable Design. Retrieved 09/01/15.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Lacey, E. (2009). Contemporary ceramic design for meaningful interaction and emotional durability: A case study. International Journal of Design, 3(2), 87-92
^ Clark, H. & Brody, D., Design Studies: A Reader, Berg, New York, US, 2009, p531 ISBN 9781847882363
^ Ji Yan and Plainiotis Stellios (2006): Design for Sustainability. Beijing: China Architecture and Building Press. ISBN 7-112-08390-7
^ Holm, Ivar (2006). Ideas and Beliefs in Architecture and Industrial design: How attitudes, orientations, and underlying assumptions shape the built environment. Oslo School of Architecture and Design. ISBN 82-547-0174-1.
^ "Rolf Disch - SolarArchitektur". more-elements.com. 
^ ASHRAE Guideline 10-2011: "Interactions Affecting the Achievement of Acceptable Indoor Environments"
^ "Charter of the New Urbanism". cnu.org. 
^ "Beauty, Humanism, Continuity between Past and Future". Traditional Architecture Group. Retrieved 23 March 2014. 
^ Issue Brief: Smart-Growth: Building Livable Communities. American Institute of Architects. Retrieved on 2014-03-23.
^ "Driehaus Prize". Together, the $200,000 Driehaus Prize and the $50,000 Reed Award represent the most significant recognition for classicism in the contemporary built environment.. Notre Dame School of Architecture. Retrieved 23 March 2014. 
^ Feenstra, G (December 1997). What Is Sustainable Architecture?. Retrieved June 27, 2009, UC SAREP Web site
^ "Renewable Energy Policy Project & CREST Center for Renewable Energy and Sustainable Technology"
^ Various. "Guiding Principles of Sustainable Design". Chapter 7: Energy Management.
^ "Water recycling & alternative water sources". health.vic.gov.au. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. 
^ "The Ecothis.eu campaign website". ecothis.eu. Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Sustainable Roadmap - Open Innovation". connect.innovateuk.org. 2012. Retrieved December 3, 2012. 



External links[edit]

Sustainability in the Desert: A review of Sustainable Design in the Middle East. Via Carboun
Chris Hendrickson, Noellette Conway-Schempf, Lester Lave and Francis McMichael. "Introduction to Green Design."
Material Review: One to Watch








v
t
e


Design






Outline
Portal
Designer










Disciplines







Communication
design



Advertising
Book design
Corporate design
Exhibit design
Film title design
Graphic design

Motion
Postage stamp design
Print design


Illustration
Information design
Instructional design
News design
Photography
Retail design
Signage / Traffic sign design
Typography / Type design
Video design
Visual merchandising





Environmental
design



Architecture
Architectural lighting design
Building design

Passive solar


Ecological design
Environmental impact design
Garden design

Computer-aided


Healthy community design
Hotel design
Interior architecture
Interior design

EID


Keyline design
Landscape architecture

Sustainable


Landscape design
Spatial design
Urban design





Industrial
design



Automotive design
Automotive suspension design
CMF design
Corrugated box design
Electric guitar design
Furniture design

Sustainable


Hardware interface design
Motorcycle design
Packaging and labeling
Photographic lens design
Product design
Production design
Sensory design
Service design





Interaction
design



Experience design

EED


Game design

Level design
Video game design


Hardware interface design
Icon design
Immersive design
Information design
Sonic interaction design
User experience design
User interface design
Web design





Other
applied arts



Public art design
Ceramic / glass design
Fashion design

Costume design
Jewelry design


Floral design
Game art design
Property design
Scenic design
Sound design
Stage/set lighting design
Textile design





Other
design
& engineering



Algorithm design
Boiler design
Conceptual design
Database design
Drug design
Electrical system design
Experimental design
Filter design
Job design
Integrated circuit design

Circuit design
Physical design
Power network design


Mechanism design
Nuclear weapon design
Nucleic acid design
Organization design
Process design
Processor design
Protein design
Research design
Social design
Software design
Spacecraft design
Strategic design
Systems design
















Approaches






Activity-centered
Adaptive web
Affective
Brainstorming
By committee
By contract
C-K theory
Closure
Co-design
Concept-oriented
Configuration
Contextual
Continuous
Cradle-to-cradle
Creative problem-solving
Creativity techniques
Critical

Design fiction


Defensive
Design–bid–build
Design–build

architect-led


Domain-driven
Ecodesign
Energy neutral
Engineering design process

Probabilistic design


Error-tolerant
Fault-tolerant
Framework-oriented
For assembly
For behaviour change
For manufacturability
For Six Sigma
For testing
For X
Functional
Generative
Geodesign
High-level
Integrated
Integrated topside
Intelligence-based
Iterative
KISS principle
Low-level
Metadesign
Mind mapping
Modular
New Wave
Object-oriented
Open
Parametric
Participatory
Platform-based
Policy-based
Process-centered
Public interest
Rational
Regenerative
Reliability engineering
Research-based
Responsibility-driven
RWD
Safe-life
Sustainable
Systemic

SOD


Tableless web
Theory of constraints
Top-down and bottom-up
Transformation
Transgenerational
TRIZ
Universal

Design for All


Usage-centered
Use-centered
User-centered

Empathic


User innovation
Value-driven
Value sensitive

Privacy by




Design choice
computing
controls
flow
leadership
management
marker
methods
pattern
research
science
strategy
theory
thinking
















Tools
Intellectual property
Organizations
Awards










Tools



AAD
Architectural model
Blueprint
Comprehensive layout
CAD

CAID
Virtual home design software


CAutoD
Design quality indicator
Electronic design automation
Flowchart
Mockup
Product design specification
Prototype
Sketch
Storyboard
Technical drawing
Web design program
Website wireframe





Intellectual
property



Community design
Design around
Design patent
Fashion design copyright
Geschmacksmuster
Industrial design rights

European Union







Organizations



AIGA
Chartered Society of Designers
Design and Industries Association
Design Council
International Forum Design
The Design Society
Design Research Society





Awards



European Design Award
German Design Award
Good Design Award (Chicago)
Good Design Award (Japan)
Graphex
IF product design award
James Dyson Award
Prince Philip Designers Prize
















Related topics






Aesthetics
Agile
Concept art
Creative industries
Cultural icon
.design
Enterprise architecture
Futures studies
Innovation Management
Intelligent design
Lean Startup
New product development
OODA Loop
Philosophy of design
Process simulation
Slow design
STEAM fields
Unintelligent design
Visualization
Wicked problem


Design brief
change
classic
director
education
elements and principles
engineer
firm
history
knowledge
language
life
load
museum
paradigm
rationale
review
specification
studio
technology











Commons
Wikibooks
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Wiktionary












v
t
e


Sustainability



Principles



Anthropocene
Earth system governance
Ecological modernization
Environmental governance
Environmentalism
Global catastrophic risk
Human impact on the environment
Planetary boundaries
Social sustainability
Stewardship
Sustainable development





Consumption



Anthropization
Anti-consumerism
Earth Overshoot Day
Ecological footprint
Ethical
Over-consumption
Simple living
Sustainability advertising
Sustainability brand
Sustainability marketing myopia
Sustainable
Systemic change resistance
Tragedy of the commons





Population



Birth control
Family planning
Control
Overpopulation
Zero growth





Technology



Appropriate
Environmental
Sustainable





Biodiversity



Biosecurity
Biosphere
Conservation biology
Deep ecology
Endangered species
Holocene extinction
Invasive species





Energy



Carbon footprint
Climate change mitigation
Conservation
Descent
Efficiency
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out
Peak oil
Renewable
Energy poverty





Food



Forest gardening
Local
Permaculture
Security
Sustainable agriculture
Sustainable fishery
Urban horticulture





Water



Conservation
Crisis
Efficiency
Footprint
Reclaimed





Accountability



Sustainability accounting
Sustainability measurement
Sustainability metrics and indices
Sustainability reporting
Standards and certification
Sustainable yield





Applications



Advertising
Architecture
Art
Business
City
College programs
Community
Design
Ecovillage
Education for Sustainable Development
Fashion
Gardening
Geopark
Green marketing
Industries
Landscape architecture
Living
Low-impact development
Sustainable market
Organizations
Packaging
Practices
Procurement
Tourism
Transport
Urban drainage systems
Urban infrastructure
Urbanism





Management



Environmental
Fisheries
Forest
Materials
Natural resource
Planetary
Waste





Agreements



UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972)
Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983)
Our Common Future (1987)
Earth Summit (1992)
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
Agenda 21 (1992)
Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
ICPD Programme of Action (1994)
Earth Charter
Lisbon Principles
UN Millennium Declaration (2000)
Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg)
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012)
Sustainable Development Goals








Category
Lists
Outline
Portal
Science
Studies
Degrees












v
t
e


Environmental humanities



Art



Crop art
Environmental art
Environmental sculpture
Land art
Landscape painting
Photography

conservation
landscape
nature
wildlife


Sculpture trail
Site-specific art
Sustainable art








Culture



Cultural ecology
Cultural landscape
Ecolinguistics
Ecological anthropology
Ecosemiotics
Environmental anthropology
Ethnoecology
Traditional ecological knowledge





Literature



Ecocomposition
Ecocriticism
Ecopoetry
Geocriticism
Nature writing
Outdoor literature
Zoopoetics





Philosophy



Aesthetics of nature
Constructivism
Cosmology
Critical realism
Deep ecology
Ecofeminism
Ecophenomenology
Ecosophy
Environmental ethics
Environmental justice
Environmental philosophy
Materialism
Natural philosophy
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of science
Social ecology





Religion



Ecotheology
Environmental theology
Religion and environmentalism
Spiritual ecology
Stewardship





Other



Anthrozoology
Ecomusicology
Environmental communication
Environmental education

adult
arts-based


Environmental history
Environmental interpretation
Environmental journalism
Environmental law
Outdoor education
Psychogeography
Thematic interpretation





Related



Animal studies
Bioethics
Biophilia hypothesis
Do it yourself (ethic)
Natural history (museums)
Popular science
Property theory (common property)
Science, technology and society

science studies


Simple living
Slow food
Spirit of place
Sustainability studies





Applied



Arts and Crafts movement
Acoustic ecology
Biomimicry
Ecodesign
Ecological design
Ecomuseum
Educational trail
Environmental design
Landscape architecture

assessment
planning


Nature center
New Urbanism
Sustainable architecture
Sustainable design
Sustainable fashion
Themed walk
Urban acupuncture








 Environment portal
 Category
 Commons
Journals
Degrees
Institutions











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sustainable_design&oldid=814526701"					Categories: Sustainable designHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2012Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017