"Swampland" redirects here. For the theoretical-physics concept, see Swampland (physics). For other uses, see Swamp (disambiguation).




A freshwater swamp in Florida.






A black alder swamp in Germany.






Mass deforestation causes the appearance of swamps. Belorucheiskaya (Russia) forestry railway in 1977.


A swamp is a wetland that is forested.[1] Many swamps occur along large rivers where they are critically dependent upon natural water level fluctuations.[2] Other swamps occur on the shores of large lakes.[3] Some swamps have hammocks, or dry-land protrusions, covered by aquatic vegetation, or vegetation that tolerates periodic inundation.[4] The two main types of swamp are "true" or swamp forests and "transitional" or shrub swamps. In the boreal regions of Canada, the word swamp is colloquially used for what is more correctly termed a bog or muskeg. The water of a swamp may be fresh water, brackish water or seawater. Some of the world's largest swamps are found along major rivers such as the Amazon, the Mississippi, and the Congo.[5]



Contents


1 Geomorphology and hydrology
2 Draining
3 Land value, productivity and conservation
4 Notable examples

4.1 Africa
4.2 Asia
4.3 North America


5 List of major swamps

5.1 Africa
5.2 Asia
5.3 Europe
5.4 North America
5.5 South America


6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Geomorphology and hydrology[edit]
Swamps are characterized by slow-moving to stagnant waters. They are usually associated with adjacent rivers or lakes. Swamps are features of areas with very low topographic relief. Swamps generate coal as rock.
Draining[edit]
Historically, humans have drained swamps to provide additional land for agriculture and to reduce the threat of diseases borne by swamp insects and similar animals[clarification needed].[6] Many swamps have also undergone intensive logging, requiring the construction of drainage ditches and canals. These ditches and canals contributed to drainage and, along the coast, allowed salt water to intrude, converting swamps to marsh or even to open water.[1] Large areas of swamp were therefore lost or degraded. Louisiana provides a classic example of wetland loss from these combined factors.[7] Europe has probably lost nearly half its wetlands.[6] New Zealand lost 90 percent of its wetlands over a period of 150 years.[8] Ecologists recognise that swamps provide valuable ecological services including flood control, fish production, water purification, carbon storage, and wildlife habitat.[9] In many parts of the world authorities protect swamps. In parts of Europe and North America, swamp restoration projects are becoming widespread.[2][10] Often the simplest steps to restoring swamps involve plugging drainage ditches and removing levees.[11]
Land value, productivity and conservation[edit]
Swamps and other wetlands have traditionally held a very low property value compared to fields, prairies, or woodlands. They have a reputation for being unproductive land that cannot easily be utilized for human activities, other than perhaps hunting and trapping. Farmers, for example, typically drained swamps next to their fields so as to gain more land usable for planting crops.
Many societies now realize that swamps are critically important to providing fresh water and oxygen to all life, and that they are often breeding grounds for a wide variety of life. Indeed, floodplain swamps are extremely important in fish production.[12] Government environmental agencies (such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency) are taking steps to protect and preserve swamps and other wetlands. In Europe, major effort is being invested in the restoration of swamp forests along rivers.[2] Conservationists work to preserve swamps such as those in northwest Indiana in the United States Midwest that were preserved as part of the Indiana Dunes.[13][14][15] The problem of invasive species has also been put into greater light such as in places like the Everglades.
Notable examples[edit]
Swamps can be found on all continents except Antarctica.[16]
The largest swamp in the world is the Amazon River floodplain, which is particularly significant for its large number of fish and tree species.[17][18][19]
Africa[edit]
The Sudd and the Okavango Delta are Africa's best known marshland areas. The Bangweulu Floodplains make up Africa's largest swamp.
Asia[edit]
The Tigris-Euphrates river system is a large swamp and river system in southern Iraq, traditionally inhabited in part by the Marsh Arabs.
In Asia, tropical peat swamps are located in mainland East Asia and Southeast Asia. In Southeast Asia, peatlands are mainly found in low altitude coastal and sub-coastal areas and extend inland for distance more than 100 km (62 mi) along river valleys and across watersheds. They are mostly to be found on the coasts of East Sumatra, Kalimantan (Central, East, South and West Kalimantan provinces), West Papua, Papua New Guinea, Brunei, Peninsular Malaya, Sabah, Sarawak, Southeast Thailand, and the Philippines (Riley et al.,1996). Indonesia has the largest area of tropical peatland. Of the total 440,000 km2 (170,000 sq mi) tropical peat swamp, about 210,000 km2 (81,000 sq mi) are located in Indonesia (Page, 2001; Wahyunto, 2006).
The Vasyugan Swamp is a large swamp in the western Siberia area of the Russian Federation. This is one of the largest swamps in the world, covering an area larger than Switzerland.
North America[edit]




Swamp in southern Louisiana


The Atchafalaya Swamp at the lower end of the Mississippi River is the largest swamp in the United States. It is an important example of southern cypress swamp[20] but it has been greatly altered by logging, drainage and levee construction.[21] Other famous swamps in the United States are the forested portions of the Everglades, Okefenokee Swamp, Barley Barber Swamp, Great Cypress Swamp and the Great Dismal Swamp. The Okefenokee is located in extreme southeastern Georgia and extends slightly into northeastern Florida. The Great Cypress Swamp is mostly in Delaware but extends into Maryland on the Delmarva Peninsula. Point Lookout State Park on the southern tip of Maryland contains a large amount of swamps and marshes. The Great Dismal Swamp lies in extreme southeastern Virginia and extreme northeastern North Carolina. Both are National Wildlife Refuges. Another swamp area, Reelfoot Lake of extreme western Tennessee and Kentucky, was created by the 1811–12 New Madrid earthquakes. Caddo Lake, the Great Dismal and Reelfoot are swamps that are centered at large lakes. Swamps are often called bayous in the southeastern United States, especially in the Gulf Coast region.
List of major swamps[edit]




A small swamp in Padstow, New South Wales.






Inside a mangrove canopy, Salt Pan Creek, New South Wales


The world's largest wetlands include significant areas of swamp, such as in the Amazon and Congo River basins.[19] Further north, however, the largest wetlands are bogs.
Africa[edit]

Bangweulu Swamps, Zambia
Okavango Swamp, Botswana
Sudd, South Sudan
Niger Delta, Nigeria
Mare aux Songes, Mauritius

Asia[edit]

Asmat Swamp, Indonesia
Candaba Swamp in Apalit and Candaba, Pampanga and Pulilan, Bulacan, Philippines
Mangrove Swamp in Karachi, Pakistan
Myristica Swamps in Western Ghats, India
Ratargul Swamp Forest in Sylhet, Bangladesh
Sundarbans in India and Bangladesh
Vasyugan Swamp, Russia

Europe[edit]

Pripyat Marshes, Belarus
Valmayor reservoir, Spain

North America[edit]

Atchafalaya National Wildlife Refuge, Louisiana, United States
Big Cypress National Preserve, Florida, United States
Barley Barber Swamp, Florida, United States
Cache River, Illinois, United States
Caddo Lake, Texas/Louisiana, United States
Congaree Swamp, South Carolina, United States
Everglades, Florida, United States
Great Black Swamp, Indiana/Ohio, United States
Great Cypress Swamp, Delaware and Maryland, United States, also known as Great Pocomoke Swamp
Great Dismal Swamp, North Carolina/Virginia, United States
Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge, New Jersey, United States
Green Swamp, Florida, United States
Green Swamp, North Carolina, United States
Honey Island Swamp, Louisiana, United States
Hudson Bay Lowlands, Ontario, Canada
Limberlost, Indiana, United States
Louisiana swamplands, Louisiana, United States
Mingo National Wildlife Refuge, Puxico, Missouri, United States
Okefenokee Swamp, Georgia/Florida, United States
Reelfoot Lake, Tennessee/Kentucky, United States
Pantanos de Centla, Tabasco/Campeche, Mexico
Swamp City, Plymouth, Minnesota, United States
Texas Swamplands, Texas, United States

South America[edit]

Lahuen Ñadi, Chile
Pantanal, Brazil
Paraná Delta, Argentina
Esteros del Iberá, Argentina
Amazon, Brazil
Caribbean Lowlands, Colombia

See also[edit]


Aquatic plant
Bog
Coniferous swamp
Fen
Freshwater swamp forest
Hydrogen sulfide
Marsh
Marsh gas
Muck
Peat
Peat swamp forest
Salt marsh
Shrub swamp
Slough (hydrology)
Wetland
Will-o'-the-wisp


References[edit]


^ a b Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 497 p.
^ a b c Hughes, F.M.R. (ed.). 2003. The Flooded Forest: Guidance for policy makers and river managers in Europe on the restoration of floodplain forests. FLOBAR2, Department of Geography, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 96 p.
^ Wilcox, D.A, Thompson, T.A., Booth, R.K. and Nicholas, J.R. 2007. Lake-level variability and water availability in the Great Lakes. USGS Circular 1311. 25 p.
^ Swamp Archived 2007-06-10 at the Wayback Machine. (from glossary web page of the United States Geological Survey)
^ Keddy, P.A., L.H. Fraser, A.I. Solomeshch, W.J. Junk, D.R. Campbell, M.T.K. Arroyo and C.J.R. Alho. 2009. Wet and wonderful: the world's largest wetlands are conservation priorities. BioScience 59: 39–51.
^ a b Dugan, P. (ed.) 2005. Guide to Wetlands. Buffalo, New York. Firefly Books. 304 p.
^ Keddy, P.A., D. Campbell, T. McFalls, G. Shaffer, R. Moreau, C. Dranguet, and R. Heleniak. 2007. The wetlands of lakes Pontchartrain and Maurepas: past, present and future. Environmental Reviews 15: 1- 35.
^ Peters, M. and Clarkson, B. 2010. Wetland Restoration: A Handbook for New Zealand Freshwater Systems. Manaaki Whenua Press, Lincoln, N.Z. ISBN 978-0-478-34707-4 (online)
^ Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 497 p. Chapter 11.
^ Environment Canada. 2004. How Much Habitat is Enough? A Framework for Guiding Habitat Rehabilitation in Great Lakes Areas of Concern. 2nd ed. 81 p.
^ Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 497 p. Chapter 13.
^ Lowe-McConnell, R. H. (1975). Fish Communities in Tropical Fresh waters: Their Distribution, Ecology and Evolution. London: Long man
^ Smith, S. & Mark, S. (2006). Alice Gray, Dorothy Buell, and Naomi Svihla: Preservationists of Ogden Dunes. The South Shore Journal, 1. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2012-09-13. Retrieved 2012-06-11. 
^ Smith, S. & Mark, S. (2009). The Historical Roots of the Nature Conservancy in the Northwest Indiana/Chicagoland Region: From Science to Preservation. The South Shore Journal, 3. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-01-01. Retrieved 2015-11-22. 
^ Smith, S. & Mark, S. (2007). The cultural impact of a museum in a small community: The Hour Glass of Ogden Dunes. The South Shore Journal, 2. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2012-11-30. Retrieved 2012-06-11. 
^ Hunter, Malcolm L. (1999). Maintaining Biodiversity in Forest Ecosystems. Cambridge University Press. p. 325. ISBN 978-0521637688. 
^ Goulding, M. (1980). The Fishes and the Forest: Explorations in Amazonian Natural History. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
^ Lowe-McConnell, R. H. (1975). Fish Communities in Tropical Freshwaters: Their Distribution, Ecology and Evolution. London: Longman
^ a b L.H. Fraser and P.A. Keddy (eds.). 2005. The World's Largest Wetlands: Ecology and Conservation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 488 p.
^ Conner, W. H. and Buford, M. A. (1998). Southern deepwater swamps. In Southern Forested Wetlands: Ecology and Management, eds. M. G. Messina and W. H. Conner, pp. 261–87. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis Publishers.
^ Reuss, M. (1998). Designing the Bayous: The Control of Water in the Atchafalaya Basin 1800–1995. Alexandria, VA: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Office of History.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Swamps.



 "Swamp". New International Encyclopedia. 1905. 







v
t
e


Wetlands






Acrotelm
A Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia
Aquatic ecosystem
Aquatic plants
Atchafalaya Basin
Backswamp
Bayou
Beach meadow
Blackwater river
Blanket bog
Bog
Bog garden
Brackish marsh
Callows
Carr
Cataract bog
Ciénega
Clean Water Act
Clearwater river
Coastal bog
Coniferous swamp
Constructed wetland
Delta Waterfowl Foundation
Dambo
Drainage basin
Ducks Unlimited
Estuary
Fen
Flark
Flood-meadow
Flooded grasslands and savannas
Freshwater marsh
Freshwater swamp forest
Grass valley
Guelta
Halosere
Hydrosere
Igapó
Ings
Interdunal wetland
Intertidal wetland
Karst
Kermi bog
Kettle
Lagg
Mangrove
Marsh
Marsh gas
Mere
Mire
Misse
Moorland
Muck
Mudflat
Muskeg
Oasis
Palsa bog
Paludification
Palustrine wetland
Plateau bog
Pocosin
Polygonal bog
Pond
Peat swamp forest
Poor fen
Pothole
Ramsar Convention
Raised bog
Reed bed
Rich fen
Riparian zone
River delta
Salt marsh
Salt pannes and pools
Shrub swamp
Slough
String bog
Swamp
Telmatology
Tidal marsh
Upland bog
Wet meadow
Wetlands International
Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust
Will-o'-the-wisp
Várzea forest
Vernal pool
Whitewater river
Yaéré








Forestry portal
Wetlands portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Swamp&oldid=818037514"					Categories: SwampsFlooded grasslands and savannasTerrestrial ecoregionsFluvial landformsPedologyWetlandsForest ecologyBodies of waterHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2013Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia