"Shul" redirects here. For other uses, see Shul (disambiguation).


Part of a series on


Jews and Judaism








Etymology
Who is a Jew?


Jewish peoplehood
Jewish identity







Religion


God in Judaism (names)



Principles of faith
Mitzvot (613)
Halakha
Shabbat
Holidays
Prayer
Tzedakah
Land of Israel
Brit
Bar and Bat Mitzvah
Marriage
Bereavement
Philosophy
Ethics
Kabbalah
Customs
Synagogue
Rabbi









Texts



Tanakh


(Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim)





Talmud


(Mishnah
Gemara)





Rabbinic


(Midrash
Tosefta)







Targum
Beit Yosef
Mishneh Torah
Tur
Shulchan Aruch
Zohar









Communities





Ashkenazim
Sephardim
Italkim
Romaniotes
Mizrahim
Cochin
Bene Israel
Beta Israel




Related groups




Bnei Anusim
Lemba
Crimean Karaites
Krymchaks
Samaritans
Crypto-Jews
Mosaic Arabs
Subbotniks











Population



Land of Israel




Old Yishuv
New Yishuv
Israeli Jews




Europe




Austria
Belarus
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Estonia
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldova
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Spain
Sweden
Ukraine
United Kingdom




Asia




Yemen
Iraq
Iran
Turkey
Cyprus
Syria
Lebanon
Uzbekistan
Azerbaijan
India
China
Indonesia
Vietnam
Japan
Philippines




Africa




Morocco
Algeria
Tunisia
Libya
Egypt
Ethiopia
South Africa
Zimbabwe




North America




United States
Canada




Latin America and Caribbean




Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Guyana
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
Paraguay
Puerto Rico
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela




Oceania




Australia
Fiji
Guam
New Zealand
Palau






Judaism by country
Lists of Jews
Historical population comparisons








Denominations



Orthodox
Reform
Conservative
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot









Culture



Minyan
Music

Religious
Secular


Wedding
Clothing
Niddah
Pidyon haben
Kashrut
Shidduch
Zeved habat
Conversion to Judaism
Hiloni
Cuisine

Israelite
Israeli
Sephardic
Mizrahi


Literature

Israeli
Yiddish
American


Yiddish theatre
Dance
Humour









Languages



Hebrew (Biblical)
Yiddish
Jewish Koine Greek
Yevanic
Juhuri
Shassi
Judæo-Iranian
Ladino
Ghardaïa Sign
Bukharian
Knaanic
Zarphatic
Italkian
Gruzinic
Judeo-Aramaic
Judeo-Arabic
Judeo-Berber
Judeo-Malayalam









History



Timeline
Leaders
Ancient history


Kingdom of Judah
Temple in Jerusalem
Babylonian captivity
Assyrian captivity
Yehud Medinata
Jerusalem (in Judaism
timeline)
Hasmonean dynasty
Sanhedrin
Schisms
Pharisees
Hellenistic Judaism
Jewish–Roman wars
History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire
Christianity and Judaism
Hinduism and Judaism
Islamic–Jewish relations
Diaspora
Middle Ages
Golden Age
Sabbateans
Hasidism
Haskalah
Emancipation
Antisemitism
Anti-Judaism
Persecution
The Holocaust
Israel
Land of Israel
Aliyah
Jewish atheism
Baal teshuva
Arab–Israeli conflict









Politics


Politics of Israel

Zionism


(General
Green
Labor
Neo
Religious
Revisionist)







World Agudath Israel
Bundism
Feminism
Jewish left / right









Category: Jews and Judaism
Portal: Judaism
WikiProject Judaism







v
t
e









Scolanova Synagogue, Trani, Italy






Great Synagogue of Florence


A synagogue, also spelled synagog (pronounced /ˈsɪnəɡɒɡ/; from Greek συναγωγή, synagogē, 'assembly', Hebrew: בית כנסת‎ bet kenesset, 'house of assembly' or בית תפילה bet tefila, "house oa}} or קהל kahal), is a Jewish house of prayer.
Synagogues have a large place for prayer (the main sanctuary), and may also have smaller rooms for study and sometimes a social hall and offices. Some have a separate room for Torah study, called the beith midrash (Sephardi) beis medrash (Ashkenazi)—בית מדרש ('house of study').
Synagogues are consecrated spaces used for the purpose of prayer, Tanakh (the entire Hebrew Scriptures including Torah) reading, study and assembly; however, a synagogue is not necessary for worship. Halakha holds that communal Jewish worship can be carried out wherever ten Jews (a minyan) assemble. Worship can also be carried out alone or with fewer than ten people assembled together. However, halakha considers certain prayers as communal prayers and therefore they may be recited only by a minyan. In terms of its specific ritual and liturgical functions, the synagogue does not replace the long-since destroyed Temple in Jerusalem.



Contents


1 Terminology
2 Origins
3 Architectural design
4 Interior elements

4.1 Denominational differences


5 Synagogue as community center
6 Synagogue offshoots
7 Great synagogues
8 World's largest synagogues

8.1 Israel
8.2 Europe
8.3 North America


9 World's oldest synagogues

9.1 Oldest synagogues in the United States


10 Other famous synagogues
11 Image gallery
12 See also
13 References
14 External links



Terminology[edit]
Israelis use the Hebrew term beyt knesset ('house of assembly'). Jews of Ashkenazi descent have traditionally used the Yiddish term shul (cognate with the German Schule, 'school') in everyday speech. Sephardi Jews and Romaniote Jews generally use the term kal (from the Hebrew Ḳahal, meaning "community"). Spanish Jews call the synagogue a sinagoga and Portuguese Jews call it an esnoga. Persian Jews and some Karaite Jews also use the non-Hebrew term kenesa, which is derived from Aramaic, and some Mizrahi Jews use kenis. Some Reform, Reconstructionist, and Conservative Jews use the word temple. The Greek word synagogue is used in English (and German and French), to cover the preceding possibilities.[1]
Origins[edit]
Although synagogues existed a long time before the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE, communal worship in the time while the Temple still stood centered around the korbanot ("sacrificial offerings") brought by the kohanim ("priests") in the Holy Temple. The all-day Yom Kippur service, in fact, was an event in which the congregation both observed the movements of the kohen gadol ("the high priest") as he offered the day's sacrifices and prayed for his success.
During the Babylonian captivity (586–537 BCE) the Men of the Great Assembly formalized and standardized the language of the Jewish prayers. Prior to that people prayed as they saw fit, with each individual praying in his or her own way, and there were no standard prayers that were recited. Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakkai, one of the leaders at the end of the Second Temple era, promulgated the idea of creating individual houses of worship in whatever locale Jews found themselves. This contributed to the continuity of the Jewish people by maintaining a unique identity and a portable way of worship despite the destruction of the Temple, according to many historians.
Synagogues in the sense of purpose-built spaces for worship, or rooms originally constructed for some other purpose but reserved for formal, communal prayer, however, existed long before the destruction of the Second Temple.[2][unreliable source?] The earliest archaeological evidence for the existence of very early synagogues comes from Egypt, where stone synagogue dedication inscriptions dating from the 3rd century BCE prove that synagogues existed by that date.[3][unreliable source?] More than a dozen Second Temple era synagogues have been identified by archaeologists.[2]
Any Jew or group of Jews can build a synagogue. Synagogues have been constructed by ancient Jewish kings, by wealthy patrons, as part of a wide range of human institutions including secular educational institutions, governments, and hotels, by the entire community of Jews living in a particular place, or by sub-groups of Jews arrayed according to occupation, ethnicity (i.e. the Sephardic, Polish or Persian Jews of a town), style of religious observance (i.e., a Reform or an Orthodox synagogue), or by the followers of a particular rabbi.
There has been no evidence of synagogues in Roman Palestine, or modern day Israel, prior to first century C.E.[citation needed] It has been theorized that the synagogue emerged as a place of worship in Palestine upon the destruction of the Second Temple during the First Jewish-Roman War; however, others speculate that there had been places of prayer, apart from the Temple, during the Hellenistic period. The popularization of prayer over sacrifice during the years prior to the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 C.E.[4] had prepared the Jews for life in the diaspora, where prayer would serve as the focus of Jewish worship.[5]
Despite the possibility of synagogue-like spaces prior to the Revolt, the synagogue emerged as a stronghold for Jewish worship upon the destruction of the Temple. For Jews living in the wake of the Revolt, the synagogue functioned as a "portable system of worship". Within the synagogue, Jews worshipped by way of prayer rather than sacrifices, which had previously served as the main form of worship within the Second Temple.[6]







Mosaic in the Tzippori Synagogue









Ruins of the ancient synagogue of Kfar Bar'am




Architectural design[edit]




Aerial view of the synagogue of the Kaifeng Jewish community in China.


Main article: Synagogue architecture
There is no set blueprint for synagogues and the architectural shapes and interior designs of synagogues vary greatly. In fact, the influence from other local religious buildings can often be seen in synagogue arches, domes and towers.
Historically, synagogues were built in the prevailing architectural style of their time and place. Thus, the synagogue in Kaifeng, China looked very like Chinese temples of that region and era, with its outer wall and open garden in which several buildings were arranged. The styles of the earliest synagogues resembled the temples of other sects of the Eastern Roman Empire. The surviving synagogues of medieval Spain are embellished with mudéjar plasterwork. The surviving medieval synagogues in Budapest and Prague are typical Gothic structures.
The emancipation of Jews in European countries not only enabled Jews to enter fields of enterprise from which they were formerly barred, but gave them the right to build synagogues without needing special permissions, synagogue architecture blossomed. Large Jewish communities wished to show not only their wealth but also their newly acquired status as citizens by constructing magnificent synagogues. These were built across Europe and in the United States in all of the historicist or revival styles then in fashion. Thus there were Neoclassical, Neo-Byzantine, Romanesque Revival, Moorish Revival, Gothic Revival, and Greek Revival. There are Egyptian Revival synagogues and even one Mayan Revival synagogue. In the 19th century and early 20th century heyday of historicist architecture, however, most historicist synagogues, even the most magnificent ones, did not attempt a pure style, or even any particular style, and are best described as eclectic.
In the post-war era, synagogue architecture abandoned historicist styles for modernism.




K.A.M. Isaiah Israel Temple in the Chicago neighborhood of Kenwood



Temple Sholom in Chicago's neighborhood of Lakeview




Interior elements[edit]
All synagogues contain a Bimah, a raised platform where the table of the rabbi is found.
The Torah Ark (Hebrew: Aron Kodesh—ארון קודש) (called the heikhal—היכל [temple] by Sephardim) is a cabinet in which the Torah scrolls are kept.
The ark in a synagogue is almost always positioned in such a way such that those who face it are facing towards Jerusalem. Thus, sanctuary seating plans in the Western world generally face east, while those east of Israel face west. Sanctuaries in Israel face towards Jerusalem. Occasionally synagogues face other directions for structural reasons; in such cases, some individuals might turn to face Jerusalem when standing for prayers, but the congregation as a whole does not.
The Ark is reminiscent of the Ark of the Covenant, which held the tablets inscribed with the Ten Commandments. This is the holiest spot in a synagogue, equivalent to the Holy of Holies. The Ark is often closed with an ornate curtain, the parochet פרוכת, which hangs outside or inside the ark doors.
A large, raised, reader's platform called the bimah (בימה) by Ashkenazim and teḇah (= reading dais) by Sephardim, where the Torah scroll is placed to be read is a feature of all synagogues. In Sephardi synagogues it is also used as the prayer leader's reading desk.
Other traditional features include a continually lit lamp or lantern, usually electric in contemporary synagogues, called the ner tamid (נר תמיד), the "Eternal Light", used as a reminder of the western lamp of the menorah of the Temple in Jerusalem, which remained miraculously lit perpetually. Many have an elaborate chair named for the prophet Elijah, which is only sat upon during the ceremony of Brit milah. Many synagogues have a large seven-branched candelabrum commemorating the full Menorah. Most contemporary synagogues also feature a lectern for the rabbi.
A synagogue may be decorated with artwork, but in the Rabbinic and Orthodox tradition, three-dimensional sculptures and depictions of the human body are not allowed as these are considered akin to idolatry.
Originally, synagogues were made devoid of much furniture, the Jewish congregants in Spain, the Maghreb (North Africa), Babylonia, the Land of Israel and Yemen having a custom to sit upon the floor, which had been strewn with mats and cushions, rather than upon chairs or benches. In other European towns and cities, however, Jewish congregants would sit upon chairs and benches.[7] Today, the custom has spread in all places to sit upon chairs and benches.
Until the 19th century, in an Ashkenazi synagogue, all seats most often faced the Torah Ark. In a Sephardi synagogue, seats were usually arranged around the perimeter of the sanctuary, but when the worshipers stood up to pray, everyone faced the Ark. In Ashkenazi synagogues, the Torah was read on a reader's table located in the center of the room, while the leader of the prayer service, the hazzan, stood at his own lectern or table, facing the Ark. In Sephardic synagogues, the table for reading the Torah (reading dais) was commonly placed at the opposite side of the room from the Torah Ark, leaving the center of the floor empty for the use of a ceremonial procession carrying the Torah between the Ark and the reading table.
In Yemen, the Jewish custom was to take-off one's shoes immediately prior to entering the synagogue, a custom that had been observed by Jews in other places in earlier times.[8] Today, the custom of removing one's shoes is no longer practised in Israel.







Gothic interior of the 13th-century Old New Synagogue of Prague









Bimah at the Bialystoker Synagogue with Torah Ark in background.









Interior of the Portuguese Synagogue (Amsterdam) showing Tebah in the foreground, and Torah Ark in the background.









Cast-iron Bimah of the Old Synagogue in Kraków









El-Ghriba synagogue in Djerba




Denominational differences[edit]




New York's Reform Temple Emanu-El


Orthodox synagogues feature a partition (mechitzah) dividing the men's and women's seating areas, or a separate women's section located on a balcony.
The German Reform movement, which arose in the early 19th century, made many changes to the traditional look of the synagogue, keeping with its desire to simultaneously stay Jewish yet be accepted by the host culture.
The first Reform synagogue, which opened in Hamburg in 1811, introduced changes that made the synagogue look more like a church. These included: the installation of an organ to accompany the prayers (even on Shabbat, when musical instruments are proscribed by halakha), a choir to accompany the hazzan, and vestments for the synagogue rabbi to wear.[9]
In following decades, the central reader's table, the Bimah, was moved to the front of the Reform sanctuary—previously unheard-of[citation needed] in Orthodox synagogues. The synagogue was renamed a "temple", to emphasize that the movement no longer looked forward to the rebuilding of the Temple in Jerusalem.[citation needed]
Synagogue as community center[edit]
Synagogues often take on a broader role in modern Jewish communities and may include additional facilities such as a catering hall, kosher kitchen, religious school, library, day care center and a smaller chapel for daily services.
Synagogue offshoots[edit]
Since many Orthodox and some non-Orthodox Jews prefer to collect a minyan (a quorum of ten) rather than pray alone, they commonly assemble at pre-arranged times in offices, living rooms, or other spaces when these are more convenient than formal synagogue buildings. A room or building that is used this way can become a dedicated small synagogue or prayer room. Among Ashkenazi Jews they are traditionally called shtiebel (שטיבל, pl. shtiebelekh or shtiebels, Yiddish for "little house"), and are found in Orthodox communities worldwide.
Another type of communal prayer group, favored by some contemporary Jews, is the Chavurah (חבורה, pl. chavurot, חבורות), or prayer fellowship. These groups meet at a regular place and time, either in a private home or in a synagogue or other institutional space. In antiquity, the Pharisees lived near each other in chavurot and dined together to ensure that none of the food was unfit for consumption.[10]
Great synagogues[edit]

The Great Synagogue of Jerusalem
The Choral Synagogue of Moscow
The Grand Choral Synagogue of St. Petersburg
The Kharkiv Choral Synagogue
The Dohány Street Synagogue in Budapest, Hungary
The Grand Synagogue of Paris
The Great Synagogue of Brussels (also known as the Great Synagogue of Europe)
The Great Synagogue of Florence
The Great Synagogue of Oran
The Great Synagogue of Plzeň
The Great Synagogue of Rome
The Great Synagogue of Stockholm
The Great Synagogue of Sydney
The New Synagogue of Berlin
The Portuguese Synagogue of Amsterdam
The Synagogue of Novi Sad
The Synagogue of Sofia
The Synagogue of Szeged[11]
The Grand Synagogue of Edirne
The Fabric Synagogue of Timisoara
The El Ghriba synagogue of Djerba

World's largest synagogues[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Interior of the Belz Great Synagogue in Jerusalem.


Israel[edit]

The largest synagogue in the world is probably the Belz Great Synagogue, in Jerusalem, Israel, whose main Sanctuary seats up to 10,000. Construction on the edifice lasted for over 15 years.
Kehilat Kol HaNeshama, a Reform synagogue located in Baka, Jerusalem, is the largest Reform (and largest non-Orthodox) Jewish synagogue in Israel.[12]

Europe[edit]

The newly constructed Breslov Center at the graveside of Rabbi Nahman of Breslov in Uman, Ukraine, may be the largest synagogue by square footage in Europe. It is perhaps the largest by number of seats, with a capacity of up to 5,000.[citation needed]
The Dohány Street Synagogue in Budapest, Hungary, may be the largest synagogue in Europe by square footage. It seats 3,000, and has an area of 1,200 m2 (13,000 sq ft) and height of 26 m (85 ft) (apart from the towers, which are 43 m or 141 ft).[citation needed]
The Synagogue of Trieste is the largest synagogue in Western Europe.
The Great Synagogue of Rome is one of the greatest in Europe.
The Portuguese Synagogue in Amsterdam, also called "Esnoga", was built in 1675. At that time it was the largest synagogue in the world. Apart from the buildings surrounding the synagogue, it has an area of 1,008 m2 (10,850 sq ft), is 19.5 meters (64 ft) high. It was built to accommodate 1227 men and 440 women.[13]
Szeged Synagogue is located in Szeged, Hungary, seats 1,340 and has height of 48.5 m (159 ft).
The Sofia Synagogue is located in Sofia, Bulgaria, seating about 1,200.
Great Synagogue (Plzeň) in the Czech Republic is the second-largest synagogue in Europe, and the third-largest in the world.

North America[edit]

The Satmar synagogue in Kiryas Joel, New York, which is said to seat "several thousand", is also very large.[14]
Congregation Yetev Lev D'Satmar (Rodney Street, Brooklyn) is also said to seat "several thousand".
Temple Emanu-El of New York, a Reform Temple, is located in New York City, with an area of 3,523 m2 (37,920 sq ft), seating 2,500. It is the largest Reform synagogue in the world.
Congregation Yetev Lev D'Satmar (Hooper Street, Brooklyn) seats between 2,000 and 4,000 congregants.
The main sanctuary of Adas Israel Congregation (Washington, D.C.) seats 1,500.
Temple Emanu-El (Miami Beach, Florida) located in Miami Beach, Florida, seats approximately 1,400 people.
Congregation Shaare Zion, an Orthodox Sephardic synagogue located in Brooklyn, New York, is the largest Syrian Jewish congregation in New York City. It is attended by over 1,000 worshipers on weekends.
Beth Tzedec Congregation in Toronto, Ontario, is the largest Conservative synagogue in North America.

World's oldest synagogues[edit]
Main article: List of oldest synagogues




The Sardis Synagogue in Manisa, Turkey. The synagogue was a section of a large bath-gymnasium complex, which was in use for 450–500 years.






Fresco at the Dura-Europos synagogue, illustrating a scene from the Book of Esther, 244 CE.



The oldest Samaritan synagogue, the Delos Synagogue dates from between 150 and 128 BCE, or earlier and is located on the island of Delos.[15][unreliable source?]
The oldest synagogue fragments are stone synagogue dedication inscriptions stones found in middle and lower Egypt and dating from the 3rd century BCE.[3]
The synagogue of Dura Europos, a Seleucid city in north eastern Syria, dates from the third century CE. It is unique. The walls were painted with figural scenes from the Old Testament. The paintings included Abraham and Isaac, Moses and Aaron, Solomon, Samuel and Jacob, Elijah and Ezekiel. The synagogue chamber, with its surviving paintings, is reconstructed in the National Museum in Damascus.
The Old Synagogue in Erfurt, Germany, parts of which date to c.1100, is the oldest intact synagogue building in Europe. It is now used as a museum of local Jewish history.
The Paradesi Synagogue is the oldest synagogue in the Commonwealth of Nations, located in Kochi, Kerala, in India. It was built in 1568 by the Malabar Yehudan people or Cochin Jewish community in the Kingdom of Cochin. Paradesi is a word used in several Indian languages, and the literal meaning of the term is "foreigners", applied to the synagogue because it was historically used by "White Jews", a mixture of Jews from Cranganore, the Middle East, and European exiles. It is also referred to as the Cochin Jewish Synagogue or the Mattancherry Synagogue. The synagogue is located in the quarter of Old Cochin known as Jew Town and is the only one of the seven synagogues in the area still in use.
Jew's Court, Steep Hill, Lincoln, England, is arguably the oldest synagogue in Europe in current use.

Oldest synagogues in the United States[edit]




The Kahal Zur Israel Synagogue (1636), located in Recife on the site of the oldest synagogue in the Americas.






Touro Synagogue, the oldest surviving synagogue building in the U.S.






Painting of the interior of the Portuguese Synagogue (Amsterdam) by Emanuel de Witte (c. 1680)


Main article: List of the oldest synagogues in the United States

Congregation Shearith Israel, in Manhattan, founded in 1654, is the oldest congregation in the United States. Its present building dates from 1897.
The Touro Synagogue in Newport, Rhode Island, is the oldest Jewish house of worship in North America that is still standing. It was built in 1759 for the Jeshuat Israel congregation, which was established in 1658.

Other famous synagogues[edit]

The Rashi Shul in Worms, Germany, built in 1175 and razed on Kristallnacht in 1938, was painstakingly reconstructed using many of the original stones. It is still in use as a synagogue.
The Synagogue of El Transito of Toledo, Spain, was built in 1356 by Samuel ha-Levi, treasurer of King Pedro I of Castile. This is one of the best examples of Mudéjar architecture in Spain. The design of the synagogue recalls the Nasrid style of architecture that was employed during the same period in the decorations of the Alhambra palace in Granada as well as the Great Mosque of Córdoba. Since 1964, this site has hosted a Sephardi museum.
The Hurva Synagogue, located in the Jewish Quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem, was Jerusalem's main Ashkenazi synagogue from the 16th century until 1948, when it was destroyed by the Arab Legion several days after the conquest of the city. After the Six-Day War, an arch was built to mark the spot where the synagogue stood. A complete reconstruction, to plans drawn up by architect Nahum Meltzer, opened in March 2010.
The Great Synagogue of Oran, Algeria, built in 1880, but converted into a mosque in 1975 when most Algerian Jews had left the country for France following independence.
The Barbados Nidhe Israel Synagogue ("Bridgetown Synagogue"), located in the capital city of Bridgetown, was first built in 1654. It was destroyed in the hurricane of 1831 and reconstructed in 1833.[16]
The Snoa in Willemstad, Curaçao, Netherlands Antilles was built by Sephardic Portuguese Jews from Amsterdam and Recife, Brazil. It is modeled after the Esnoga in Amsterdam. Congregation Mikvé Israel built this synagogue in 1692; it was reconstructed in 1732.
The Bialystoker Synagogue on New York's Lower East Side, is located in a landmark building dating from 1826 that was originally a Methodist Episcopal Church. The building is made of quarry stone mined locally on Pitt Street, Manhattan. It is an example of Federalist architecture. The ceilings and walls are hand-painted with zodiac frescos, and the sanctuary is illuminated by 40-foot (12.19 m) stained glass windows. The bimah and floor-to-ceiling ark are handcarved.
The Great Synagogue of Florence, Tempio Maggiore, Florence, 1874–82, is an example of the magnificent, cathedral-like synagogues built in almost every major European city in the 19th century and early 20th century.
Boston's 1920 Vilna Shul is a rare surviving intact Immigrant Era synagogue.[17]
The Congregation Or Hatzafon "Light of the North", Fairbanks, Alaska, is the world's northern most synagogue building.[18]

Image gallery[edit]







The Old Synagogue (Erfurt) is the oldest intact synagogue building in Europe









The Synagogue in the Gerard Doustraat in Amsterdam, Netherlands.









The New Synagogue in Berlin, Germany.









Beth Jakov synagogue in Skopje, Macedonia









The Choral Synagogue in Moscow, Russia.









The Great Synagogue of Santiago, Chile.









The Portuguese Synagogue in Amsterdam, Netherlands.









The Dohány Street Synagogue in Budapest, Hungary.









The Great Synagogue of Plzeň, Czech Republic.









The main synagogue of the city of Frankfurt am Main (Germany) before the Kristallnacht.









The Roonstrasse Synagogue in Cologne, Germany.









The Lesko Synagogue in Lesko, Poland.









The Bobowa Synagogue in Bobowa, Poland.









Kadoorie Synagogue in Porto, Portugal. The largest synagogue in the Iberian Peninsula.









The Baal Shem Tov's shul in Medzhybizh, Ukraine (c. 1915). The original was destroyed, but has now been rebuilt.









The Belzer synagogue of Belz, Ukraine. The synagogue no longer exists.









The Cymbalista Synagogue and Jewish Heritage Center at Tel Aviv University.









The synagogue of Kherson, Ukraine.









Or Zaruaa Synagogue, Jerusalem, Israel founded in 1926 by Rabbi Amram Aburbeh in Nahlat Ahim neighbourhood, Jerusalem, Israel, exterior photo of the building declared as historic preservation cultural heritage site, on 3 Refaeli street.









The dome of the Hurva Synagogue dominated the skyline of the Jewish Quarter of Jerusalem for more than 80 years, from 1864 when it was built until 1948 when it was bombed.









The remains of the Hurva Synagogue as they appeared from 1977 to 2003. The synagogue has recently been reconstructed.









The Ashkenazi Synagogue of Istanbul, Turkey. The synagogue was founded in the year 1900.









The interior of a Karaite synagogue.









The Central Synagogue on Lexington Avenue in Manhattan, New York City, United States of America.









Temple Emanu-El, the oldest synagogue in Miami Beach, Florida, which was built in Byzantine style.









The Grand Choral Synagogue of St. Petersburg, Russia









The Paradesi Synagogue in Kochi, Kerala, India









The Great Choral Synagogue in Podil, Kiev, Ukraine









Great Synagogue of Rome, Italy









Abuhav synagogue, Israel









Ari Ashkenazi Synagogue, Israel









Santa María la Blanca, Spain









Córdoba Synagogue, Spain









El Transito Synagogue, Spain









Székesfehérvár synagogue, Hungary (c. 1930s) The synagogue no longer exists, however, the memorial plaques were moved to a building at the city's Jewish cemetery.









Sofia Synagogue, Bulgaria









Interior of a "caravan shul" (synagogue housed in a trailer-type facility) in Neve Yaakov, Jerusalem, Israel.









The Ohev Sholom Talmud Torah, the National Synagogue, is a wondrous example of mid-century modern architecture employing expressionist overtones, located in Upper 16th Street, Washington, D.C.









Beth Yaakov Synagogue, Switzerland









Sanctuary ark for Lincoln Square Synagogue, New York City (2013), by the artist David Ascalon.









Synagogue, Szombathely, Hungary









Bevis Marks Synagogue, City of London, the oldest synagogue in the United Kingdom









Stockholm Synagogue, Sweden









Brisbane Synagogue, Brisbane, Australia




See also[edit]

Beth midrash
Cheder sheini
Jewish services
Shtiebel
Siddur
Synagogue architecture
List of synagogues
List of choral synagogues

References[edit]



^ Judaism 101: Synagogues, Shuls and Temples. Jewfaq.org.
^ a b Donald D. Binder. "Second Temple Synagogues". 
^ a b Donald D. Binder. "Egypt". 
^ Schiffman, Lawrence (March 1991). From Text to Tradition: A History of Second Temple and Rabbinic Judaism (1st ed.). Ktav Pub Inc. p. 159. ISBN 0881253723. 
^ Schiffman, Lawrence (March 1991). From Text to Tradition: A History of Second Temple and Rabbinic Judaism (1st ed.). Ktav Pub Inc. p. 164. ISBN 0881253723. 
^ Schiffman, Lawrence (March 1991). From Text to Tradition: A History of Second Temple and Rabbinic Judaism (1st ed.). Ktav Pub Inc;. p. 164. ISBN 0881253723. 
^ Maimonides, Mishne Torah (Hil. Tefillah 11:4), who wrote: "Synagogues and houses of study must be treated with respect. They are swept and sprinkled to lay the dust. In Spain and in the Maghreb (North Africa), in Babylon and in the Holy Land, it is customary to kindle lamps in the synagogues and to spread mats on the floor on which the worshipers sit. In the land of Edom (i.e. Christian countries) they sit in synagogues upon chairs."
^ Joseph Kafih, Jewish Life in Sanà, Ben-Zvi Institute: Jerusalem 1982, p. 64 (note 3) ISBN 965-17-0137-4. There, Rabbi Kafih recalls the following story in the Jerusalem Talmud (Baba Metzi'a 2:8): “Yehudah, the son of Rebbe, entered a synagogue and left his sandals [outside], and they were stolen. He then said, 'Had I not gone to the synagogue, my sandals would not have gone-off.'” The custom of never entering a synagogue while wearing one's shoes is also mentioned in the Cairo Geniza manuscripts: "While he is yet outside, let him take-off his shoes or sandals from his feet and then enter barefoot, since such is the way of servants to walk barefoot before their lords... We have a minor sanctuary, and we are required to behave with sanctity and fear [in it], as it says: And you shall fear my hallowed place." (v. Halakhot Eretz Yisrael min ha-Geniza [The Halacha of the Land of Israel from the Geniza], ed. Mordechai Margaliot, Mossad Harav Kook: Jerusalem 1973, pp. 131–132; Taylor-Schechter New Series 135, Cambridge University Library / Oxford MS. 2700).
^ Rabbi Ken Spiro. "Crash Course in Jewish History Part 54 - Reform Movement", Aish.com
^ Alan F. Segal, Rebecca's Children: Judaism and Christianity in the Roman World, Harvard University Press, 1986, 125.
^ 1340 seats, the synagogue is 48 meters long, 35 meters wide, and 48.6 meters high.
^ Nathan Jeffay (January 12, 2011). "The Heart of Israel's Reform Judaism". The Forward. 
^ Snyder, S. C. (2008). Acculturation and Particularism in the Modern City: Synagogue Building and Jewish Identity in Northern Europe. University of Michigan. ISBN 9780549818977. Retrieved 2014-12-07. 
^ Rabbi Yitschak Rudomin. "Rebbes, Hasidim, and Authentic Kehillahs". The Second World War and Jewish Education in America: The Fall and Rise of Orthodoxy. Jewish Professionals Institute (JPI). 
^ Donald D. Binder. "Delos". 
^ "Nidhe Israel Synagogue". planetware. 
^ Vilna Shul
^ "Congregation Or HaTzafon". mosquitonet.com. Archived from the original on 2014-09-20. Retrieved 2014-12-07. 




Levine, Lee (2005) [1999]. The Ancient Synagogue: The First Thousand Years (2nd. ed.). New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-10628-9. 
Young, Penny (2014). Dura Europos: A City for Everyman. Diss, Norfolk: Twopenny Press. ISBN 9780956170347.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Synagogue.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Synagogue



 "Synagogue". Encyclopædia Britannica. 26 (11th ed.). 1911. 
Hamodia Shul Supplement
Guide to synagogues and other Jewish heritage sites in Slovakia
B'Nai Israel Synagogue, GuidepostUSA
Joseph Tabory, A list of articles on Synagogues (in various languages), in Daat.col.il
Eldridge Street Synagogue
Webs.com
Synagogue doubles as mosque during Ramadan, MSN
Virtual Synagogues, —The Texas Jewish Historical Society







v
t
e


Jews and Judaism






Outline of Judaism
Index of Jewish history-related articles





History



Timeline
Israelites
Origins of Judaism
Ancient Israel and Judah
Second Temple period
Rabbinic Judaism
Middle Ages
Haskalah
Zionism





Population



Assimilation
Diaspora

Ashkenazi
Sephardi
Mizrahi


Languages

Hebrew


Lists of Jews
Persecution

Antisemitism







Philosophy



Beliefs

Mitzvah


Chosen people
Conversion
Eschatology

Messiah


Ethics
God
Halakha
Kabbalah
Land of Israel
Who is a Jew?





Schisms



Religious movements

Orthodox
Haredi
Hasidic
Conservative
Reform
Karaite
relations


Secularism





Literature



Tanakh

Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim


Rabbinic

Mishnah
Talmud
Midrash


Kabbalah texts

Zohar


Shulchan Aruch
Siddur
Hebrew literature





Culture



Calendar

Holidays


Cuisine

Kashrut


Education
Leadership

Rabbi


Marriage
Music
Names
Politics
Prayer

Synagogue


Symbolism





Studies



Ashkenazi intelligence
Genetics
Jew (word)
Jewish Virtual Library
Relations with other Abrahamic religions

Christianity
Islam










 Category: Jews and Judaism
 Judaism portal
 Judaism – Wikipedia book












v
t
e


Place of worship






Bahá'í House of Worship (Baha'is)
Chaitya/Buddhist temples/monastery (Buddhists)
Church building (Christians)
Hof (Germanic pagans)
Hindu temple/mandir (Hindus)
Jain temple/basadi (Jains)
Synagogue (Jews)
Mosque (Muslims)
Shinto shrine/jinja (Shintos)
Gurdwara (Sikhs)
Taoist temple (Taoists)
Magic circle (Neopagans / Wiccans)
Fire temple (Zoroastrians)
Sun temple (various)









Authority control



LCCN: sh85131580
GND: 4184221-2











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Synagogue&oldid=818244140"					Categories: SynagoguesJewish holy placesReligious buildingsReligious placesHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles containing Ladino-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing Portuguese-language textAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from July 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2017Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008Articles containing Yiddish-language textArticles needing additional references from July 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from October 2009Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers