
Syracuse University




Motto
Suos Cultores Scientia Coronat (Latin)



Motto in English

Knowledge crowns those who seek her


Type
Private research university


Established
March 24, 1870[1]



Academic affiliations

NAICU
CUMU
IAMSCU
URA
ORAU


Endowment
$1.157 billion (2016)[2]


Chancellor
Kent Syverud


Provost
Michele G. Wheatly



Academic staff

1,563[3]


Students
22,190[4]


Undergraduates
16,097[4]


Postgraduates
[4]


Location
Syracuse, New York, U.S.
43°02′16″N 76°08′02″W﻿ / ﻿43.03767°N 76.13399°W﻿ / 43.03767; -76.13399Coordinates: 43°02′16″N 76°08′02″W﻿ / ﻿43.03767°N 76.13399°W﻿ / 43.03767; -76.13399


Campus
Urban, 683 acres (276.4 ha)[5]


Colors
Orange[6]     


Nickname
Orange



Sporting affiliations

NCAA Division I
ACC, CHA, EARC


Mascot
Otto the Orange


Website
www.syracuse.edu









Crouse College, a Romanesque building completed in 1889, housed the first College of Fine Arts in the United States. It is now the home of the university's College of Visual and Performing Arts and the Setnor School of Music.


Syracuse University (commonly referred to as Syracuse, 'Cuse, or SU[7]) is a private research university in Syracuse, New York, United States. The institution's roots can be traced to the Genesee Wesleyan Seminary (later becoming Genesee College), founded in 1831 by the Methodist Episcopal Church in Lima, New York. After several years of debate over relocating the college to Syracuse, the university was established in 1870, independent of the college. Since 1920, the university has identified itself as nonsectarian,[8][9][10][11][12] although it maintains a relationship with The United Methodist Church.[13][14][15][16][17]
The campus is in the University Hill neighborhood of Syracuse, east and southeast of downtown, on one of the larger hills. Its large campus features an eclectic mix of buildings, ranging from nineteenth-century Romanesque Revival structures to contemporary buildings. SU is organized into 13 schools and colleges, with nationally recognized programs in information studies and library science, architecture, communications, business administration, inclusive education and wellness, sport management, public administration, engineering and the College of Arts and Sciences.
Syracuse University athletic teams, known as the Orange, participate in 20 intercollegiate sports. SU is a member of the Atlantic Coast Conference for all NCAA Division I athletics, except for the men's rowing and women's ice hockey teams. SU is also a member of the Eastern College Athletic Conference.[18]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Founding
1.2 Expansion
1.3 Modern
1.4 Pan Am Flight 103


2 Campus

2.1 Main campus
2.2 South campus
2.3 Downtown
2.4 Metropolitan satellite locations
2.5 Art on campus and permanent collections


3 Organization
4 Academics

4.1 Degrees
4.2 Recognition and rankings
4.3 Faculty
4.4 Syracuse University Press
4.5 University lectures
4.6 Libraries


5 Research
6 Student life

6.1 Media
6.2 Student government
6.3 Fraternities and sororities
6.4 Syracuse University Ambulance
6.5 Religious life


7 Athletics
8 Alumni
9 Affiliations

9.1 Affiliated institutions

9.1.1 State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry
9.1.2 State University of New York Upstate Medical University


9.2 Formerly affiliated institutions

9.2.1 State University of New York at Binghamton
9.2.2 Utica College




10 See also
11 References
12 External links



History[edit]
Founding[edit]
The Genesee Wesleyan Seminary was founded in 1831 by the Genesee Annual Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church in Lima, New York, south of Rochester. In 1850, it was resolved to enlarge the institution from a seminary into a college, or to connect a college with the seminary, becoming Genesee College. However, the location was soon thought by many to be insufficiently central. Its difficulties were compounded by the next set of technological changes: the railroad that displaced the Erie Canal as the region's economic engine bypassed Lima completely. The trustees of the struggling college then decided to seek a locale whose economic and transportation advantages could provide a better base of support.




A graduate of the Genesee Seminary, Henry Jarvis Raymond later went on to found The New York Times.


The college began looking for a new home at the same time Syracuse, ninety miles to the east, was engaged in a search to bring a university to the city, having failed to convince Ezra Cornell and Andrew Dickson White to locate Cornell University there rather than in Ithaca.[19][20] Syracuse resident White pressed that the new university should locate on the hill in Syracuse (the current location of Syracuse University) due to the city's attractive transportation hub, which would ease the recruitment of faculty, students, and other persons of note. However, as a young carpenter working in Syracuse, Cornell had been twice robbed of his wages,[21][22] and thereafter considered Syracuse a Sodom and Gomorrah insisting the university be in Ithaca on his large farm on East Hill, overlooking the town and Cayuga Lake.




Genesee Wesleyan Seminary






Belva Lockwood was the second woman, (after Victoria Woodhull), to run for President of the United States.


Meanwhile, there were several years of dispute between the Methodist ministers, Lima, and contending cities across the state, over proposals to move Genesee College to Syracuse. At the time, the ministers wanted a share of the funds from the Morrill Land Grant Act for Genesee College. They agreed to a quid pro quo donation of $25,000 from Senator Cornell in exchange for their (Methodist) support for his bill. Cornell insisted the bargain be written into the bill and Cornell became New York State's Land Grant University in 1865. In 1869, Genesee College obtained New York State approval to move to Syracuse, but Lima got a court injunction to block the move, and Genesee stayed in Lima until it was dissolved in 1875.[23] By that time, however, the court injunction had been made moot by the founding of a new university on March 24, 1870. On that date the State of New York granted the new Syracuse University its own charter, independent of Genesee College.[23] The City of Syracuse had offered $100,000 to establish the school.[23] Bishop Jesse Truesdell Peck had donated $25,000 to the proposed school[24] and was elected the first president of the Board of Trustees.[20]
Rev. Daniel Steele, a former Genesee College president, served as the first administrative leader of Syracuse until its Chancellor was appointed.[25] The university opened in September 1871 in rented space downtown.[23] George F. Comstock, a member of the new University's Board of Trustees, had offered the school 50 acres (200,000 m2) of farmland on a hillside to the southeast of the city center. Comstock intended Syracuse University and the hill to develop as an integrated whole; a contemporary account described the latter as "a beautiful town ... springing up on the hillside and a community of refined and cultivated membership ... established near the spot which will soon be the center of a great and beneficent educational institution."[26]




First Annual Class of Syracuse University.






Stephen Crane (front row, left) sits with baseball teammates on the steps of the Hall of Languages, Syracuse University, 1891. (Photo courtesy of the SU Special Collections Research Center)


The university was founded as coeducational, and President Peck stated at the opening ceremonies, "The conditions of admission shall be equal to all persons... there shall be no invidious discrimination here against woman.... brains and heart shall have a fair chance... "[27] Syracuse implemented this policy with a high proportion of women students. In the College of Liberal Arts, the ratio between male and female students during the 19th century was approximately even. The College of Fine Arts was predominantly female, and a low ratio of women enrolled in the College of Medicine and the College of Law.[27] Men and women were taught together in the same courses, and many extra-curricular activities were coeducational as well. Syracuse also developed "women-only" organizations and clubs.[27]
Expansion[edit]
Coeducation at Syracuse traced its roots to the early days of Genesee College where educators and students like Frances Willard and Belva Lockwood were heavily influenced by the Women's movement in nearby Seneca Falls, NY. However, the progressive "co-ed" policies practiced at Genesee would soon find controversy at the new university in Syracuse.[20] Colleges and universities admitted few women students in the 1870s. Administrators and faculty argued women had inferior minds and could not master mathematics and the classics. Dr. Erastus Otis Haven, Syracuse University chancellor and former president of the University of Michigan and Northwestern University, maintained that women should receive the advantages of higher education. He enrolled his daughter, Frances, at Syracuse where she joined the other newly admitted female students in founding the Gamma Phi Beta sorority.[20] The inclusion of women in the early days of the university led to the proliferation of various women's clubs and societies. In fact, it was a Syracuse professor who coined the term "sorority" specifically for Gamma Phi Beta.
In the late 1880s the university engaged in a rapid building spree. Holden Observatory (1887) was followed by two Romanesque Revival buildings – von Ranke Library (1889), now Tolley Humanities Building,[28] and Crouse College (1889).[29] Together with the Hall of Languages, these first buildings formed the basis for the "Old Row," a grouping which, along with its companion Lawn, established one of Syracuse's most enduring images.[26] The emphatically linear organization of these buildings along the brow of the hill follows a tradition of American campus planning which dates to the construction of the "Yale Row" in the 1790s. At Syracuse, the Old Row continued to provide the framework for growth well into the twentieth century.[26]
From its founding until through early 1920s, the university grew rapidly. It offered programs in the physical sciences and modern languages, and in 1873, Syracuse added one of the first architecture programs in the U.S.[30] In 1874, Syracuse created the nation's first bachelor of fine arts degree,[31] and in 1876, the school offered its first post-graduate courses in the College of Arts and Sciences.[30] SU created its first doctoral program in 1911.[32] SU's school of journalism, now the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications, was established at Syracuse in 1934.[33]
The growth of Syracuse University from a small liberal arts college into a major comprehensive university were due to the efforts of two men, Chancellor James Day and John Archbold. James Roscoe Day was serving the Calvary Church in New York City where he befriended Archbold. Together, the two dynamic figures would oversee the first of two great periods of campus renewal in Syracuse's history.[20]




Yates Castle, former home of the School of Education (Photo courtesy of the Syracuse University Archives)






Hendricks Chapel


John Dustin Archbold was a capitalist, philanthropist, and President of the Board of Trustees at Syracuse University. He was known as John D. Rockefeller's right-hand man and successor at the Standard Oil Company. He was a close friend of Syracuse University Chancellor James R. Day, and gave almost $6 million to the university over his lifetime.[20] Said a journalist in 1917:

Mr. Archbold's ... is the president of the board of trustees of Syracuse University, an institution which has prospered so remarkably since his connection with it that its student roll has increased from hundreds to over 4,000, including 1,500 young women, placing it in the ranks of the foremost institutions of learning in the United States.[34]

In addition to keeping the university financially solvent during its early years, he also contributed funds for eight buildings, including the full cost of Archbold Stadium (opened 1907, demolished 1978), Sims Hall (men's dormitory, 1907), the Archbold Gymnasium (1909, nearly destroyed by fire in 1947, but still in use), and the oval athletic field.
Modern[edit]
After World War II, Syracuse University began to transform into a major research institution. Enrollment increased in the four years after the war due to the G.I. Bill, which paid tuition, room, board, and a small allowance for veterans returning from World War II. In 1946, SU admitted 9,464 freshmen, nearly four times greater than the previous incoming class.[33] Branch campuses were established in Endicott, New York and Utica, New York.

The velocity with which the university sped through its change into a major research institution was astounding. By the end of the 1950s, Syracuse ranked twelfth nationally in terms of the amount of its sponsored research, and it had over four hundred professors and graduate students engaging in that investigation.[30]

From the early 1950s through the 1960s, Syracuse University added programs and staff that continued the transformation of the school into a research university. In 1954, Arthur Phillips was recruited from MIT and started the first pathogen-free animal research laboratory. The lab focused on studying medical problems using animal models. The School of Social Work, which eventually merged into the College of Human Ecology, was founded in 1956.[35] Syracuse's College of Engineering also founded the nation's second oldest computer engineering and bioengineering programs. In 1962, Samuel Irving Newhouse, Sr. donated $15 million to begin construction of a school of communications, eventually known as the SI Newhouse School of Public Communications. In 1966, Syracuse University was admitted to the Association of American Universities, an organization of leading research universities devoted to maintaining a strong system of academic research and education.[36]


Schools and colleges of Syracuse University (date of founding)


Undergraduate
College of Arts and Sciences
1870
University College
1918
College of Visual and Performing Arts
1873
School of Architecture
1873
School of Information Studies
1896
College of Engineering and Computer Science
1901
School of Education
1906
Falk College of Sport and Human Dynamic
1918
Martin J. Whitman School of Management
1919
S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications
1964


Graduate
College of Law
1895
Graduate School
1912
Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs
1924


Pan Am Flight 103[edit]




SU's Flight 103 Memorial


Main article: Pan Am Flight 103
On December 21, 1988, 35 Syracuse University students were killed in the terrorist bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. The students were returning from a study-abroad program in Europe.
That evening, Syracuse University went on with a basketball game just hours after the attack, for which it was severely criticized.[37] The conduct of university officials in making the decision was also brought to the attention of the NCAA.[37] The day after the bombing, the university's chancellor, Melvin A. Eggers, said on nationwide television that he should have cancelled the event.[37][38] After the attacks on September 11, 2001, the NCAA left it up to the conferences to decide what to do about their sports events; many cancelled them.[39][40] (the bombing of Flight 103 was the deadliest terrorist attack against the United States prior to the attacks on September 11, 2001.[41][42])
In April 1990, Syracuse University dedicated a memorial wall to the students killed on Flight 103, constructed at the entrance to the main campus in front of the Hall of Languages. Every year the university holds "Remembrance Week" during the fall semester to commemorate the students. On December 21 a service in the university's chapel at 2:03 p.m. (19:03 UTC) marks the exact minute on that date in 1988 when the plane exploded. The university also maintains a link to the tragedy with the "Remembrance Scholars" program, when 35 senior students receive scholarships during their final year at the university. With the "Lockerbie Scholars" program, two graduating students from Lockerbie Academy study at Syracuse for one year.[43]
Campus[edit]




Mosaic in honor of Sacco and Vanzetti, by Ben Shahn, installed on the east wall of Huntington Beard Crouse Hall.[44]


The university is set on a campus that features an eclectic mix of buildings, ranging from nineteenth-century Romanesque Revival structures to contemporary buildings designed by renowned architects such as I.M. Pei. The center of campus, with its grass quadrangle, landscaped walkways, and outdoor sculptures, offers students the amenities of a traditional college experience. The university overlooks downtown Syracuse, a medium-sized city (140,600 residents in 2008).[45] The school also owns a Sheraton Hotel,[46] the Drumlins Country Club — a nearby, 36-hole golf course,[47] the Fisher Center and Joseph I. Lubin House in New York City,[48] the Paul Greenberg House in Washington, D.C.,[49] and the Minnowbrook Conference Center, a 30-acre (121,000 m²) retreat in the Adirondack Mountains of Upstate New York.[50]
Main campus[edit]




Hall of Languages


Also called "North Campus," the Main Campus contains nearly all academic buildings and residence halls. Its centerpiece is The Kenneth A. Shaw Quadrangle, more affectionately known as "The Quad", which is surrounded by academic and administrative buildings. The North Campus represents a large portion of the University Hill neighborhood. Buses run to South Campus, as well as downtown Syracuse and other locations in the city.[51] About 70 percent of students live in university housing. First- and second-year students are required to live on campus. All 22 residence halls are coeducational and each contain a lounge, laundry facility, and various social/study spaces. Residence halls are secured with a card access system. Residence halls are located on both Main Campus and South Campus, the latter of which is a five-minute ride via bus. Learning communities and interest housing options are also available. Food facilities include six residential dining centers, two food courts, and several cafes.




Hendricks Chapel


The Comstock Tract Buildings, a historic district of older buildings on the campus, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980.[52] Three buildings on campus—the Crouse Memorial College and the Hall of Languages, and the Pi Chapter House of Psi Upsilon Fraternity—are individually listed on the National Register.[53]
A few blocks walk from Main Campus on East Genesee St, the Syracuse Stage building includes two proscenium theatres. The Storch is used primarily by the Drama Department and the Archbold is used primarily by Syracuse Stage, a professional regional theatre.
South campus[edit]
After World War II, a large, undeveloped hill owned by the university was used to house returning veterans in military-style campus housing. During the 1970s, this housing was replaced by permanent two-level townhouses for two or three students each, or for graduate family housing. There are also three small residence halls which feature open doubles. South Campus is also home to the Institute for Sensory Research, Tennity Ice Pavilion, Goldstein Student Center, Skytop Office Building and 621 Skytop Road (for administration), and the InnComplete Pub, a graduate student bar. Just north is the headquarters of SU Athletics, Manley Field House, located in the Manley Athletics Complex. Approximately 2,500 students live on the South Campus, which is connected to the main campus by frequent bus service.
Downtown[edit]




The Warehouse


In December 2004, the university announced that it had purchased or leased twelve buildings in downtown Syracuse. Five Design Programs; Communication, Advertising, Environmental and Interior Design, Industrial and Interactive Design, and Fashion; reside permanently in the newly renovated facilities, fittingly called The Warehouse, which was renovated by Gluckman Mayner Architects. Both programs were chosen to be located in the downtown area because of their history of working on projects directly with the community. The Warehouse also houses a contemporary art space that commissions, exhibits, and promotes the work of local and international artists in a variety of media. Hundreds of students and faculty have also been affected by the temporary move of the School of Architecture downtown for the $12 million renovation of its campus facility, Slocum Hall.
Since 2009, the Syracuse Center of Excellence in Environmental and Energy Systems, led by Syracuse University in partnership with Clarkson University and the College Environmental Science and Forestry, creates innovations in environmental and energy technologies that improve human health and productivity, security, and sustainability in urban and built environments.[54][55] The Paul Robeson Performing Arts Company and the Community Folk Art Center will also be located downtown. On March 31, 2006, the university and the city announced an initiative to connect the main campus of the university with the arts and culture areas of downtown Syracuse and The Warehouse.[56] Using natural gas, the Green Data Center generates its own electricity on site, providing cooling for servers and for a neighboring building.[57]
The Connective Corridor project, supported by of public and private funds, will be a strip of cultural development that will connect the main campus of the university to downtown Syracuse, NY. In 2008, an engineering firm is studying traffic patterns and lighting to commence the project. A design competition was held to determine the best design for the project.[58]
Metropolitan satellite locations[edit]
SU has established an admissions presence in Los Angeles, California that will enhance the university's visibility on the West Coast and will join the University's West Coast offices of alumni relations, institutional advancement, and the LA semester program in the same location. Syracuse University has also established an admissions presence in New York City and Atlanta, Georgia.[59]
Art on campus and permanent collections[edit]
See also: List of university art museums and galleries in New York State




Created in 1934 by Anna Hyatt Huntington and donated to the University soon thereafter, Diana graces the entrance to Carnegie Library.


Syracuse is home to the SU Art Galleries,[60] whose mission is to enhance the cultural environment of its community and surrounding area. The main gallery space is located in the Shaffer Art Building on the main campus.
The Warehouse Gallery[61] is a new contemporary art space exhibiting that is operated under the umbrella of the SU Art Galleries. Housed in a former furniture warehouse off campus, the Warehouse Gallery features works from international artists in a variety of media, its mission is to engage the community in a dialogue regarding the role the arts can play in illuminating the critical issues of our times.
Also on campus is the Louise and Bernard Palitz Gallery.[62] Located on the second floor of the Lubin House, the Palitz gallery has a rotation of exhibitions, including two annual public shows, local and regional artists, featured items from the university's art collection, and professional artists.
There are many other venues for student work at Syracuse University. In the Shaffer Art Building is the Lowe Art Gallery,[63] which features student work. Gallery spaces are also available for reservation on the fourth floor of the Bird Library.[64]
Within the Schine Student Center is home to three gallery spaces.[65] The Robert B Menschel Photography Gallery features work from professional photographers as well as students and local artists. On the third floor is the Panasci Lounge Art Hanging space for two dimensional spaces. This space can be reserved by students. The White Cube Gallery, also on the third floor is a student gallery that showcases work for the student body outside of the school of art and design.
Students can also research primary sources through the Special Collections Research Center (SCRC)[66] which is composed of rare books, manuscripts, works of architecture and design, and popular culture (cartoons, science fiction, and pulp literature), photography, the history of recorded sound, and more.
SU has a permanent art collection of over 45,000 objects from artists including Picasso, Rembrandt, Hopper, Tiffany and Wyeth. More than 100 important paintings, sculptures, and murals are displayed in public places around campus. Notable sculptures on campus include Sol LeWitt's Six Curved Walls, Anna Hyatt Huntington's Diana, Jean-Antoine Houdon's George Washington, Antoine Bourdelle's Herakles, James Earle Fraser's Lincoln, Malvina Hoffman's The Struggle of Elemental Man, and Ivan Meštrović's Moses, Job and Supplicant Persephone.
Organization[edit]
Syracuse is governed by a 70-member Board of Trustees, with 64 trustees elected by the board to four-year terms, and six elected by the alumni to four-year terms. Of the 64 Board elected Trustees, three must represent specified conferences of the United Methodist Church. In addition, the chancellor and the President of the Syracuse Alumni Association serve as ex officio voting Trustees. Two students and one faculty member serve as non-voting representatives to the Board of Trustees.[67] The Board of Trustees selects, and sets the salary of, the chancellor. The Syracuse University Bylaws also establish a University Senate with "general supervision over all educational matters concerning the University as a whole". The Senate consists of administrators, faculty, students and staff.[67]
Academics[edit]
For the Class of 2012, there were approximately 25,000 applicants for 3,350 seats in the Freshman class.[68] In fall 2006, the university had over 12,000 full-time undergraduate students and over 1,000 part-time undergraduate students, as well as almost 4,000 full-time graduate and law students and 2,000 part-time graduate and law students.[3] In 2005–06, the university granted over 2,600 bachelor's degrees; nearly 2,000 master's degrees; over 300 law degrees; and more than 160 doctoral degrees.[3] U.S. News & World Report ranked SU 53rd among national universities in the United States for 2009, 58th for 2013 and 61st in 2016.[69] Syracuse participates in the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities and University and College Accountability Network (U-CAN).
Degrees[edit]
SU offers undergraduate degrees in over 200 majors in the 9 undergraduate schools and colleges.[70] Bachelor's degrees are offered through the Syracuse University School of Architecture, the College of Arts and Sciences, the School of Education, the David B. Falk College of Sport and Human Dynamics, the College of Engineering and Computer Science, the School of Information Studies, Martin J. Whitman School of Management, S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications, and the College of Visual and Performing Arts. Also offered are Master's and doctoral degrees from the Graduate School and from specialized programs in the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs, College of Law, among others. Additionally, SU offers 24 Certificates of Advanced Study Programs for specialized programs for education, counseling, and other academic areas.[71]
The university has offered multiple international study programs since 1911. SU Abroad, formerly known as the Division of International Programs Abroad (DIPA), currently offers joint programs with universities in over 40 countries.[72] The university operates eight international centers, called SU Abroad Centers, that offer structured programs in a variety of academic disciplines. The centers are located Beijing, Istanbul, Florence, Hong Kong, London, Madrid, Strasbourg, and Santiago.[72][73]
Recognition and rankings[edit]






University rankings


National


ARWU[74]
NR


Forbes[75]
144


U.S. News & World Report[76]
61


Washington Monthly[77]
52


Global


ARWU[78]
601-700


QS[79]
501-550


Times[80]
251-300


U.S. News & World Report[81]
374






National Program Rankings[82]


Program
Ranking


Audiology
25


Biological Sciences
115


Business
88


Chemistry
92


Clinical Psychology
62


Computer Science
67


Earth Sciences
64


Economics
50


Education
57


Engineering
78


English
67


Fine Arts
33


History
91


Law
92


Library & Information Studies
4


Mathematics
87


Physics
65


Political Science
49


Psychology
90


Public Affairs
1


Social Work
64


Sociology
63


Speech–Language Pathology
30






Global Program Rankings[83]


Program
Ranking


Arts & Humanities
195


Economics & Business
114


Physics
230


Social Sciences & Public Health
219










Newhouse Communications Center III


In its 2018 ranking of U.S. colleges, U.S. News & World Report ranked Syracuse tied for 61st among undergraduate national universities.[84]
In 2015, Syracuse University was ranked 24th in New York State by average professor salaries.[85]
Many of SU's programs have been nationally recognized for excellence. A 2008 survey in the Academic Ranking of World Universities places Syracuse University in the top 100 world universities in social sciences.[86] In the 2015 'Design Intelligence' national rankings, the Environmental and Interior Design program is ranked 9th. The School of Architecture's Bachelor of Architecture program was ranked second nationally in 2010 by the journal DesignIntelligence in its annual edition of "America's Best Architecture & Design Schools."
The S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications is one of the top ranked in the country and has produced alumni in many fields of broadcasting.[87] The School of Information Studies offers information management and technology courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels at Syracuse University. Within the School of Information Studies, U.S. News & World Report has ranked the graduate program as the third best Library and Information Studies graduate school in the United States. It also has the top-ranked graduate Information Systems program, the second ranked graduate program in Digital Librarianship, and the fourth ranked graduate program in School Library Media.[88] The School of Management was renamed the Martin J. Whitman School of Management in 2003, in honor of SU alumnus and benefactor Martin J. Whitman. The school is home to about 2,000 undergraduate and graduate students.
The undergraduate program was ranked No. 43 among business schools nationwide by U.S. News & World Report in 2014[89] while the graduate school was ranked No. 88.[90] The entrepreneurship program was ranked No. 9 by the U.S. News & World Report in 2014, and No. 13 by both Entrepreneur Magazine and The Princeton Review in 2007. The supply chain management program was ranked No. 10 in the nation by Supply Chain Management Review. Also, the Joseph I. Lubin School of Accounting was named No. 10 in the nation by The Chronicle of Higher Education.[91]
The College of Law is ranked 92nd nationally by U.S. News & World Report. It is an emerging leader in the relatively novel field of National Security Law.[92] In 2007 the Law School started the Cold Case Justice Initiative, investigating cold cases from the civil rights era in the South. Its professors and students have identified 196 cases, of which more than 100 are in Georgia, and will give information to the US Department of Justice in order to have cases prosecuted.[93] The FBI has identified 122 cold cases that it is trying to resolve.
The Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs combines social sciences with public administration and international relations. It is ranked as the top graduate school for public affairs in the US.[94]
The graduate program of the College of Visual and Performing Art is considered one of the top 50 programs in the US.[95] VPA ranked No. 14 in multimedia/visual communications, a specialty that includes disciplines found in the college's Department of Transmedia, which offers M.F.A. programs in art photography, art video, computer art and film. VPA also ranked No. 16 in ceramics, No. 19 in printmaking and No. 20 in sculpture, which are M.F.A. programs based in the Department of Art. Project Advance (or SUPA) is a nationally recognized concurrent enrollment program honored by the American Association for Higher Education, the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, the National Commission on Excellence in Education, and the National Institute of Education.[96]
Syracuse was ranked 5th in The Princeton Review's 2014 and 1st in the 2015 list of top party schools.[97][98]
Faculty[edit]




Slutzker Center for International Services.


Syracuse University has 1013 full-time instructional faculty, 96 part-time faculty, and 454 adjunct faculty. Approximately 86% of the full-time faculty have earned Ph.D.s or professional degrees.[3] The current faculty includes scholars such as United States National Academy of Sciences member Jozef J. Zwislocki, Professor of Psychology, who developed mathematical models on the mechanics of the inner and middle ear, MacArthur Fellow Don Mitchell, Professor of Geography, who has developed studies in cultural geography, Bruce Kingma, Associate Provost and Kauffman Professor of Entrepreneurship, a pioneer in the field of information economics and online learning, Catherine Bertini, Professor of Practice in Public Administration, who has worked on the role of women in food distribution, Frederick C. Beiser, Professor of Philosophy, one of leading scholars of German idealism, Mary Karr, the Jesse Truesdell Peck Professor of Literature, who has received a Guggenheim Fellowship in poetry, John Caputo, the Thomas J. Watson Professor of Humanities, who founded weak theology, and Gustav Niebuhr Associate Professor of Religion and Media who is the former New York Times National Religion Correspondent.

Syracuse University Press[edit]
Main article: Syracuse University Press
Founded on August 2, 1943 by Chancellor William Pearson Tolley and benefactor Thomas Watson, Sr. The areas of focus for the Press include Middle East Studies, Native American Studies, Peace and Conflict Resolution, Irish Studies and Jewish Studies, among others. The Press has an international reputation in Irish Studies and Middle East Studies. It is a member of the Association of American University Presses.
University lectures[edit]
Every year as a tradition, the university invites notable and influential speakers from around the world. These speakers have included leading thinkers and practitioners in sustainability, advertising, redevelopment, human rights, journalism, and the environment. The lecturers are selected for their academic and public service excellence. The university lectures are supported by the University Trustees, alumni, and friends.[99] Previous University lecturers included Ishmael Beah, author of "A Long Way Gone: Memoirs of a Boy Soldier", 45th Vice President of the United States, Al Gore, Economist and Nobel Prize winner, Muhammad Yunus, author and columnist, William Safire, environmental justice advocate Majora Carter, and environmental law attorney, Robert Kennedy Jr.[100]
Libraries[edit]




The Carnegie Library


Syracuse University's main library is the Ernest S. Bird Library, which opened in 1972. Its seven levels contain 2.3 million books, 11,500 periodicals, 45,000 feet (14,000 m) of manuscripts and rare books, 3.6 million microforms, and a café. There are also several departmental libraries on campus. Many of the landmarks in the history of recorded communication between people are in the university's Special Collections Research Center, from cuneiform tablets and papyri to several codices dating from the 11th century, to the invention of printing. The collection also includes works by Galileo, Luther, John Calvin, Voltaire, Sir Isaac Newton, Descartes, Sir Francis Bacon, Samuel Johnson, Thomas Hobbes, Goethe, and others. In addition, the collection includes the personal library of Leopold Von Ranke.
Making sensational headlines at the time, the university outbid the Prussian government for all 19 tons of Von Ranke's prized personal library. Other collections of note include Rudyard Kipling first editions and an original second leaf of the Gutenberg Bible.
Bird Library is also home to the largest collection of national archives of Kenya and Tanzania. In July 2008, Syracuse University became the owner of the second largest collection of 78 rpm records in the United States after the Library of Congress after a donation of more than 200,000 records. The donation is valued at $1 million and more than doubles the university's collection of 78 rpm records to about 400,000.[101] It also has a special The Harriet Tubman Research Collection, and Environmental Justice and Gender collection housed in the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library. The MLK library holds over 15,000 acquisitions in African, African-American, Afro-Lationo, and Caribbean studies.
The university is also home to the Belfer Audio Laboratory and Archive, whose holdings total approximately 540,000 recordings in all formats, primarily cylinders, discs, and magnetic tapes. Some of the voices to be found include Thomas Edison, Amelia Earhart, Albert Einstein, and Oscar Wilde.
Research[edit]




Holden Observatory which houses the University's State Recorder's office.


According to the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education, Syracuse University is a research university with "highest level of research activity."[102] Through the university's Office of Research, which promotes research, technology transfer, and scholarship, and its Office of Sponsored Programs, which assists faculty in seeking and obtaining external research support, SU supports research in the fields of management and business, sciences, engineering, education, information studies, energy, environment, communications, computer science, public and international affairs, and other specialized areas.[103] Syracuse became a member of the Association of American Universities (AAU) in 1966, an organization of leading research universities devoted to maintaining a strong system of research and education.[104] In 2011, however, the university's board of trustees voted to pull out of the research consortium.[105]
SU has established 29 research centers and institutes that focuses research, often across disciplines, in a variety of areas.[106] The Burton Blatt Institute advances research in economic and social issues for individuals with disabilities, and it has international projects in the field.[107] The Martin J Whitman School of Management supports the largest number of research centers, including The Ballentine Investment Institute, the George E. Bennett Center for Accounting and Tax Research, the Robert H. Brethren Operations Management Institute, Michael J. Falcone Center for Entrepreneurship, The H. H. Franklin Center for Supply Chain Management, Olivia and Walter Kiebach Center for International Business Studies, and the Earl V. Snyder Innovation Management Program.
Other research programs include The Syracuse Biomaterials Institute,[108] the Alan K. Campbell Public Affairs Institute through the Maxwell School, and the Center for the Study of Popular Television through the Newhouse School of Public Communications.[106]
Syracuse University also has collaborations with CERN and Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, among other institutes. Syracuse also has a comparatively large number of collaborators on the LIGO Scientific project and is actively involved with the search for gravitational waves using data from the gravitational-wave detectors.[109][110][111]
Student life[edit]
Syracuse University has a diverse student population, representing all 50 US states and over 115 countries. Approximately 10 percent of students are from outside of the US, and are supported by an international services department within the University's Division of Student Affairs.[112] Approximately 37% of students in the fall 2010 undergraduate full-time class are from New York State. Approximately 56% of that class are women.[113] In 2014, 8.8% of the students were black or African-American.[114] In 2015, black students made up 14.7% of all US college students.[115]
Media[edit]




The CitrusTV control room during a taping of CitrusTV News


CitrusTV (formerly UUTV, HillTV and Synapse) is the university's entirely student-run television studio, and one of the largest student-run TV studios in the country with over 300 active members.[116] There are also multiple student-run magazines and other print publications, including: ‘‘The Onondagan Yearbook, Student Voice, Perception, Jerk Magazine, What the Health, 360, Baked Magazine, The Out Crowd’’, and ‘‘Equal Time.’’[117]
Student government[edit]
Founded in 1957, the Student Association (SA) represents the undergraduate students of both SU and ESF. SA, elects a President and Vice President (on a unified ticket) each academic year. They also each year elect a Comptroller, who, with the assembly, oversees the allocation and designation of the Student Activity Fee that was first collected in the 1968–69 school year. The goals of SA are to participate through a unified student voice in the formulation of Syracuse University rules and regulations. The SA-SGA Alumni Organization maintains the history and an organizational timeline on its website.[118]
The graduate students at Syracuse University are represented by the Graduate Student Organization (GSO) while the law students at Syracuse University are represented by the Law Student Senate. Each of the three organizations elects students to serve in the Syracuse University Senate, which also includes faculty, staff, and administrators.[119]
Fraternities and sororities[edit]




Pi Chapter House of Psi Upsilon Fraternity


Main article: Syracuse University fraternity and sorority system
The Syracuse University fraternity and sorority system offers organizations that are members of the Panhellenic Council (NPC), the Interfraternity Council (IFC), the National Association of Latino Fraternal Organizations, the National Multicultural Greek Council, the Professional Fraternity Council (PFC), and the National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC). In addition to SU students, ESF students are permitted to join the university's fraternity and sorority system.
The oldest fraternity at SU is Delta Kappa Epsilon, which established a chapter in 1871 soon after the founding of the university, followed by Psi Upsilon in 1875 and Phi Kappa Psi in 1884.[120] Sororities were also a part of the early history of SU. Alpha Phi was founded at SU in 1872, followed by Gamma Phi Beta in 1874 and Alpha Gamma Delta in 1904. Alpha Phi Alpha established a chapter at SU in 1910, and was reorganized in 1949 and 1973. The first NPHC fraternity,[121] Omega Psi Phi, was established at SU in 1922, and the first NPHC sorority, Delta Sigma Theta in 1973.[120] Alpha Phi Delta, the only historically Italian-American heritage fraternity, was founded at SU in 1914. University policy prohibits fraternities and sororities from discriminating "on the basis of race, creed, color, gender, national origin, religion, marital status, age, disability, sexual orientation, or status as a disabled veteran or a veteran of the Vietnam era."[122]
Syracuse University Ambulance[edit]
Syracuse University Ambulance,[123] commonly referred to as SUA, is a SU Health Services-based student organization that responds to over 1,500 medical emergencies each year. Providing intermediate life support (ILS), rapid cardiac defibrillation, emergency and nonemergency transportation, and special event standby services, SUA operates two full-time transporting ambulances, a supervisor's fly car, and a MCI trailer for mass-casualty incidents. Additionally, SUA operates four transport vans for non-emergency transports. Advanced life support (ALS) mutual aid is provided by the City of Syracuse's private EMS provider, Rural/Metro Medical Services. SUA was formed in 1973 by a group of students out of a need for emergency medical services on campus. Starting with only a few members and meager equipment, the Syracuse University Medical Crisis Unit was formed. The organization has evolved greatly over time but, with 70+ volunteer students, remains a student-run organization to this day. SUA provides emergency and non-emergency services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week during the academic school year and is funded by a portion of the student health fee.
Religious life[edit]




Hendricks Chapel houses ten chaplaincies.


Hendricks Chapel[124] is an interfaith chapel located on the Quad, and services as the spiritual center of Syracuse University. The Chapel, headed by Dean Tiffany Steinwert, is home to ten chaplaincies, including Baptist, Buddhist, Evangelical Christian, Historically Black Churches, Islamic, Jewish, Lutheran, Pagan, Methodist, and Roman Catholic.[125] In addition, there are a number of student religious groups, including groups associated with the chaplaincies as well as Adventist, Christian Science, Hindu, Mormon, Muslim, Orthodox Christian, Pentecostal, and more.[126]
Additional buildings located on campus support specific religious groups, including the Alibrandi Catholic Center[127] and the Winnick Hillel Center for Jewish Life.[128] Off campus, the Chabad House and Islamic Center of CNY also support student religious life.
Athletics[edit]
Main article: Syracuse Orange




Syracuse marching band at Old Archbold Stadium.






Syracuse Crew at the 1925 American Henleys.






Syracuse Orange football team entering the Carrier Dome.


Syracuse University's sports teams have "the Orange" nickname since 2004, although the former names of Orangemen and Orangewomen are still used. The school's mascot is Otto the Orange. SU fields intercollegiate teams in eight men's sports and 12 women's sports.
Most of Syracuse University's intercollegiate teams participate in NCAA Division I in the Atlantic Coast Conference. The Syracuse Orange women's ice hockey team participates in College Hockey America. Crew participates in the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges. The men's and women's basketball teams, the football team, and both the men's and women's lacrosse teams play in the Carrier Dome. Other sports are located at the nearby Manley Field House, except ice hockey which takes place in the Tennity Ice Skating Pavilion.
SU has reached 28 team national championships, including 14 men's lacrosse, six men's crew, two cross country running, and one each in boxing, football, and women's lacrosse.[129] Under long-time head coach Jim Boeheim, men's basketball team won seven Big East regular season championships, five Big East Tournament championships, and 25 NCAA Tournament appearances, including the 2003 NCAA championship. The men's basketball team holds the largest on campus attendance record of 35,446 attendees. The record was set in the Carrier Dome playing Duke on Saturday February 1, 2014.




The Syracuse University Orange men's lacrosse team are honored at the White House by President of the United States George W. Bush for their winning the 2008 National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I national championship.


In 1959, Syracuse earned its first National Championship following an undefeated football season and a Cotton Bowl victory over Texas. The team featured sophomore running back Ernie Davis who, in 1961, became the first African-American to win the Heisman Trophy. Davis was slated to play for the Cleveland Browns in the same backfield as Jim Brown, but died of leukemia before being able to play professionally.[130]
Syracuse played its first intercollegiate lacrosse game in 1916, and captured its first USILA championship in 1920. It won USILA championships in 1922, 1924, and 1925. In the modern NCAA era, Syracuse is the first school to capture 11 National Championships, the most of any team in college lacrosse history. Most recently, Syracuse reached the men's Division I championship game in 2013 after winning two championships in 2008 & 2009 seasons and reaching the quarterfinals in 2011. However, the Orange lost 16-10 to Duke University after leading 5-0 early in the game.[131] The women's lacrosse team reached the NCAA Division I National Championship game for the first time in school history in 2012, which they lost to Northwestern.
Toward the end of the 1970s, Syracuse University was under pressure to improve its football facilities in order to remain a NCAA Division I football school. Its small concrete stadium, Archbold Stadium, was seventy years old and not up to the standards of other schools. The stadium could not be expanded; it had been reduced from 40,000 seats to 26,000 due to the fire codes. Syracuse University decided to build a new stadium. In 1978, Archbold Stadium was demolished to make way for the Carrier Dome, which was to have a domed Teflon-coated, fiberglass inflatable roof. It would also serve as the home for the men's basketball team, as a replacement for Manley Field House. The Carrier Dome was constructed between April 1979 and September 1980. The total construction cost was $26.85 million, including a $2.75 million naming gift from the Carrier Corporation.[132]
Alumni[edit]
Main article: List of Syracuse University people § Notable alumni




Joseph ("Joe") Biden J.D. '68, 47th Vice President of the United States


Among the individuals who have attended or graduated from Syracuse University include writers Kathrine Switzer, George Saunders, Stephen Crane, Joyce Carol Oates, John D. MacDonald, Cheryl Strayed, Shirley Jackson, and Alice Sebold; William Safire, Pulitzer Prize winning commentator; Pierre Ramond, string theorist; Cambridge University historian Sir Moses I. Finley; Sir John Stanley, British Member of Parliament; Arthur Rock, legendary venture capitalist and cofounder of Intel; Vishal Sikka, Former CEO and MD of Infosys; Donna Shalala, CEO of the Clinton Foundation; Joe Biden, former Vice President of the United States; Robert Jarvik, inventor of the first artificial heart implanted into human beings; Eileen Collins, first female commander of a Space Shuttle; Prince Sultan bin Salman, first Arab, first Muslim and the youngest person to travel to space; Robert Menschel, legendary partner/director at Goldman Sachs; Marilyn Loden, who coined the phrase "glass ceiling"; Samuel Irving Newhouse, Jr., owner of Conde Nast publications; Lowell Paxson, founder of Home Shopping Network; musician Lou Reed; Betsey Johnson fashion designer; David P. Weber, lawyer and certified fraud examiner, who reported misconduct in the Bernard L. Madoff and R. Allen Stanford frauds; Abramoff scandal lawyer Kevin Ring, and Prince Al-Waleed bin Talal, a prominent investor and member of the Saudi royal family. Emily C. Gorman, former director of the United States Women's Army Corps, completed her graduate studies at Syracuse.
Alumni in journalism and broadcasting include Kathrine Switzer, Ted Koppel, Megyn Kelly, Michael Barkann, Bob Costas, Marv Albert, Len Berman, Marty Glickman, Dorothy Thompson, Beth Mowins, Dave Pasch, Sean McDonough, Ian Eagle, Dave O'Brien, Dick Stockton, Arun Shourie, Mike Tirico, Brian Higgins, Adam Zucker, Lakshmi Singh, Larry Hryb (an employee at Microsoft, former radio broadcaster for Clear Channel Communications), Steve Kroft of 60 Minutes, Pulitzer Prize winner Eugene Payne and Adam Schein of Mad Dog Sports Radio, NY Times columnist and war correspondent Drew Middletown.




Vanessa Williams, actress and singer


Notable SU alumni in the performing arts include Dick Clark, Taye Diggs, Rob Edwards, Peter Falk, Vera Farmiga, Peter Guber, Peter Hyams, Frank Langella, Jessie Mueller, Lou Reed, Tom Everett Scott, Aaron Sorkin, Jerry Stiller, Lexington Steele, Bill Viola, Vanessa Williams, and Pete Yorn.
Prominent athletes include Kathrine Switzer, the first woman to officially run the Boston Marathon, Jim Brown, actor and NFL Hall of Famer with the Cleveland Browns, arguably the greatest running back of all time;[133] Ernie Davis, the first African-American Heisman Trophy winner immortalized in the motion picture The Express; Donovan McNabb, former NFL quarterback; former Indianapolis Colts wide receiver Marvin Harrison; Dwight Freeney, defensive end for the San Diego Chargers; Larry Csonka, former Miami Dolphins running back, Pro Football Hall of Famer and television host, Carmelo Anthony, forward for the Oklahoma City Thunder; 7-time NBA All Star, pro basketball Hall of Famer and former Mayor of Detroit Dave Bing; Tim Green, former Atlanta Falcons player, author, lawyer, and National Public Radio commentator; Darryl Johnston, three-time Super Bowl winner with the Dallas Cowboys in the 1990s; Mikey Powell, who formerly played lacrosse for the Boston Cannons; Floyd Little, who played for the Denver Broncos; Kyle Johnson, who played the majority of his NFL career with the Denver Broncos; John Mackey a member of the NFL Hall of Fame played for the legendary Baltimore Colts (1963–71); and Tom Coughlin, former New York Giants head coach and executive VP of football operation at Jacksonville Jaguars.
Affiliations[edit]
Affiliated institutions[edit]
State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry[edit]
Main article: State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry
The College of Environmental Science and Forestry (ESF) has a long affiliation with Syracuse University, shares many campus resources, and operates its main academic campus immediately adjacent to Syracuse University. ESF was founded in 1911 as the New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University, under the leadership of Syracuse University Trustee Louis Marshall, with the active support of Syracuse University Chancellor Day. Its founding followed the Governor's veto of annual appropriations to a separate New York State College of Forestry at Cornell.[134]
ESF is an autonomous institution, administratively separate from SU, while resources, facilities, and some infrastructure are shared. The two schools share a common Schedule of Classes; students at both institutions may take courses at the other, and degrees from ESF bear the Syracuse University seal along with the State University of New York. A number of concurrent degree programs and certificates are offered between the schools, as well. The college receives an annual appropriation as part of the SUNY budget and the state builds and maintains all of the college's educational facilities. The state has similar relationships with five statutory colleges that are at Alfred University and Cornell University.
ESF faculty, students, and students' families join those from SU to take part in a joint convocation ceremony at the beginning of the academic year in August, and joint commencement exercises in May. ESF and SU students share access to libraries, recreational facilities, student clubs, and other activities at both institutions, except for the schools' intercollegiate sports teams, affiliated with the NCAA and NAIA, respectively. First-year ESF students live in the newly constructed Centennial Hall located on ESF's main campus.[135]
State University of New York Upstate Medical University[edit]
Main article: State University of New York Upstate Medical University
The medical school was formerly a college within SU, known as the Syracuse University Medical School. In 1950, SU sold the medical school to the State University of New York system. Beginning in the fall of 2009, a Master of Public Health degree program is now being offered by the two institutions. The program is the first of its kind in Central New York, and the first jointly offered by the two universities.[136]
Formerly affiliated institutions[edit]
State University of New York at Binghamton[edit]
Main article: Binghamton University
Binghamton University was established in 1946 as Triple Cities College, to serve the needs of local veterans of the Binghamton, New York area, who were returning from World War II. Established in Endicott, New York, the college was a branch of Syracuse University. Triple Cities College offered local students the first two years of their education, while the following two were spent at Syracuse University. In 1946, students could earn their degrees entirely at the Binghamton campus. In 1950, it was absorbed by the State University of New York and renamed Harpur College.[137]
Utica College[edit]
Main article: Utica College
Utica College, an independent private university located in Utica, New York, was founded by Syracuse University in 1946. Utica College became independent from SU in 1995, but still offers its students the option to receive a specialized bachelor's degree from Syracuse University through a mutual relationship between the two schools.[138]
See also[edit]


ACC portal
New York portal
Syracuse, New York portal
University portal



Bernie Fine Sexual Abuse Allegations and Termination
Feiner v. New York
List of Chancellors of Syracuse University
Say Yes to Education
Syracuse University Alma Mater
Syracuse University in pop culture (movies, books, television)

References[edit]


^ "Syracuse University Chronology". Syracuse University. February 10, 2008. Retrieved September 16, 2008. 
^ As of June 30, 2016. "U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year (FY) 2016 Endowment Market Value and Change in Endowment Market Value from FY 2015 to FY 2016" (PDF). National Association of College and University Business Officers and Commonfund Institute. 2017. 
^ a b c d "SU Facts". Syracuse University. Retrieved January 29, 2011. 
^ a b c "Syracuse University OIRA – Facts and Figures – Student Enrollment". Syracuse University. January 12, 2014. Retrieved December 4, 2013. 
^ "Syracuse University Business and Facilities Maintenance Services". Syracuse University. 
^ Syracuse University Brand Guidelines (PDF). August 23, 2017. Retrieved September 8, 2017. 
^ "Marrone's Focus is on the 'Cuse". Syracuse University. December 13, 2008. Retrieved January 5, 2009. 
^ "Syracuse University | Best College | US News". Colleges.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com. September 28, 2012. Retrieved October 10, 2012. 
^ "Syracuse University". Princetonreview.com. September 22, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2013. 
^ "Syracuse University Data, Campus, Location, Stats". College Stats.org. Retrieved October 10, 2012. 
^ "Syracuse University — School Overview". Cappex. Retrieved October 10, 2012. 
^ "Syracuse University". March 28, 2011. 
^ "Syracuse University Bylaws, Scope: Trustees/University Governance". Syracuse University. May 14, 2011. Retrieved December 16, 2011. Three Trustees shall be elected by the Board to represent the North Central New York, Western New York and Wyoming Conferences of the United Methodist Church. The Syracuse University Board of Trustees and the named conferences may recommend persons for election as Trustees in this capacity. The representatives need not reside in the areas they represent. 
^ A Brief Report of Church Relatedness: Syracuse University – INCORPORATION AND THE METHODIST CHURCH. Syracuse University. June 15, 2010. The current bylaws authorize the Board to elect three Organization Trustees: one Trustee each to represent the North Central New York, Western New York, and Wyoming conferences of the United Methodist Church. Both the conferences and the Board may recommend persons for election as Organization Trustees. Today Syracuse University is considered a Methodist-related institution. Syracuse University's affiliation is expressed in the tradition, though not regulation, of having a United Methodist minister serve as dean of Hendricks Chapel and in the University's participation in the annual University Teacher/Scholar Award sponsored by the Methodist Church. In addition, the University administers a number of Methodist-funded scholarships and houses the Bishop Ledden Endowed Professorship in the Department of Religion.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Separated brethren: a review of Protestant, Anglican, Eastern Orthodox & other religions in the United States. Our Sunday Visitor. 2002. ISBN 9781931709057. Retrieved March 27, 2010. Among Protestant denominations, Methodists take first place in hospitals and colleges. Some of their one hundred colleges and universities have all but severed ties with the denominations, but others remain definitely Methodist: Syracuse, Boston, Emory, Duke, Drew, Denver, and Southern Methodist. The church operates three hundred sixty schools and institutions overseas. Methodists established Goodwill Industries in 1907 to help handicapped persons help themselves by repairing and selling old furniture and clothes. The United Methodist Church runs seventy-two hospitals in the United States. 
^ "Syracuse University". International Association of Methodist Schools, Colleges, and Universities (IAMSCU). Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2007. 
^ "United Methodist schools score high in rankings". The United Methodist Church. August 31, 2004. Archived from the original on July 1, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2007. Other United Methodist schools on the top national list are Syracuse (N.Y.) University (tied for 52nd); Boston University (tied for 56th); Southern Methodist University, Dallas (tied for 71st); and American University, Washington (tied for 86th). 
^ "Eastern College Athletic Conference (ECAC)". Easter College Athletic Conference. September 29, 2008. Retrieved September 16, 2008. 
^ Galpin, WF (1952). Syracuse University: The Pioneer Years. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. 
^ a b c d e f Greene, John Edward (2000). The Hill: an illustrated biography of Syracuse University (SU), 1870–present. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press. ISBN 0-8156-0648-6. 
^ Goldwin Smith, Reminiscences (New York, 1911), p.371;quoted in Morris Bishop (1962), p.11, A History of Cornell. Cornell University Press
^ Carol Kammen, 2003, p. 13 "Glorious to View Cornell", Cornell University Press; Ithaca, NY ISBN 978-0-935995-03-9
^ a b c d "History of the Founding of Syracuse University". Syracuse University. Retrieved December 15, 2010. 
^ "Peck at Dickinson". Archived from the original on July 28, 2008. Retrieved August 26, 2009. 
^ Green, John Edward (2000). The Hill: an illustrated biography of Syracuse University, 1870–present. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press. p. 2. ISBN 0-8156-0648-6. 
^ a b c Gorney, J (2006). Syracuse University: an architectural guide. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. ISBN 0-8156-0810-1. 
^ a b c "Co-ed From the Start: Women Students at Syracuse University in the 19th Century". Syracuse University. Retrieved December 20, 2010. 
^ "SU Archives: Buildings - Tolley Building". archives.syr.edu. Retrieved 2017-05-15. 
^ "SU Archives: Buildings - Crouse College of Fine Arts". archives.syr.edu. Retrieved 2017-05-15. 
^ a b c Baron, Karrie A.; Galpin, William Freeman; Wilson, Richard; Barck, Oscar Theodore; Greene, John Edward (1952). Syracuse University. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press. ISBN 0-8156-2701-7. 
^ "Syracuse University History". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on October 20, 2008. Retrieved September 17, 2008. 
^ "Syracuse University History 1906–1930". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved September 17, 2008. 
^ a b "Syracuse University History 1931–1950". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008. Retrieved September 17, 2008. 
^ Forbes, BC (1917). Men who are making America. New York, NY: B.C. Forbes Publishing. p. 440. 
^ "Syracuse University History, 1951–1960". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "Syracuse University History, 1961–1970". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ a b c Deppa, Joan (1994). The media and disasters: Pan Am 103. New York: New York University Press. ISBN 0-8147-1856-6. 
^ Yen, Marianne (December 23, 1988). "A Tragic End to the Semester". The Washington Post. p. A07. Eggers was criticized for allowing a basketball game against Western Michigan to be played here Wednesday night. More than 25,000 people attended, and a moment of silence was observed before the game. 'We who are in charge were also in shock,' a haggard Eggers explained yesterday. 'The question of the basketball game just dropped by the wayside in our efforts to deal with this tragedy.' 
^ Litsky, Frank; Williams, Lena (September 12, 2001). "Many Sporting Events Called Off or Postponed". The New York Times. p. C18. 
^ Thamel, Pete (September 16, 2001). "Pan Am Horror Recalled On the Night 270 People Died, SU Played On". Syracuse Herald American. p. D2. 
^ Kaye, Ken (December 21, 2003). "An Act of War?–On the 15th Anniversary a Former Pilot Compares the Downing of Pan Am 103 to the Sept. 11, 2001 Attacks on America". South Florida Sun-Sentinel. p. 3A. Until Sept. 11, Flight 103 had been the deadliest act of terrorism against the United States, killing...189 Americans. 
^ Conery, Ben (December 21, 2008). "20 years later, pain of Lockerbie still fresh". The Washington Times. p. A3. When a bomb hidden aboard Pan Am flight 103 exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland...189 Americans (were) killed, making it the largest terrorist attack against the U.S. until nearly 3,000 people were killed Sept. 11, 2001. 
^ "Lockerbie Scholars". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ Ali Shehad Zaidi, "Powerful Compassion: The Strike At Syracuse," in Monthly Review, September 1999
^ "Best Places to Live-Syracuse, NY". CNNMoney. August 2008. Archived from the original on January 23, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2009. 
^ "S.U. Acquires Sheraton Hotel". CNY Business Journal. 2000. Retrieved October 6, 2008. [dead link]
^ "Drumlins Country Club. Syracuse, New York". Drumlins Country Club. Archived from the original on August 21, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "Lubin House: Welcome". Syracuse University. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "Syracuse University Greenberg House". Syracuse University. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "Minnowbrook Conference Center". Minnowbrook Conference Center. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "Syracuse University Map". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on August 1, 2008. Retrieved September 20, 2008. 
^ Robert Mann & Alice Jean Stuart (1980). "National Register of Historic Places Inventory/Nomination: Syracuse University-Comstock Tract Buildings". Archived from the original on July 24, 2011. Retrieved January 25, 2008. 
^ "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. January 12, 2009. 
^ "Syracuse Center of Excellence in Environmental and Energy Innovations". SyracuseCoE. 2008. Archived from the original on March 2, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2009. 
^ "Excellence in Environmental and Energy Innovations". Syracuse University. Retrieved December 25, 2010. 
^ "Welcome to Syracuse University News". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on November 24, 2007. Retrieved September 24, 2008. 
^ Gibson, Tom. "Orange Lead the Way". Progressive Engineer. Retrieved December 3, 2013. 
^ "The Connective Corridor—Project Overview". Syracuse University. 2008. Archived from the original on February 7, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2009. 
^ "Syracuse in Your Area - Syracuse University". www.syracuse.edu. Retrieved 2017-05-15. 
^ "The Syracuse University Art Galleries". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "The Warehouse Gallery". Archived from the original on March 20, 2014. 
^ Lubinhouse.syr.edu Archived March 20, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Lowe Art Gallery: Syracuse Arts Directory". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Art Exhibits Policy". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Galleries". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Special Collections Research Center". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ a b "Syracuse University Bylaws". Retrieved November 15, 2010. 
^ "Office of Admissions". Syracuse University. Retrieved September 16, 2008. 
^ "Best Colleges 2009". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on September 19, 2008. Retrieved September 18, 2008. 
^ "Office of Admissions". Syracuse University. Retrieved September 16, 2008. 
^ "Graduate School Certificates for Advanced Study Programs". Syracuse University. Retrieved September 17, 2008. 
^ a b "SU Abroad – Programs By Location". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on October 13, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "SU Abroad – Your Place In The World". Syracuse University. Retrieved September 17, 2008. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017: USA". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "America's Top Colleges". Forbes. July 5, 2016. 
^ "Best Colleges 2017: National Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. September 12, 2016. 
^ "2016 Rankings - National Universities". Washington Monthly. Retrieved September 6, 2016. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "QS World University Rankings® 2018". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2017. Retrieved 25 July 2017. 
^ "World University Rankings 2016-17". THE Education Ltd. Retrieved September 21, 2016. 
^ "Best Global Universities Rankings: 2017". U.S. News & World Report LP. Retrieved October 25, 2016. 
^ "Syracuse University - U.S. News Best Grad School Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved 2 June 2017. 
^ "Syracuse University - U.S. News Best Global University Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved 20 July 2017. 
^ "National Universities Ranking". U.S. News & World Report year. 2014. 
^ Tumulty, Brian (April 13, 2015). "Half of N.Y. colleges pay profs less than $100K". Ithaca Journal. Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Top 100 world universities in Social Sciences". Institute of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008. Retrieved September 24, 2008. 
^ "Welcome to the S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on September 23, 2008. Retrieved September 17, 2008. 
^ "America's Best Graduate Schools" (PDF). US News and World Report. Retrieved September 17, 2008. 
^ "Poets & Quants". poetsandquantsforundergrads.com. 
^ "U.S. News Best Colleges Rankings - Syracuse University". 
^ "Fast Facts: Whitman School of Management at Syracuse University". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on December 31, 2007. Retrieved December 22, 2007. 
^ "INSCT – Institute for National Security & Counterterrorism". Syracuse University College of Law. Retrieved September 17, 2008. 
^ "Cold Case Justice Initiative uncovers 196 new cases from civil rights era - Syracuse University". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Best Public Affairs Programs". 
^ "Search – Fine Arts – Best Graduate Schools – Education". US News and World Report. Archived from the original on April 24, 2009. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "SUPA About Us". Retrieved July 7, 2009. 
^ Kingkade, Tyler (August 6, 2013). "Top Party Schools: Princeton Review Releases 2013-14 Rankings". The Huffington Post. 
^ "Top Party Schools in the US 2015". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "University lectures". Syracuse University. Retrieved October 22, 2010. 
^ "University lectures". Syracuse University. Retrieved October 22, 2010. 
^ "Donor leaves $1M record collection to SU". syracuse.com. Retrieved July 9, 2008. 
^ "Institutions: Syracuse University". Carnegie Foundation. Retrieved July 16, 2015. 
^ "Syracuse University Research". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on May 15, 2008. Retrieved September 24, 2008. 
^ "Association of American Universities Member Institutions". aau.com. Retrieved September 24, 2008. 
^ Selingo, Jeffrey J. (May 2, 2011). "Facing an Ouster From an Elite Group of Universities, Syracuse U. Says It Will Withdraw". Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved May 2, 2011. 
^ a b "Syracuse University Research Centers". Syracuse University. Retrieved September 24, 2008. 
^ "Burton Blatt Institute: BBI Projects". Burton Blatt Institute. Retrieved September 24, 2008. 
^ "Syracuse Biomaterials Institute | Where Materials Matter". biomaterials.syr.edu. Retrieved 2017-06-04. 
^ "myLigo". my.ligo.org. Retrieved 2017-06-04. 
^ "Gravitational Wave Group". gwg.syr.edu. Retrieved 2017-06-04. 
^ "Gravitational Waves Detected 100 Years after Einstein's Prediction". SU News. Retrieved 2017-06-04. 
^ "Center for International Services". Syracuse University. Retrieved September 19, 2008. 
^ "Syracuse University Facts-Student Demographics". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008. Retrieved September 19, 2008. 
^ https://www.forbes.com/colleges/syracuse-university/
^ http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=372
^ "About Us". Archived from the original on April 26, 2011. Retrieved June 8, 2011. 
^ ":: Ed2010 at SU :: Resources ::". Retrieved April 2, 2011. 
^ "Student Association". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved September 18, 2008. 
^ "Syracuse University Senate Bylaws". Syracuse University. Retrieved June 2, 2014. 
^ a b "The History of Syracuse University Fraternity and Sorority Community". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on September 5, 2008. Retrieved September 18, 2008. 
^ "Alpha Phi Alpha — Delta Zeta Chapter — Syracuse University". Retrieved April 2, 2011. 
^ "Chapter Development Plan" (PDF). Syracuse University. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 9, 2010. Retrieved December 26, 2010. 
^ "Syracuse University Ambulance". sua.syr.edu. Retrieved December 29, 2013. 
^ "Hendricks Chapel". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Chaplaincies". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Religious Groups". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Roman Catholic". Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "Hillel at Syracuse University". Hillel at Syracuse University. Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ "SU Athletics – Syracuse National Champions". Syracuse University. Retrieved September 24, 2008. 
^ "Pages in the History of Elmira – Ernie Davis: the "Elmira Express"". City of Elmira. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "SU Athletics – National Champions Again! Syracuse Claims 10th NCAA Title with 13–10 Win Against Johns Hopkins". Syracuse University. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008. Retrieved September 26, 2008. 
^ "Carrier 100th Anniversary: Dome Sweet Dome". Carrier. November 25, 2002. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2007. 
^ Cleveland Browns JIM BROWN the greatest NFL running back. YouTube. August 20, 2014. Retrieved August 3, 2015. 
^ Education & Agriculture, A History of the NYS College of Agriculture at Cornell University, 1963, by Gould P. Colman, page 161, Cornell University Press
^ "The ESF-SU Relationship". State University of New York. Retrieved September 18, 2008. 
^ "SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse University Offer Joint Master of Public Health Degree in Fall 2009". SUNY Upstate Medical University. October 30, 2008. Archived from the original on February 11, 2009. Retrieved January 14, 2009. 
^ "About: History". SUNY Binghamton. Retrieved December 25, 2010. 
^ "Fast Facts". Utica College. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Syracuse University.



Official website
Syracuse Athletics website







v
t
e


Syracuse University




Located in: Syracuse, New York



Academics



Architecture
Arts and Sciences
Citizenship and Public Affairs
Information Studies
Law
Management
Public Communications





Affiliated institutions



SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
SUNY Upstate Medical University





Departments



African American Studies
National Security and Counterterrorism





Athletics




Teams



Football
Men's basketball
Men's lacrosse
Men's soccer
Women's basketball
Women's ice hockey





Facilities



Archbold Stadium
Ben Schwartzwalder Trophy
Carrier Dome
Tennity Ice Skating Pavilion





Other



Otto the Orange
Atlantic Coast Conference








Greek Organizations



Alpha Gamma Delta
Alpha Phi
Gamma Phi Beta
Delta Kappa Epsilon
Theta Chi
Phi Iota Alpha
Phi Kappa Psi
Phi Tau
Syracuse Triad





History



Feiner v. New York
Genesee College
Genesee Wesleyan Seminary
NYS College of Forestry
Orangemen baseball
Pan Am Flight 103 bombing





Campus



List of buildings
Comstock Tract Buildings
Crouse College
Hall of Languages
Pi Chapter House





People



Alumni
Faculty
Chancellors





Student life



Alma Mater
CitrusTV
Orange TV Network
The Daily Orange
WAER (88.3 FM)
WJPZ (89.1 FM)
WERW (webcast)








Founded: 1870










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Syracuse, New York






Mayor
Metropolitan area
Onondaga Lake
Onondaga County
Central New York
Finger Lakes
Upstate New York





History



Onondaga Nation

Great Peacemaker
Hiawatha


French

Sainte Marie
Simon Le Moyne


British
Cycling
Ethnic groups
Erie Canal
Historic places
Industry

products
salt


Mayors
Notable citizens

John Wilkinson
Samuel Joseph May
Matilda Joslyn Gage
Louis Marshall


Railroads

New York Central Passenger station
OnTrack


Streetcars
Towns
Underground Railroad





Economy



Transportation

airport
Transportation Center/Amtrak train station
bus service


Interstate highways

I-81
I-481
I-90
I-690


Air National Guard
Bristol-Myers Squibb
Carrier Corporation
Destiny USA
Downtown Syracuse

Armory Square
Clinton Square


Lockheed Martin
National Grid
O'Brien & Gere
Oneida Nation Enterprises

Turning Stone Resort & Casino


Raymour & Flanigan
Seneca Data
SRC
Charter Spectrum
Wegmans





Education



Bryant & Stratton College
Empire State College
Le Moyne College
Onondaga Community College
SUNY Environmental Science and Forestry
SUNY Oswego
Syracuse City School District
Syracuse University
SUNY Upstate Medical University





Sports



Syracuse Chiefs

NBT Bank Stadium


Syracuse Crunch

War Memorial Arena


Syracuse Silver Knights
Syracuse Orange

Carrier Dome
football
men's basketball
men's lacrosse
men's soccer
women's basketball
women's ice hockey


Le Moyne Dolphins
OCC Lazers
SUNY-ESF Mighty Oaks
Ski country





Culture
and parks



Annual events
Burnet Park
Clinton String Quartet
Erie Canal Museum
Everson Museum of Art
Pass Arboretum
Museum of Science and Technology
New York State Fair
Light Work
Mills Rose Garden
Niagara Mohawk Building
Old Erie Canal
Onondaga Creekwalk
Onondaga Lake Park
Ra Ra Riot
Rosamond Gifford Zoo
Syracuse in fiction
Syracuse Stage
Thornden Park








 Portal
 Category

lists
neighborhoods
people
sports
transportation


 Commons
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Colleges and Universities in Central New York



Doctoral



Binghamton University
Clarkson University
Cornell University
Rochester Institute of Technology
St. John Fisher College
SUNY Environmental Science and Forestry
SUNY Polytechnic Institute
SUNY Upstate Medical University
Syracuse University
University of Rochester





Graduate



College at Brockport
Empire State College
Ithaca College
Le Moyne College
SUNY Cortland
SUNY Geneseo
SUNY Oneonta
SUNY Oswego
SUNY Potsdam





Baccalaureate



Bryant & Stratton College
Cazenovia College
Colgate University
Davis College
Elmira College
Hamilton College
Hartwick College
Hobart and William Smith Colleges
Morrisville State College
Nazareth College
Saint Lawrence University
SUNY Canton
Union College
Utica College
Wells College





Community colleges



Broome
Cayuga
Corning
Finger Lakes
Herkimer
Jefferson
Mohawk Valley
Onondaga
Tompkins Cortland





Other



St. Elizabeth College of Nursing
SUNY-ESF Ranger School












v
t
e


Universities Research Association



Public



Alabama
Arizona
Arizona State
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Colorado State
Florida
Florida State
Houston
Illinois

Chicago
Urbana–Champaign


Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
LSU
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Mississippi
Nebraska
New Mexico
New Mexico State
North Carolina
North Texas
Northern Illinois
Ohio State
Oklahoma
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
South Carolina
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


Tennessee
Texas

Arlington
Austin
Dallas


Texas A&M
Texas Tech
Virginia
Virginia Tech
Washington
Wayne State
William & Mary
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Harvard
Illinois Tech
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northeastern
Northwestern
Notre Dame
Penn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
Rockefeller
SMU
Stanford
Syracuse
Tufts
Tulane
Vanderbilt
WUSTL
Yale





International



McGill
Toronto
Pisa
Waseda
Manchester
Liverpool
UCL












v
t
e


Atlantic Coast Conference



Atlantic Division



Boston College Eagles
Clemson Tigers
Florida State Seminoles
Louisville Cardinals
North Carolina State Wolfpack
Notre Dame Fighting Irish (non-football member)
Syracuse Orange
Wake Forest Demon Deacons








Coastal Division



Duke Blue Devils
Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets
Miami Hurricanes
North Carolina Tar Heels
Pittsburgh Panthers
Virginia Cavaliers
Virginia Tech Hokies





Championships & awards



Conference champions
National championships
Athlete of the Year





Broadcast partners



Raycom Sports (ACC Network; list of affiliates)
ESPN (ACC Network Extra)












v
t
e


College Hockey America



Teams



Lindenwood Lady Lions
Mercyhurst Lakers
Penn State Nittany Lions
RIT Tigers
Robert Morris Colonials
Syracuse Orange





Arenas



Lindenwood Ice Arena (Lindenwood)
Mercyhurst Ice Center (Mercyhurst)
Pegula Ice Arena (Penn State)
Gene Polisseni Center (RIT)
84 Lumber Arena (Robert Morris)
Tennity Ice Skating Pavilion (Syracuse)





Tournaments



2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Champions












v
t
e


Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges






BU Terriers
Brown Bears
Columbia Lions
Cornell Big Red
Dartmouth Big Green
Georgetown Hoyas
Harvard Crimson
Holy Cross Crusaders
MIT Engineers
Navy Midshipmen
Northeastern Huskies
Penn Quakers
Princeton Tigers
Rutgers Scarlet Knights
Syracuse Orange
Wisconsin Badgers
Yale Bulldogs












v
t
e


International Association of Methodist-related Schools, Colleges, and Universities






Adrian
Alaska Pacific
Albion
Albright
Allegheny
American
Andrew
Baker
Baldwin Wallace
Bennett
Bethune–Cookman
Birmingham-Southern
Boston University
Brevard
Centenary (Louisiana)
Centenary University
Central Methodist
Claflin
Clark Atlanta
Columbia College (South Carolina)
Cornell College
Dakota Wesleyan
Denver
DePauw
Dickinson College
Dillard
Drew
Duke
Emory
Emory & Henry
Evansville
Ferrum
Florida Southern
Green Mountain
Greensboro
Hamline
Hendrix
High Point
Hiwassee
Huntingdon
Huston-Tillotson
Illinois Wesleyan
Indianapolis
Iowa Wesleyan
Kansas Wesleyan
Kendall
Kentucky Wesleyan
LaGrange
Lambuth
Lebanon Valley
Lindsey Wilson
Lon Morris
Louisburg
Lycoming
MacMurray
Martin Methodist
McKendree
McMurry
Meharry Medical
Methodist
Millsaps
Morningside
Mount Union
Nebraska Methodist
Nebraska Wesleyan
North Carolina Wesleyan
North Central
Northwestern University
Ohio Northern
Ohio Wesleyan
Oklahoma City
Otterbein
Oxford of Emory
Pacific
Paine
Pfeiffer
Puget Sound
Philander Smith
Randolph
Randolph-Macon
Reinhardt
Rocky Mountain
Rust
Shenandoah
Simpson College
Southern Methodist
Southwestern College (Kansas)
Southwestern University
Spartanburg Methodist
Syracuse
Tennessee Wesleyan
Texas Wesleyan
Union (Kentucky)
Virginia Wesleyan
Wesley College (Delaware)
Wesleyan College
West Virginia Wesleyan
Wiley
Willamette
Wofford
Young Harris












v
t
e


New York college radio stations






WAIH (State University of New York College at Potsdam)
WALF (Alfred University)
WARY (Westchester Community College)
WBNY (Buffalo State College)
WBSU (College at Brockport)
WCDB (State University of New York at Albany)
WCEB (Corning Community College)
WCVF (Fredonia State University)
WCWP (Long Island University, CW Post Campus)
WDWN (Cayuga County Community College)
WECW (Elmira College)
WERW (Syracuse University)
WETD (Alfred State College)
WFNP (SUNY New Paltz)
WFTU (Five Towns College)
WFUV (Fordham University)
WGCC (Genesee Community College)
WGFR (SUNY Adirondack)
WGSU (SUNY Geneseo)
WHCL (Hamilton College)
WHCR (City College of New York)
WHPC (Nassau Community College)
WHRW (Binghamton University)
WICB (Ithaca College)
WITC (Cazenovia College)
WITR (Rochester Institute of Technology)
WJPZ (Syracuse University)
WKCR (Columbia University)
WKRB (Kingsborough Community College)
WNYK (Nyack College)
WNYO (State University of New York – Oswego)
WNYU (New York University)
WONY (SUNY College at Oneonta)
WPNR (Utica College of Syracuse University)
WQKE (Plattsburgh State University)
WRCU (Colgate University)
WRHO (Hartwick College)
WRHU (Hofstra University)
WRPI (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute)
WRUC (Union College)
WRUR (University of Rochester)
WSBU (St. Bonaventure University)
WSIA (College of Staten Island)
WSPN (Skidmore College)
WSUC (State University of New York – Cortland)
WTSC (Clarkson University)
WUSB (State University of New York – Stony Brook)
WVCR (Siena College)
WVHC (Herkiner County Community College)
WVKR (Vassar College)
WXBC (Bard College)









See also
adult contemporary
classic hits
college
country
news/talk
NPR
oldies
religious
rock
sports
top 40
urban
other radio stations in New York















Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 154121848
LCCN: n79018811
ISNI: 0000 0001 2189 1568
GND: 4306-0
SUDOC: 034281290
BNF: cb12066573q (data)
NLA: 35536882
NKC: kn20080330020
BNE: XX136230











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Syracuse_University&oldid=817716984"					Categories: Syracuse UniversityUniversities and colleges in New York (state)1870 establishments in New York (state)Atlantic Coast Conference schoolsCarnegie libraries in New York (state)Educational institutions established in 1870Hidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2016Webarchive template wayback linksUse mdy dates from October 2015Coordinates on WikidataInstances of Infobox university using image sizeGood articlesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers