For other uses, see Systematics (disambiguation).




A comparison of phylogenetic and phenetic (character-based) concepts


Biological systematics is the study of the diversification of living forms, both past and present, and the relationships among living things through time. Relationships are visualized as evolutionary trees (synonyms: cladograms, phylogenetic trees, phylogenies). Phylogenies have two components: branching order (showing group relationships) and branch length (showing amount of evolution). Phylogenetic trees of species and higher taxa are used to study the evolution of traits (e.g., anatomical or molecular characteristics) and the distribution of organisms (biogeography). Systematics, in other words, is used to understand the evolutionary history of life on Earth.



Contents


1 Branches and Applications of Systematics
2 Definition and relation with taxonomy
3 Taxonomic characters
4 See also
5 References

5.1 Notes
5.2 Further reading


6 External links



Branches and Applications of Systematics[edit]
In the study of biological systematics, researchers use the different branches to further understand the relationships between differing organisms. These branches are used to determine the applications and uses for modern day systematics.
Biological systematics classifies species by using three specific branches. Numerical systematics, also known as Biometry, is a method that uses biological statistics to identify and classify animals. Biochemical systematics is a method that classifies and identifies animals based on the analysis of the material that makes up the living part of a cell, such as the nucleus, cytoplasm, and other organelles. Experimental systematics is a method that identifies and classifies animals based on the evolutionary units that comprise a species, as well as their importance in evolution itself. Factors such as mutations, genetic divergence, and hybridization all are considered evolutionary units.[1]
With the specific branches, researchers are able to determine the applications and uses for modern-day systematics. These applications include:

Studying the diversity of organisms and the differentiation between extinct and living creatures. Biologists study the well-understood relationships by making many different diagrams and "trees" (cladograms, phylogenetic trees, phylogenies, etc.).
Including the scientific names of organisms, species descriptions and overviews, taxonomic orders, and classifications of evolutionary and organism histories.
Explaining the biodiversity of the planet and its organisms. The systematic study is that of conservation.
Manipulating and controlling the natural world. This includes the practice of 'biological control', the intentional introduction of natural predators and disease.[1]

Definition and relation with taxonomy[edit]
John Lindley provided an early definition of systematics in 1830, although he wrote of "systematic botany" rather than using the term "systematics".[2]
In 1970 Michener et al. defined "systematic biology" and "taxonomy" (terms that are often confused and used interchangeably) in relationship to one another as follows:[3]

Systematic biology (hereafter called simply systematics) is the field that (a) provides scientific names for organisms, (b) describes them, (c) preserves collections of them, (d) provides classifications for the organisms, keys for their identification, and data on their distributions, (e) investigates their evolutionary histories, and (f) considers their environmental adaptations. This is a field with a long history that in recent years has experienced a notable renaissance, principally with respect to theoretical content. Part of the theoretical material has to do with evolutionary areas (topics e and f above), the rest relates especially to the problem of classification. Taxonomy is that part of Systematics concerned with topics (a) to (d) above.

Taxonomy, systematic biology, systematics, biosystematics, scientific classification, biological classification, phylogenetics: At various times in history, all these words have had overlapping, related meanings. However, in modern usage, they can all be considered synonyms of each other.
For example, Webster's 9th New Collegiate Dictionary of 1987 treats "classification", "taxonomy", and "systematics" as synonyms. According to this work, the terms originated in 1790, c. 1828, and in 1888 respectively. Some[who?] claim systematics alone deals specifically with relationships through time, and that it can be synonymous with phylogenetics, broadly dealing with the inferred hierarchy[citation needed] of organisms. This means it would be a subset of taxonomy as it is sometimes regarded, but the inverse is claimed by others.[who?]
Europeans tend to use the terms "systematics" and "biosystematics" for the study of biodiversity as a whole, whereas North Americans tend to use "taxonomy" more frequently.[4] However, taxonomy, and in particular alpha taxonomy, is more specifically the identification, description, and naming (i.e. nomenclature) of organisms,[5] while "classification" focuses on placing organisms within hierarchical groups that show their relationships to other organisms. All of these biological disciplines can deal with both extinct and extant organisms.
Systematics uses taxonomy as a primary tool in understanding, as nothing about an organism's relationships with other living things can be understood without it first being properly studied and described in sufficient detail to identify and classify it correctly.[citation needed] Scientific classifications are aids in recording and reporting information to other scientists and to laymen. The systematist, a scientist who specializes in systematics, must, therefore, be able to use existing classification systems, or at least know them well enough to skilfully justify not using them.
Phenetics was an attempt to determine the relationships of organisms through a measure of overall similarity, making no distinction between plesiomorphies (shared ancestral traits) and apomorphies (derived traits). From the late-20th century onwards, it was superseded by cladistics, which rejects plesiomorphies in attempting to resolve the phylogeny of Earth's various organisms through time. Today's[update] systematists generally make extensive use of molecular biology and of computer programs to study organisms.
Taxonomic characters[edit]
Taxonomic characters are the taxonomic attributes that can be used to provide the evidence from which relationships (the phylogeny) between taxa are inferred.[6] Kinds of taxonomic characters:[7]





Morphological characters

General external morphology
Special structures (e.g. genitalia)
Internal morphology (anatomy)
Embryology
Karyology and other cytological factors


Physiological characters

Metabolic factors
Body secretions
Genic sterility factors


Molecular characters

Immunological distance
Electrophoretic differences
Amino acid sequences of proteins
DNA hybridization
DNA and RNA sequences
Restriction endonuclease analyses
Other molecular differences






Behavioral characters

Courtship and other ethological isolating mechanisms
Other behavior patterns


Ecological characters

Habit and habitats
Food
Seasonal variations
Parasites and hosts


Geographic characters

General biogeographic distribution patterns
Sympatric-allopatric relationship of populations







See also[edit]


Part of a series on


Evolutionary biology



Diagrammatic representation of the divergence of modern taxonomic groups from their common ancestor





Key topics


Introduction to evolution
Common descent
Evidence of common descent








Processes and outcomes



Population genetics
Variation
Diversity
Mutation
Natural selection
Adaptation
Polymorphism
Genetic drift
Gene flow
Speciation
Adaptive radiation
Co-operation
Coevolution
Divergence
Convergence
Parallel evolution
Extinction









Natural history



Origin of life
History of life
Timeline of evolution
Human evolution
Phylogeny
Biodiversity
Biogeography
Classification
Evolutionary taxonomy
Cladistics
Transitional fossil
Extinction event









History of evolutionary theory



Overview
Renaissance
Before Darwin
Darwin
Origin of Species
Before synthesis
Modern synthesis
Molecular evolution
Evo-devo
Current research
History of paleontology (timeline)









Fields and applications


Applications of evolution
Biosocial criminology
Ecological genetics
Evolutionary aesthetics
Evolutionary anthropology
Evolutionary computation
Evolutionary ecology
Evolutionary economics
Evolutionary epistemology
Evolutionary ethics
Evolutionary game theory
Evolutionary linguistics
Evolutionary medicine
Evolutionary neuroscience
Evolutionary physiology
Evolutionary psychology
Experimental evolution
Phylogenetics
Paleontology
Selective breeding
Sociobiology
Systematics
Universal Darwinism








Social implications


Evolution as fact and theory
Social effects
Creation–evolution controversy
Objections to evolution
Level of support








 Evolutionary biology portal
 Category
 Book
Related topics







v
t
e






Biological classification
Cladistics - a methodology in systematics
Evolutionary systematics - a school of systematics
Global biodiversity
Phenetics - a methodology in systematics that does not infer phylogeny
Phylogeny - the historical relationships between lineages of organism
16S ribosomal RNA - an intensively studied nucleic acid that has been useful in phylogenetics
Phylogenetic comparative methods - use of evolutionary trees in other studies, such as biodiversity, comparative biology. adaptation, or evolutionary mechanisms
Scientific classification and Taxonomy - the result of research in systematics

References[edit]
Notes[edit]



^ a b "Systematics: Meaning, Branches and Its Application". Biology Discussion. 2016-05-27. Retrieved 2017-04-12. 
^ Wilkins, J. S. What is systematics and what is taxonomy?. Available on http://evolvingthoughts.net
^ Michener, Charles D., John O. Corliss, Richard S. Cowan, Peter H. Raven, Curtis W. Sabrosky, Donald S. Squires, and G. W. Wharton (1970). Systematics In Support of Biological Research. Division of Biology and Agriculture, National Research Council. Washington, D.C. 25 pp.
^ Brusca, R. C., & Brusca, G. J. (2003). Invertebrates (2nd ed.). Sunderland, Mass. : Sinauer Associates, p. 27
^ Fortey, Richard (2008), Dry Store Room No. 1: The Secret Life of the Natural History Museum, London: Harper Perennial, ISBN 978-0-00-720989-7 
^ Mayr, Ernst (1991). Principles of Systematic Zoology. New York: McGraw-Hill, p. 159.
^ Mayr, Ernst (1991), p. 162.



Further reading[edit]

Schuh, Randall T. and Andrew V. Z. Brower. 2009. Biological Systematics: Principles and Applications, 2nd edn. ISBN 978-0-8014-4799-0
Simpson, Michael G. 2005. Plant Systematics. ISBN 978-0-12-644460-5
Wiley, Edward O. and Bruce S. Lieberman. 2011. "Phylogenetics: Theory and Practice of Phylogenetic Systematics, 2nd edn." ISBN 978-0-470-90596-8

External links[edit]

Society of Australian Systematic Biologists
Society of Systematic Biologists
Willi Hennig Society







v
t
e


Evolutionary biology






Evolutionary history of life
Index of evolutionary biology articles
Introduction
Outline of evolution
Timeline of evolution





Evolution



Abiogenesis
Adaptation
Adaptive radiation
Cladistics
Coevolution
Common descent
Cospeciation
Convergence
Divergence
Earliest known life forms
Evidence of common descent
Extinction

Event


Gene-centered view
Homology
Last universal common ancestor
Macroevolution
Microevolution
Origin of life
Panspermia
Parallel evolution
Prehistoric Autopsy
Speciation
Taxonomy





Population genetics



Biodiversity
Gene flow
Genetic drift
Mutation
Natural selection
Variation





Development



Canalisation
Evolutionary developmental biology
Inversion
Modularity
Phenotypic plasticity





Of taxa



Birds

origin


Brachiopods
Cephalopods
Dinosaurs
Fish
Fungi
Insects

butterflies


Life
Mammals

cats
dogs
dolphins and whales
horses
primates

humans
lemurs


sea cows
wolves


Molluscs
Plants
Reptiles
Spiders
Tetrapods
Viruses

influenza







Of organs



Cell
DNA
Flagella
Eukaryotes

symbiogenesis
chromosome
endomembrane system
mitochondria
nucleus
plastids


In animals

eye
hair
auditory ossicle
nervous system
brain







Of processes



Aging

Death
Programmed cell death


Avian flight
Biological complexity
Cooperation
Color vision

in primates


Emotion
Empathy
Ethics
Eusociality
Immune system
Metabolism
Monogamy
Morality
Mosaic evolution
Multicellularity
Sexual reproduction

Gamete differentiation/sexes
Life cycles/nuclear phases
Mating types
Sex-determination


Snake venom





Tempo and modes



Gradualism/Punctuated equilibrium/Saltationism
Micromutation/Macromutation
Uniformitarianism/Catastrophism





Speciation



Allopatric
Anagenesis
Catagenesis
Cladogenesis
Ecological
Hybrid
Parapatric
Peripatric
Reinforcement
Sympatric





History



Renaissance and Enlightenment
Transmutation of species
Charles Darwin

On the Origin of Species


History of paleontology
Transitional fossil
Blending inheritance
Mendelian inheritance
The eclipse of Darwinism
Modern synthesis
History of molecular evolution
Extended evolutionary synthesis





Philosophy



Darwinism
Alternatives to evolution by natural selection

Catastrophism
Lamarckism
Orthogenesis
Mutationism
Saltationism
Structuralism

Spandrel


Theistic
Vitalism







Related



Biogeography
Ecological genetics
Molecular evolution
Phylogenetics

Tree


Polymorphism
Protocell
Systematics








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Biology



Subdisciplines



Anatomy
Astrobiology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biological anthropology
Biological classification
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Bioinformatics
Biostatistics
Biopsychology
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Cognitive biology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Developmental biology
Ecology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Evolutionary developmental biology
Genetics
Genomics
Histology
Human biology
Immunology
Lipidology
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Nanobiotechnology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Origin of life
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Physiology
Quantum biology
Reproductive biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Zoology








Hierarchy of life



Biosphere >  Ecosystem > Community (Biocoenosis) > Population >  Organism > Organ system > Organ > Tissue > Cell > Organelle > Biomolecular complex > Molecule (Macromolecule, Biomolecule) > Atom





Foundations



Cell theory
Ecology
Energy Transformation
Evolution
Genetics
Homeostasis
Synthetic biology
Taxonomy





Principles




Evolution



Adaptation
Earliest known life forms
Function
Genetic drift
Gene flow
Macroevolution
Microevolution
Mutation
Natural selection
Speciation





Ecology



Biodiversity
Biological interaction
Community
Ecosystem
Habitat
Niche
Population dynamics
Resources





Molecular
biology



Cell signaling
Development
Epigenetics
Gene regulation
Meiosis
Mitosis
Post-transcriptional modification





Biochemistry



Carbohydrates
Lipids
Metabolism
Nucleic acids
Photosynthesis
Proteins








Glossaries



Botanical terms
Ecological terms
Plant morphology terms








Category
 Commons
Portal
 WikiProject









Authority control



GND: 4128136-6











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Systematics&oldid=797471114"					Categories: Evolutionary biologyBiological classificationHidden categories: All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2014Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles with GND identifiers