Not to be confused with Tackle (football move) or Defensive tackle.




The positioning of the offensive tackles in a formation.


Tackle is a playing position in American and Canadian football. Historically, in the one-platoon system prevalent in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, a tackle played on both offense and defense. In the modern system of specialized units, offensive tackle and defensive tackle are separate positions, and the stand-alone term "tackle" refers to the offensive tackle position only. The offensive tackle (OT, T) is a position on the offensive line, left and right. Like other offensive linemen, their job is to block: to physically keep defenders away from the offensive player who has the football and enable him to advance the football and eventually score a touchdown. The term "tackle" is a vestige of an earlier era of football in which the same players played both offense and defense.







A tackle is the strong position on the offensive line. They power their blocks with quick steps and maneuverability. The tackles are mostly in charge of the outside protection. If the tight end goes out for a pass, the tackle must cover everyone that his guard does not, plus whoever the tight end is not covering. Usually they defend against defensive ends. In the NFL, offensive tackles often measure over 6 ft 4 in (193 cm) and 300 lb (140 kg).
According to Sports Illustrated football journalist Paul "Dr. Z" Zimmerman, offensive tackles consistently achieve the highest scores, relative to the other positional groups, on the Wonderlic Test, with an average of 26. The Wonderlic is taken before the draft to assess each player's aptitude for learning and problem solving; a score of 26 is estimated to correspond with an IQ of 112.[citation needed]
Right tackle[edit]
The right tackle (RT) is usually the team's best run blocker. Most running plays are towards the strong side (the side with the tight end) of the offensive line. Consequently, the right tackle will face the defending team's best run stoppers. He must be able to gain traction in his blocks so that the running back can find a hole to run through.




Former Minnesota Vikings' offensive tackle Bryant McKinnie


Left tackle[edit]
The left tackle (LT) is usually the team's best pass blocker. Of the two tackles, the left tackles will often have better footwork and agility than the right tackle in order to counteract the pass rush of defensive ends. When a quarterback throws a forward pass, the quarterback's shoulders are aligned roughly perpendicular to the line of scrimmage, with the non-dominant shoulder closer to downfield. Right-handed quarterbacks, the majority of players in the position, thus turn their backs to defenders coming from the left side, creating a vulnerable "blind side" that the left tackle must protect. (Conversely, teams with left-handed quarterbacks tend to have their better pass blockers at right tackle for the same reason.)
A 2006 book by Michael Lewis, The Blind Side: Evolution of a Game, made into a 2009 motion picture, sheds much light on the workings of the left tackle position. The book and the film's introduction discuss how the annual salary of left tackles in the NFL skyrocketed in the mid-1990s. Premier left tackles are now highly sought after, and are often the second highest paid players on a roster after the quarterback; in the 2013 NFL Draft three of the first four picks were left tackles, and usually at least one left tackle is picked in the first five positions.[1] Recent examples include Eric Fisher (2013, 1st overall pick), Luke Joeckel (2013, 2nd overall pick), Lane Johnson (2013, 4th overall pick), Matt Kalil (2012, 4th overall pick), Trent Williams (2010, 4th overall pick), Jake Long (2008, 1st overall pick), and Joe Thomas (2007, 3rd overall pick).
References[edit]



^ Weisman, Larry (March 30, 2009), "Keepers of the blind side: Left tackles the new money position", USA Today 





Positions in American football and Canadian football


Offense (Skill position)

Defense

Special teams


Linemen
Guard, Tackle, Center
Linemen
Tackle, End
Kicking players
Placekicker, Punter, Kickoff specialist


Quarterback (Dual-threat, Game manager, System)
Linebacker
Snapping
Long snapper, Holder


Backs
Halfback/Tailback, Fullback, H-back, Wingback, Triple-threat
Backs
Cornerback, Safety, Halfback
Returning
Punt returner, Kick returner, Jammer


Receivers
Wide receiver (Eligible), Tight end, Slotback, End
Nickelback, Dimeback
Tackling
Gunner, Upback, Utility


Formations (List) — Nomenclature — Strategy








v
t
e


Gridiron football concepts



Codes



American

Glossary
History

Early
Modern


Rules


Canadian

American–Canadian comparison
Burnside rules
Glossary


Arena
Indoor
9-man
8-man
6-man
Flag
Touch
Street/Backyard
Powderpuff
Wheelchair
Rules of gridiron football codes





Levels of play



Youth/midget

Pop Warner
AYF


High school

Varsity
Junior varsity


College

Club
Sprint


Semi-pro
Professional

Practice squad


Women's
International





Field




Lines



Yard lines

Hash marks
Goal line
Sidelines


Line of scrimmage
Field goal range





Spaces



End zone
Red zone
Neutral zone
Coffin corner
Flat
Gap
Hole
Pocket








Scoring



Touchdown
One-point conversion
Two-point conversion
Field goal
Safety
Single (rouge)





Turnovers



Fumble
Interception
Muffed punt
Turnover on downs





Downs



First down
Three-and-out
Fourth down conversion
Dead ball





Play clock



Timeout
Kneel
Spike
Time warnings

3 min.
2 min.
1 min.


Clock management
Running out the clock
Untimed play
Garbage time





Statistics



Carry
Completion
Rushing yards
Passing yards
Passer rating
Total quarterback rating
Reception
Receiving yards
Pass deflected
Sack
Return yards
Total offense
Yards after catch
Yards from scrimmage
All-purpose yardage
Touchdown pass





Practice



Two-a-days
Oklahoma drill
Three-cone drill
Film session





Officiating



Official (American, Canadian)
Chain crew
Penalty
Penalty flag
Instant replay





Miscellaneous



Ball
Coaching tree
Concussions
Equipment
12th man
Letterman
Overtime
Running up the score
Touchdown celebration
Gatorade shower
Tuck rule
Uniform number











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tackle_(gridiron_football_position)&oldid=818107066"					Categories: American football offensive linemenAmerican football positionsHidden categories: Use mdy dates from March 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017