For the musical collective, see Tanakh (band). For places in Iran, see Tanak, Iran.


Part of a series on


Judaism


  




Movements


Orthodox

Haredi
Hasidic
Modern




Conservative
Reform



Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot








Philosophy


Principles of faith
Kabbalah
Messiah
Ethics
Chosenness
Names of God
Musar movement








Texts


Tanakh

Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim





Ḥumash
Siddur
Piyutim
Zohar



Rabbinic

Mishnah
Talmud
Midrash
Tosefta










Law


Mishneh Torah
Tur
Shulchan Aruch
Mishnah Berurah
Aruch HaShulchan
Kashrut
Tzniut
Tzedakah
Niddah
Noahide laws








Holy cities / places


Jerusalem
Safed
Hebron
Tiberias



Synagogue
Beth midrash
Mikveh
Sukkah
Chevra kadisha
Holy Temple
Tabernacle








Important figures


Abraham
Isaac
Jacob


Moses
Aaron
David
Solomon


Sarah
Rebecca
Rachel
Leah



Rabbinic sages
Chazal

Tannaim
Amoraim
Savoraim




Geonim
Rishonim
Acharonim








Religious roles


Rabbi
Rebbe
Posek
Hazzan
Dayan
Rosh yeshiva
Mohel
Kohen








Culture and education


Brit
Pidyon haben
Bar and Bat Mitzvah
Marriage
Bereavement



Yeshiva
Kolel
Cheder








Ritual objects


Sefer Torah
Tallit
Tefillin
Tzitzit
Kippah
Mezuzah
Menorah
Shofar
Four species

Etrog
Lulav
Hadass
Arava




Kittel
Gartel








Prayers


Shema (Sh'ma)
Amidah
Aleinu
Kaddish
Minyan
Birkat Hamazon
Shehecheyanu
Hallel
Havdalah
Tachanun
Kol Nidre
Selichot (S'lichot)








Major holidays


Rosh Hashana
Yom Kippur
Sukkot
Pesach
Shavuot








Other religions


Judaism and Christianity
Hinduism
Islam


Abrahamic religions
Judeo-Christian
Pluralism








Related topics


Jews
Zionism
Israel
Criticism
Antisemitism
Anti-Judaism
Holocaust theology
Music
Jesus
Muhammad








 Judaism portal







v
t
e







Part of a series on the


Bible










Canons and books






Tanakh

Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim






Christian biblical canons
Hebrew Bible




Old Testament (OT)
New Testament (NT)




Deuterocanon
Antilegomena



Chapters and verses



Apocrypha

Jewish
OT
NT














Authorship and development






Authorship
Dating
Hebrew canon



Old Testament canon
New Testament canon
Documentary hypothesis
Mosaic authorship



Pauline epistles
Petrine epistles



Johannine works











Translations and manuscripts






Samaritan Torah
Dead Sea scrolls
Masoretic Text
Targumim
Peshitta
Septuagint
Vulgate
Gothic Bible
Vetus Latina
Luther Bible
English Bibles









Biblical studies






Archeology
Artifacts
Dating

Historicity
Internal consistency

People
Places
Names



Novum Testamentum Graece
Documentary hypothesis
Synoptic problem
NT textual categories




Biblical criticism





Historical
Textual
Source
Form
Redaction
Canonical












Interpretation


Hermeneutics



Pesher
Midrash
Pardes




Allegorical interpretation
Literalism




Prophecy
Inspiration









Perspectives



Gnostic
Islamic
Qur'anic
Muhammad




Inerrancy
Infallibility



Criticism of the Bible







Outline of Bible-related topics
 Bible book     Bible portal





v
t
e





The Tanakh (/tɑːˈnɑːx/;[1] Hebrew: תַּנַ"ךְ‬, pronounced [taˈnaχ] or [təˈnax]; also Tenakh, Tenak, Tanach), also called the Mikra or Hebrew Bible, is the canonical collection of Jewish texts, which is also a textual source for the Christian Old Testament. These texts are composed mainly in Biblical Hebrew, with some passages in Biblical Aramaic (in the books of Daniel, Ezra and a few others). The traditional Hebrew text is known as the Masoretic Text. The Tanakh consists of twenty-four books.
Tanakh is an acronym of the first Hebrew letter of each of the Masoretic Text's three traditional subdivisions: Torah ("Teaching", also known as the Five Books of Moses), Nevi'im ("Prophets") and Ketuvim ("Writings")—hence TaNaKh. The name Mikra (מקרא‬), meaning "that which is read", is another Hebrew word for the Tanakh. The books of the Tanakh were passed on by each generation and, according to rabbinic tradition were accompanied by an oral tradition, called the Oral Torah.



Contents


1 Terminology
2 Development and codification
3 Language and pronunciation
4 Books of the Tanakh

4.1 Torah
4.2 Nevi'im
4.3 Ketuvim

4.3.1 Poetic books
4.3.2 Five scrolls (Hamesh Megillot)
4.3.3 Other books
4.3.4 Order




5 Translations
6 Jewish commentaries
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Terminology[edit]
The three-part division reflected in the acronym "Tanakh" is well attested in the literature of the Rabbinic period.[2] During that period, however, "Tanakh" was not used. Instead, the proper title was Mikra (or Miqra, מקרא, meaning "reading" or "that which is read") because the biblical texts were read publicly. Mikra continues to be used in Hebrew to this day, alongside Tanakh, to refer to the Hebrew scriptures. In modern spoken Hebrew, they are interchangeable.[3]
Development and codification[edit]
Main article: Development of the Hebrew Bible canon
There is no scholarly consensus as to when the Hebrew Bible canon was fixed: some scholars argue that it was fixed by the Hasmonean dynasty,[4] while others argue it was not fixed until the second century CE or even later.[5]
According to the Talmud, much of the Tanakh was compiled by the men of the Great Assembly (Anshei K'nesset HaGedolah), a task completed in 450 BCE, and it has remained unchanged ever since.[6]
The twenty-four book canon is mentioned in the Midrash Koheleth 12:12: Whoever brings together in his house more than twenty four books brings confusion.[7]
Language and pronunciation[edit]
The original writing system of the Hebrew text was an abjad: consonants written with some applied vowel letters ("matres lectionis"). During the early Middle Ages scholars known as the Masoretes created a single formalized system of vocalization. This was chiefly done by Aaron ben Moses ben Asher, in the Tiberias school, based on the oral tradition for reading the Tanakh, hence the name Tiberian vocalization. It also included some innovations of Ben Naftali and the Babylonian exiles.[8] Despite the comparatively late process of codification, some traditional sources and some Orthodox Jews hold the pronunciation and cantillation to derive from the revelation at Sinai, since it is impossible to read the original text without pronunciations and cantillation pauses.[9] The combination of a text (מקרא‬ mikra), pronunciation (ניקוד‬ niqqud) and cantillation (טעמים‬ te`amim) enable the reader to understand both the simple meaning and the nuances in sentence flow of the text.
Books of the Tanakh[edit]




Complete set of scrolls, constituting the entire Tanakh.


The Tanakh consists of twenty-four books: it counts as one book each Samuel, Kings, Chronicles and Ezra–Nehemiah and counts the Twelve Minor Prophets (תרי עשר‬) as a single book. In Hebrew, the books are often referred to by their prominent first word(s).
Torah[edit]
Main article: Torah
The Torah (תּוֹרָה, literally "teaching"), also known as the Pentateuch, or as the "Five Books of Moses". Printed versions (rather than scrolls) of the Torah are often called Chamisha Chumshei Torah (חמישה חומשי תורה‬ "five fifth-sections of the Torah") and informally a Chumash.

Bereshit (בְּרֵאשִׁית, literally "In the beginning")—Genesis
Shemot (שִׁמוֹת, literally "Names")—Exodus
Vayikra (וַיִּקְרָא, literally "And He called")—Leviticus
Bemidbar (בְּמִדְבַּר, literally "In the desert [of]")—Numbers
Devarim (דְּבָרִים, literally "Things" or "Words")—Deuteronomy

Nevi'im[edit]


Books of Nevi'im


 


Former Prophets





Joshua
Judges
Samuel
Kings





Latter Prophets (major)





Isaiah
Jeremiah
Ezekiel





Latter Prophets (Twelve minor)





Hosea
Joel
Amos
Obadiah
Jonah
Micah
Nahum
Habakkuk
Zephaniah
Haggai
Zechariah
Malachi





Hebrew Bible





v
t
e





Main article: Nevi'im
Nevi'im (Hebrew: נְבִיאִים Nəḇî'îm‎, "Prophets") is the second main division of the Tanakh, between the Torah and Ketuvim. It contains two sub-groups, the Former Prophets (Nevi'im Rishonim נביאים ראשונים, the narrative books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings) and the Latter Prophets (Nevi'im Aharonim נביאים אחרונים, the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel and the Twelve Minor Prophets). This division includes the books which cover the time from the entrance of the Israelites into the Land of Israel until the Babylonian captivity of Judah (the "period of prophecy"). Their distribution is not chronological, but substantive.

(יְהוֹשֻעַ / Yĕhôshúa‘)—Joshua
(שֹׁפְטִים / Shophtim)—Judges
(שְׁמוּאֵל / Shmû’ēl)—Samuel
(מְלָכִים / M'lakhim)—Kings
(יְשַׁעְיָהוּ / Yĕsha‘ăyāhû)—Isaiah
(יִרְמְיָהוּ / Yirmyāhû)—Jeremiah
(יְחֶזְקֵאל / Yĕkhezqiēl)—Ezekiel

The Twelve Minor Prophets (תרי עשר, Trei Asar, "The Twelve") are considered one book.

(הוֹשֵׁעַ / Hôshēa‘)—Hosea
(יוֹאֵל / Yô’ēl)—Joel
(עָמוֹס / ‘Āmôs)—Amos
(עֹבַדְיָה / ‘Ōvadhyāh)—Obadiah
(יוֹנָה / Yônāh)—Jonah
(מִיכָה / Mîkhāh)—Micah
(נַחוּם / Nakḥûm)—Nahum
(חֲבַקּוּק /Khăvhakûk)—Habakkuk
(צְפַנְיָה / Tsĕphanyāh)—Zephaniah
(חַגַּי / Khaggai)—Haggai
(זְכַרְיָה / Zkharyāh)—Zechariah
(מַלְאָכִי / Mal’ākhî)—Malachi

Ketuvim[edit]
Main article: Ketuvim


Books of the Ketuvim


 


Three poetic books





Psalms
Proverbs
Job





Five Megillot (Scrolls)





Song of Songs
Ruth
Lamentations
Ecclesiastes
Esther





Other books




Daniel




Ezra–Nehemiah (Ezra
Nehemiah)




Chronicles




Hebrew Bible





v
t
e





Ketuvim (כְּתוּבִים, "Writings") consists of eleven books, described below.
Poetic books[edit]
In masoretic manuscripts (and some printed editions), Psalms, Proverbs and Job are presented in a special two-column form emphasizing the parallel stichs in the verses, which are a function of their poetry. Collectively, these three books are known as Sifrei Emet (an acronym of the titles in Hebrew, איוב, משלי, תהלים yields Emet אמ"ת, which is also the Hebrew for "truth").
These three books are also the only ones in Tanakh with a special system of cantillation notes that are designed to emphasize parallel stichs within verses. However, the beginning and end of the book of Job are in the normal prose system.
Five scrolls (Hamesh Megillot)[edit]
The five relatively short books of the Song of Songs, the Book of Ruth, the Book of Lamentations, Ecclesiastes and the Book of Esther are collectively known as the Hamesh Megillot (Five Megillot). These are the latest books collected and designated as "authoritative" in the Jewish canon, with the latest parts having dates ranging into the 2nd century BCE. These scrolls are traditionally read over the course of the year in many Jewish communities. The list below presents them in the order they are read in the synagogue on holidays, beginning with the Song of Solomon at Passover.
Other books[edit]
Besides the three poetic books and the five scrolls, the remaining books in Ketuvim are Daniel, Ezra–Nehemiah and Chronicles. Although there is no formal grouping for these books in the Jewish tradition, they nevertheless share a number of distinguishing characteristics.

Their narratives all openly describe relatively late events (i.e. the Babylonian captivity and the subsequent restoration of Zion).
The Talmudic tradition ascribes late authorship to all of them.
Two of them (Daniel and Ezra) are the only books in Tanakh with significant portions in Aramaic.

Order[edit]
The following list presents the books of Ketuvim in the order they appear in most printed editions. It also divides them into three subgroups based on the distinctiveness of Sifrei Emet and Hamesh Megillot.
The three poetic books (Sifrei Emet)

Tehillim (Psalms) תְהִלִּים
Mishlei (Book of Proverbs) מִשְׁלֵי
Iyyôbh (Book of Job) אִיּוֹב

The Five Megillot (Hamesh Megillot). These books are read aloud in the synagogue on particular occasions, the occasion listed below in parenthesis.

Shīr Hashīrīm (Song of Songs) or (Song of Solomon) שִׁיר הַשִׁירִים (Passover)
Rūth (Book of Ruth) רוּת (Shavuot)
Eikhah (Lamentations) אֵיכָה (Tisha B'Av) [Also called Kinnot in Hebrew.]
Qōheleth (Ecclesiastes) קֹהֶלֶת (Sukkot)
Estēr (Book of Esther) אֶסְתֵר (Purim)

Other books

Dānî'ēl (Book of Daniel) דָּנִיֵּאל
‘Ezrā (Book of Ezra—Book of Nehemiah) עֶזְרָא
Divrei ha-Yamim (Chronicles) דִּבְרֵי הַיָּמִים

The Jewish textual tradition never finalized the order of the books in Ketuvim. The Babylonian Talmud (Bava Batra 14b — 15a) gives their order as Ruth, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Lamentations of Jeremiah, Daniel, Scroll of Esther, Ezra, Chronicles.[citation needed]
In Tiberian Masoretic codices, including the Aleppo Codex and the Leningrad Codex, and often in old Spanish manuscripts as well, the order is Chronicles, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ruth, Song of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations of Jeremiah, Esther, Daniel, Ezra.[citation needed]
Translations[edit]
Further information: Jewish English Bible translations, Septuagint, Targum, Old Testament, and Bible translations

The Holy Scriptures According to the Masoretic Text: A New Translation with the aid of Previous Versions & with the Constant Consultation of Jewish Authorities was published in 1917 by the Jewish Publication Society. It was replaced by their Tanakh in 1985
Tanakh, Jewish Publication Society, 1985, ISBN 0-8276-0252-9
Tanach: The Stone Edition, Hebrew with English translation, Mesorah Publications, 1996, ISBN 0-89906-269-5, named after benefactor Irving I. Stone.
Tanakh Ram, an ongoing translation to Modern Hebrew (2010–) by Avraham Ahuvya (RAM Publishing House Ltd. and Miskal Ltd.)

Jewish commentaries[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Jewish commentaries on the Bible
There are two major approaches towards study of, and commentary on, the Tanakh. In the Jewish community, the classical approach is religious study of the Bible, where it is assumed that the Bible is divinely inspired. Another approach is to study the Bible as a human creation. In this approach, Biblical studies can be considered as a sub-field of religious studies. The later practice, when applied to the Torah, is considered heresy by the Orthodox Jewish community. As such, much modern day Bible commentary written by non-Orthodox authors is considered forbidden by rabbis teaching in Orthodox yeshivas. Some classical rabbinic commentators, such as Abraham Ibn Ezra, Gersonides, and Maimonides, used many elements of contemporary biblical criticism, including their knowledge of history, science, and philology. Their use of historical and scientific analysis of the Bible was considered acceptable by historic Judaism due to the author's faith commitment to the idea that God revealed the Torah to Moses on Mount Sinai.
The Modern Orthodox Jewish community allows for a wider array of biblical criticism to be used for biblical books outside of the Torah, and a few Orthodox commentaries now incorporate many of the techniques previously found in the academic world, e.g. the Da'at Miqra series. Non-Orthodox Jews, including those affiliated with Conservative Judaism and Reform Judaism, accept both traditional and secular approaches to Bible studies. "Jewish commentaries on the Bible", discusses Jewish Tanakh commentaries from the Targums to classical rabbinic literature, the midrash literature, the classical medieval commentators, and modern day commentaries.
See also[edit]


Judaism portal



613 mitzvot, formal list of Jewish 613 commandments
929: Tanakh B'yachad
Bemidbar (parsha)
Dead Sea Scrolls#Biblical books found
Jewish English Bible translations
JPS Tanakh
Mikraot Gedolot
Non-canonical books referenced in the Bible
Rashi

References[edit]



^ "Tanach". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ "Mikra'ot Gedolot". 
^ BIBLICAL STUDIES Mikra: Text, Translation, Reading and Interpretation. Norton Irish Theological Quarterly.2007; 72: 305-306
^ Davies, Philip R. (2001). "The Jewish Scriptural Canon in Cultural Perspective". In McDonald, Lee Martin; Sanders, James A. The Canon Debate. Baker Academic. p. PT66. ISBN 978-1-4412-4163-4.  "With many other scholars, I conclude that the fixing of a canonical list was almost certainly the achievement of the Hasmonean dynasty."
^ McDonald & Sanders, The Canon Debate, 2002, page 5, cited are Neusner's Judaism and Christianity in the Age of Constantine, pages 128–145, and Midrash in Context: Exegesis in Formative Judaism, pages 1–22.
^ (Bava Batra 14b-15a, Rashi to Megillah 3a, 14a)
^ Midrash Qoheleth 12:12
^ Kelley, Page H., The Masorah of Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia, Eerdmans, 1998, ISBN 0-8028-4363-8, p. 20
^ John Gill (1767). A Dissertation Concerning the Antiquity of the Hebrew Language: Letters, Vowel-points, and Accents. G. Keith. pp. 136–137.  also pages 250–255



External links[edit]






This section's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (December 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tanakh.





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Tanakh






Hebrew Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Tanakh (Hebrew source)




Serve-A-Verse—Free online Hebrew Bible Explorer with audio, translation and transliteration of all 39 books of the Hebrew Bible.
Judaica Press Translation of Tanakh with Rashi's commentary Free online translation of Tanakh and Rashi's entire commentary
Hebrew–English Tanakh: the Jewish Bible—Online edition of the oldest known complete Masoretic text of the Hebrew Bible (including contillation marks) placed next to classic Jewish translation; can be used on most Internet-connected computers and mobile devices.
Mechon Mamre—The Hebrew text of the Tanakh based on the Aleppo codex and other Tiberian manuscripts close to it, edited according to the system of Rabbi Mordechai Breuer. Hebrew text comes in four convenient versions (including one with cantillation marks) and may be downloaded. The JPS 1917 English translation is included as well as parallel translations (Hebrew–English, Hebrew–French, Hebrew–Portuguese and a Hebrew–Spanish Bible, see: A Jewish Hebrew–English/French/Portuguese/Spanish Bible According to the Masoretic Text and the JPS 1917 Edition)
Mikraot Gedolot (Rabbinic Bible) at Wikisource in English (sample) and Hebrew (sample)
Tanach on Demand – Custom PDF versions of any section of the Bible in Hebrew.
A Guide to Reading Nevi'im and Ketuvim – Detailed Hebrew outlines of the biblical books based on the natural flow of the text (rather than the chapter divisions). The outlines include a daily study-cycle, and the explanatory material is in English, by Seth (Avi) Kadish.
Unicode/XML Westminster Leningrad Codex – A free transcription of the electronic source maintained by the Westminster Hebrew Institute. (Leningrad Codex)
Tanakh Hebrew Bible Project—An online project that aims to present critical text of the Hebrew Bible with important ancient versions (Samaritan Pentateuch, Masoretic Text, Targum Onkelos, Samaritan Targum, Septuagint, Peshitta, Aquila of Sinope, Symmachus, Theodotion, Vetus Latina, and Vulgate) in parallel with new English translation for each version, plus a comprehensive critical apparatus and a textual commentary for every verse.







v
t
e


Jews and Judaism






Outline of Judaism
Index of Jewish history-related articles





History



Timeline
Israelites
Origins of Judaism
Ancient Israel and Judah
Second Temple period
Rabbinic Judaism
Middle Ages
Haskalah
Zionism





Population



Assimilation
Diaspora

Ashkenazi
Sephardi
Mizrahi


Languages

Hebrew


Lists of Jews
Persecution

Antisemitism







Philosophy



Beliefs

Mitzvah


Chosen people
Conversion
Eschatology

Messiah


Ethics
God
Halakha
Kabbalah
Land of Israel
Who is a Jew?





Schisms



Religious movements

Orthodox
Haredi
Hasidic
Conservative
Reform
Karaite
relations


Secularism





Literature



Tanakh

Torah
Nevi'im
Ketuvim


Rabbinic

Mishnah
Talmud
Midrash


Kabbalah texts

Zohar


Shulchan Aruch
Siddur
Hebrew literature





Culture



Calendar

Holidays


Cuisine

Kashrut


Education
Leadership

Rabbi


Marriage
Music
Names
Politics
Prayer

Synagogue


Symbolism





Studies



Ashkenazi intelligence
Genetics
Jew (word)
Jewish Virtual Library
Relations with other Abrahamic religions

Christianity
Islam










 Category: Jews and Judaism
 Judaism portal
 Judaism – Wikipedia book









Authority control



GND: 4001515-4
SUDOC: 028199669
BNF: cb12008323v (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tanakh&oldid=818208760"					Categories: Hebrew BibleHebrew words and phrasesHidden categories: Articles containing Hebrew-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2012Articles needing additional references from April 2014All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia external links cleanup from December 2013Wikipedia spam cleanup from December 2013Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers