For the journal, see Taxon (journal). For other uses, see Taxa (disambiguation).




African elephants form the genus Loxodonta, a widely accepted taxon.


In biology, a taxon (plural taxa; back-formation from taxonomy) is a group of one or more populations of an organism or organisms seen by taxonomists to form a unit. Although neither is required, a taxon is usually known by a particular name and given a particular ranking, especially if and when it is accepted or becomes established. It is not uncommon, however, for taxonomists to remain at odds over what belongs to a taxon and the criteria used for inclusion. If a taxon is given a formal scientific name, its use is then governed by one of the nomenclature codes specifying which scientific name is correct for a particular grouping.
Although preceded by Linnaeus's system in Systema Naturae (10th edition, 1758)[1] and unpublished work by Bernard and Antoine Laurent de Jussieu, the notion of a unit-based "natural system" of biological classification was first made widely available in 1805 through the publication, as the introduction to the third edition of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck's Flore françoise, of Augustin Pyramus de Candolle's Principes élémentaires de botanique, an exposition of a system for the "natural classification" of plants. Since then, systematists have striven to construct an accurate classification encompassing the diversity of life; today, a "good" or "useful" taxon is commonly taken to be one that reflects evolutionary relationships.[n 1]
Many modern systematists, such as advocates of phylogenetic nomenclature, use cladistic methods that require taxa to be monophyletic (all descendants of some ancestor). Their basic unit, therefore, is the clade rather than the taxon. Similarly, among those contemporary taxonomists working with the traditional Linnean (binomial) nomenclature, few propose taxa they know to be paraphyletic.[2] An example of a well-established taxon that is not also a clade is the class Reptilia, the reptiles; birds are descendants of reptiles but are not included in the Reptilia.



Contents


1 History
2 Definition
3 Ranks
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
The term taxon was first used in 1926 by Adolf Meyer-Abich for animal groups. For plants, it was proposed by Herman Johannes Lam in 1948, and it was adopted at the VII International Botanical Congress, held in 1950.[3]
Definition[edit]
The Glossary of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (1999) defines[4] a

"taxon, (pl. taxa), n.




A taxonomic unit, whether named or not: i.e. a population, or group of populations of organisms which are usually inferred to be phylogenetically related and which have characters in common which differentiate (q.v.) the unit (e.g. a geographic population, a genus, a family, an order) from other such units. A taxon encompasses all included taxa of lower rank (q.v.) and individual organisms. [...]"



Ranks[edit]














The hierarchy of biological classification's eight major taxonomic ranks. Intermediate minor rankings are not shown.


A taxon can be assigned a taxonomic rank, usually (but not necessarily) when it is given a formal name.
"Phylum" applies formally to any biological domain, but traditionally it was always used for animals, whereas "Division" was traditionally often used for plants, fungi, etc.
A prefix is used to indicate a ranking of lesser importance. The prefix super- indicates a rank above, the prefix sub- indicates a rank below. In zoology the prefix infra- indicates a rank below sub-. For instance, among the additional ranks of class are superclass, subclass and infraclass.
Rank is relative, and restricted to a particular systematic schema. For example, liverworts have been grouped, in various systems of classification, as a family, order, class, or division (phylum). The use of a narrow set of ranks is challenged by users of cladistics; for example, the mere 10 ranks traditionally used between animal families (governed by the ICZN) and animal phyla (usually the highest relevant rank in taxonomic work) often cannot adequately represent the evolutionary history as more about a lineage's phylogeny becomes known. In addition, the class rank is quite often not an evolutionary but a phenetic or paraphyletic group and as opposed to those ranks governed by the ICZN (family-level, genus-level and species-level taxa), can usually not be made monophyletic by exchanging the taxa contained therein. This has given rise to phylogenetic taxonomy and the ongoing development of the PhyloCode, which has been proposed as a new alternative to replace Linnean classification and govern the application of names to clades. Many cladists do not see any need to depart from traditional nomenclature as governed by the ICZN, ICN, etc.
See also[edit]

ABCD Schema
Alpha taxonomy
Chresonym
Cladistics
Folk taxonomy
Ichnotaxon
International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants
International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN)
Rank (botany)
Rank (zoology)
Segregate (taxonomy)
Virus classification

Notes[edit]



^ This is not considered as mandatory, however, as indicated by terms for non-monophyletic groupings ("invertebrates", "conifers", "fish", etc).



References[edit]



^ Quammen, David (June 2007). "A Passion for Order". National Geographic Magazine. Retrieved 27 April 2013. 
^ de Queiroz, K & J Gauthier (1990). "Phylogeny as a Central Principle in Taxonomy: Phylogenetic Definitions of Taxon Names" (PDF). Systematic Zoology. 39 (4): 307–322. doi:10.2307/2992353. JSTOR 2992353. 
^ Naik, V. N. (1984). Taxonomy of Angiosperms. Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, p. 2.
^ ICZN (1999) International Code of Zoological Nomenclature. Glossary. International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature.



External links[edit]

 The dictionary definition of taxon at Wiktionary







v
t
e


Evolutionary biology






Evolutionary history of life
Index of evolutionary biology articles
Introduction
Outline of evolution
Timeline of evolution





Evolution



Abiogenesis
Adaptation
Adaptive radiation
Cladistics
Coevolution
Common descent
Cospeciation
Convergence
Divergence
Earliest known life forms
Evidence of common descent
Extinction

Event


Gene-centered view
Homology
Last universal common ancestor
Macroevolution
Microevolution
Origin of life
Panspermia
Parallel evolution
Prehistoric Autopsy
Speciation
Taxonomy





Population genetics



Biodiversity
Gene flow
Genetic drift
Mutation
Natural selection
Variation





Development



Canalisation
Evolutionary developmental biology
Inversion
Modularity
Phenotypic plasticity





Of taxa



Birds

origin


Brachiopods
Cephalopods
Dinosaurs
Fish
Fungi
Insects

butterflies


Life
Mammals

cats
dogs
dolphins and whales
horses
primates

humans
lemurs


sea cows
wolves


Molluscs
Plants
Reptiles
Spiders
Tetrapods
Viruses

influenza







Of organs



Cell
DNA
Flagella
Eukaryotes

symbiogenesis
chromosome
endomembrane system
mitochondria
nucleus
plastids


In animals

eye
hair
auditory ossicle
nervous system
brain







Of processes



Aging

Death
Programmed cell death


Avian flight
Biological complexity
Cooperation
Color vision

in primates


Emotion
Empathy
Ethics
Eusociality
Immune system
Metabolism
Monogamy
Morality
Mosaic evolution
Multicellularity
Sexual reproduction

Gamete differentiation/sexes
Life cycles/nuclear phases
Mating types
Sex-determination


Snake venom





Tempo and modes



Gradualism/Punctuated equilibrium/Saltationism
Micromutation/Macromutation
Uniformitarianism/Catastrophism





Speciation



Allopatric
Anagenesis
Catagenesis
Cladogenesis
Ecological
Hybrid
Parapatric
Peripatric
Reinforcement
Sympatric





History



Renaissance and Enlightenment
Transmutation of species
Charles Darwin

On the Origin of Species


History of paleontology
Transitional fossil
Blending inheritance
Mendelian inheritance
The eclipse of Darwinism
Modern synthesis
History of molecular evolution
Extended evolutionary synthesis





Philosophy



Darwinism
Alternatives to evolution by natural selection

Catastrophism
Lamarckism
Orthogenesis
Mutationism
Saltationism
Structuralism

Spandrel


Theistic
Vitalism







Related



Biogeography
Ecological genetics
Molecular evolution
Phylogenetics

Tree


Polymorphism
Protocell
Systematics








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject









Authority control



GND: 7755743-8











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taxon&oldid=813996154"					Categories: TaxaBiological classificationBotanical nomenclatureZoological nomenclatureHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers