

Telecommunications
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste








 Landlines (2006):
3,000[1]


 Mobile lines (2007):
103,000[1]


ccTLD:
.tl


Calling code:
+670





Contents


1 Telephones
2 Radio
3 Television
4 Internet

4.1 Censorship


5 References
6 External links



Telephones[edit]
Following Indonesia's withdrawal from East Timor in 1999, the telecommunications infrastructure was destroyed in the ensuing violence, and Telkom Indonesia ceased to provide services. A new country code (670) was allocated to East Timor by the International Telecommunication Union, but international access often remained severely limited.
A complicating factor has been the fact that the calling code 670 was previously used by the Northern Marianas, with many carriers not aware that the code is now used by East Timor (the Northern Marianas, as part of the North American Numbering Plan, now uses the country code 1 and the area code 670).
Telephone calls are also often extremely expensive: for example, Telstra in Australia raised the cost of calls to East Timor to A$3.00 a minute from 97 cents in 2003. In the UK, BT's standard rate is over £2 a minute.[2]




Timor Telecom advertisement


Telstra expanded its cellular telephone signal into East Timor in 2000, and operated services until 2003, when Timor Telecom, 50.1% part-owned by Portugal Telecom, began operating fixed line and mobile telephone services. Until recently, the fixed line network was mainly confined to the capital Dili, although this has been expanded nationwide, to each district capital.
According to a press-release issued by Portugal Telecom, the total number of fixed phones (landline) are 3,000 and mobile cellular are 103,000 (as of June 2008). There is no broadband or ADSL service.
Portugal Telecom signed a 15-year contract in 2002 to invest US$29 million to rebuild and operate the phone system. The contract could be extended by 10 more years, totaling 25 years of monopoly. 2003 gross revenue totaled €10.5 million.
All voice and data are carried out by Intelsat, using a direct satellite link with one hop to their downlink in Portugal.
The telephone system suffered significant damage during the violence in the East Timorese independence. As a result, there is very little fixed-line service, and mobile-cellular service and coverage are limited primarily to urban areas.[3]
Timor Telecom offers mobile GSM services covering approximately 92% of the population,[4] 100% of the districts, and 57% of the sub-districts.[5][6]
International service is available in major urban centers, but not much elsewhere.[3]
On January 17, 2013, the Prime Minister of Timor Leste, Mr Xanana Gusmao, launched Telkomcel as the second telecommunication operator in Timor Leste with three main services: (1) Mobile Services, (2) Corporate Solution dan, (3) Wholesale & International Services. Telkomcel is 100% owned by PT Telekomunikasi Indonesia International (TELIN).[citation needed]
Radio[edit]
There are at least 21 radio stations in East Timor.[3] The main station is Radio Timor Leste, broadcasting in Tetum, Portuguese and Indonesian. Other radio stations include Radio Kmanek, and Radio Falintil, and Radio Renascença, while there are also FM retransmissions of RDP Internacional from Portugal, Radio Australia, and the BBC World Service. Community radio stations broadcast around the country, in regional languages such as Tokodede and Fataluku.
Television[edit]
East Timor has one national public broadcaster,[3] Televisão Timor Leste or Televizaun Timor Lorosae, which broadcasts local programming in Tetum and Portuguese, as well as retransmissions of RTP Internacional from Portugal.
In May 2007, RTTL's television and radio services became available via satellite, using a transponder leased from Telkom Indonesia.[7][8]
In February 2009, TVTL began carrying programmes from Rede Globo in Brazil.[9]
Internet[edit]
The first Internet connection in East Timor was made by the United Nations APDIP Programme in 1999 to support UNTAET, the UN Transitional Administration. This consisted of a C Band link to Singapore Telecom. The initial bandwidth was 256kbit/s.[10]
The Internet country code for East Timor is .tl. This code was officially changed from .tp (for Portuguese Timor) when the country achieved its independence on 20 May 2002.
There is only one ISP in East Timor, Timor Telecom. Two-way Satellite Internet is in theory available, as the country falls within the Australian and Asian footprints of several satellites offering this service, however in practice licences are not granted for use of non-East Timorese Telecom services. Therefore, internet services include landline ADSL connections, dedicated line infrastructure and 3G cellular internet.[11]
As of 2015, 13.4% of the population were connected to the internet[12] with the vast majority of users using cellular internet.[13] According to Timor Telecom about 94% of the population is able to access cellular phone and internet services.[14]
Timor Telecom has sought to block some Voice over IP services on its network such as Skype.[15] As a result, some such services may not function.
Censorship[edit]
There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms. The law prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice.[16]
References[edit]



^ a b Portugal Telecom press-release from Aug 2008
^ "UK International Prices: Tariff Guide for Residential Customers", BT, 1 June 2011. Retrieved 26 December 2013.
^ a b c d CIA World Factbook, 2009: East Timor
^ Administrator. "Timor Telecom". www.timortelecom.tl. Retrieved 2016-02-03. 
^ map of mobile coverage
^ Timor Telecom: Mobile Services
^ "TELKOM - PT. Telekomunikasi Indonesia Tbk". telkom.co.id. 
^ http://www.lyngsat.com/telkom1.html
^ "WorldScreen.com - Archives". worldscreen.com. 
^ Arnold, Wayne (1999-12-27). "U.N. Agency Is Bringing Timor Online (Horsemen in Mongolia, as Well)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2017-03-28. 
^ "Timor Telecom". www.timortelecom.tl. Timor Telecom. Retrieved 4 June 2017. 
^ "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet". Statistics. International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 4 June 2017. 
^ "Fixed-broadband subscriptions". Statistics. International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved 4 June 2017. 
^ "Timor Telecom". www.timortelecom.tl. Timor Telecom. Retrieved 4 June 2017. 
^ Logan, edited by Indrajit Banerjee, Stephen (2008). Asian communication handbook 2008. Singapore: Asian Media Information and Communication Centre and Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information, Nanyang Technological University. p. 506. ISBN 9789814136105. Retrieved 4 June 2017. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ "Timor-Leste", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 22 March 2013. Retrieved 26 December 2013.




 This article incorporates public domain material from the CIA World Factbook document "2009 edition".
 This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Department of State.

External links[edit]

Telkomcel
Timor Telecom








v
t
e


Telecommunications in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Internet censorship and surveillance by country



Africa



Algeria
Angola
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo DR
Congo RO
Egypt
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritania
Morocco (Western Sahara)
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Argentina
Bahamas
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Greenland
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States (Puerto Rico)
Uruguay
Venezuela





Asia



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
East Timor
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Malaysia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
North Korea
Oman
Pakistan
Palestinian territories
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





Europe



Albania
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany (YouTube video blocking)
Georgia
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_East_Timor&oldid=800771237"					Categories: Telecommunications in East TimorInternet censorship by countryInternet by countryTelecommunications by countryTelecommunications in AsiaHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2014Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the World FactbookWikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Department of State