For the industry, see Telecommunications industry in China. This article is about communications in the People's Republic of China, excluding Hong Kong and Macau. For communications in these areas, see Communications in Hong Kong and Telecommunications in Macau. For telecommunications in the Republic of China, see Telecommunications in Taiwan.
The People's Republic of China possesses a diversified communications system that links all parts of the country by Internet, telephone, telegraph, radio, and television. The country is served by an extensive system of automatic telephone exchanges connected by modern networks of fiber-optic cable, coaxial cable, microwave radio relay, and a domestic satellite system; cellular telephone service is widely available, expanding rapidly, and includes roaming service to foreign countries. Fiber to the x infrastructure has been expanded rapidly in recent years.



Contents


1 History
2 History of telecommunications services
3 Recent development
4 Regulation
5 Sectors

5.1 Telephone
5.2 Radio
5.3 Television
5.4 Internet


6 Mobile phone web users
7 Trans-Pacific Express
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]





History of science and
technology in China




Inventions

Four Great Inventions


Discoveries




By subject




Mathematics
Astronomy
Calendar
Units of measurement
Cartography
Geography
Printing
Ceramics
Metallurgy
Coinage
Chinese Alchemy
Traditional medicine

herbology


Agriculture

Sericulture


Silk industry
Architecture

Classic gardens
Bridges


Transport

Navigation


Military

Navy






By era




Han
Tang
Song
Yuan
People's Republic

Agriculture









v
t
e





When the People's Republic was founded in 1949, the telecommunications systems and facilities in China first established by the Qing and Republican ITA and Ministry of Posts and Communications had been seriously damaged from over thirty years of on and off war between warlords, Japan, and the two sides of the Chinese Civil War. What little remained was largely outdated and rudimentary and limited to the eastern coastal cities, the Nanjing-Shanghai region, and a few interior cities. In the 1950s existing facilities were repaired, and, with Soviet assistance, considerable progress was made toward establishing a long-distance telephone wire network connecting Beijing to provincial-level capitals.
Communications in China were established rapidly in the early 1950s. By 1952 the principal telecommunications network centered on Beijing, and links to all large cities had finally been established. Work quickly got under way to repair, renovate and expand the system, and from 1956 telecommunications routes were extended more rapidly. To increase the efficiency of the communications system, the same lines were used for both telegraphic and telephone service, while Teletype and television (broadcasting) services were also added.
In addition, conference telephone service was initiated, radio communications were improved, and the production of telecommunications equipment was accelerated. Growth in telecommunications halted with the general economic collapse after the Great Leap Forward (1958–60) but revived in the 1960s after the telephone network was expanded and improved equipment was introduced, including imports of Western plants and equipment.
By 1963 telephone wire had been laid from Beijing to the capitals of all provinces, autonomous regions, and large cities, while in turn, provincial capitals and autonomous regions were connected to the administrative seats of the counties, smaller municipalities and larger market towns.
In the years immediately following 1949, telecommunications — by telegraph or telephone — mainly used wire; by the 1970s, however, radio telecommunications equipment were increasingly used and began to replace wire lines. Microwave and satellite transmissions were soon introduced and have now become common. (China launched its first television-broadcast satellite in 1986.) In 1956 the first automatic speed Teletype was installed on the Beijing-Lhasa line. By 1964 such machines had been installed in most of China's major cities. Radio-television service also was installed in major cities, and radio teleprinters became widely used.
An important component of the Fourth Five-Year Plan (1971–75) was a major development program for the telecommunications system. The program allotted top priority to scarce electronics and construction resources and dramatically improved all aspects of China's telecommunications capabilities.
Microwave radio relay lines and buried cable lines were constructed to create a network of wideband carrier trunk lines, which covered the entire country. China was linked to the international telecommunications network by the installation of communications satellite ground stations and the construction of coaxial cables linking Guangdong Province with Hong Kong and Macau. Provincial-level units and municipalities rapidly expanded local telephone and wire broadcasting networks. Expansion and modernization of the telecommunications system continued throughout the late-1970s and early 1980s, giving particular emphasis to the production of radio and television sets and expanded broadcasting capabilities.
Marked improvements occurred by the mid-1980s with an influx of foreign technology and increased domestic production capabilities. International and long-distance telephone links by cable and satellite of high quality multiplied. Telegraph, facsimile, and telex were all in use. International satellite ground stations in Beijing and Shanghai were built and a domestic satellite communication network was operational in 1986. Over 160 radio stations existed by the mid-1980s, and transistorized radio receivers were common. A vast wired broadcasting system included over 2,600 stations carrying radio transmissions into all rural units and many urban areas. The television system grew rapidly in 1980s, with 90 television stations and 80 million sets by 1987.
By 1987 China possessed a diversified telecommunications system that linked all parts of the country by telephone, telegraph, radio, and television. None of the telecommunications forms were as prevalent or as advanced as those in modern Western countries, but the system included some of the most sophisticated technology in the world and constituted a foundation for further development of a modern network.
Overall, China's telecommunications services improved enormously during the 1980s, and, the pace of telecommunications growth and technology upgrading increased even more rapidly after 1990, especially as fiber-optic systems and digital technology were installed. After 1997, China's telecommunications services were enhanced further with the acquisition of Hong Kong's highly advanced systems. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, foreign investment in the country's telecommunications sector further encouraged growth. Notable has been the tremendous increase in Internet and cellular phone usage. China became the world leader in the early 21st century, in terms of number of cell phone subscribers. The nation ranks first in the world in numbers of both mobile and fixed-line telephones, and first in the number of internet users.
Experts claim that 'although the number of cellular phones has grown enormously, surpassing that for standard (i.e., landline) telephones in 2003, the overall ratio of phones per capita has nonetheless remained much smaller than it is for the developed countries.[1]'.
China is the largest user of largest Voice calling over the Internet or Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) services with 51 million Tom-Skype users as of November 2007.[2]
History of telecommunications services[edit]
In 1987 the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (now the Ministry of Information Industry) administered China's telecommunications systems and related research and production facilities. Besides postal services, some of which were handled by electronic means, the ministry was involved in a wide spectrum of telephone, wire, telegraph, and international communications (see Postage stamps and postal history of the People's Republic of China). The Ministry of Radio and Television was established as a separate entity in 1982 to administer and upgrade the status of television and radio broadcasting. Subordinate to this ministry were the Central People's Broadcasting Station, Radio Beijing, and China Central Television. Additionally, the various broadcasting training, talent-search, research, publishing, and manufacturing organizations were brought under the control of the Ministry of Radio and Television. In 1986 responsibility for the movie industry was transferred from the Ministry of Culture to the new Ministry of Radio, Cinema, and Television.
As of 1987 the quality of telecommunications services in China had improved markedly over earlier years. A considerable influx of foreign technology and increased domestic production capabilities had a major impact in the post-Mao period.




Phone booth, Luohu District, Shenzhen


The primary form of telecommunications in the 1980s was local and long-distance telephone service administered by six regional bureaus: Beijing (north region), Shanghai (east region), Xi'an (northwest region), Chengdu (southwest region), Wuhan (centralsouth region), and Shenyang (northeast region). These regional headquarters served as switching centers for provincial-level subsystems. By 1986 China had nearly 3 million telephone exchange lines, including 34,000 long-distance exchange lines with direct, automatic service to 24 cities. By late 1986 fiber optic communications technology was being employed to relieve the strain on existing telephone circuits. International service was routed through overseas exchanges located in Beijing and Shanghai. Guangdong Province had coaxial cable and microwave lines linking it to Hong Kong and Macau.
The large, continuously upgraded satellite ground stations, originally installed in 1972 to provide live coverage of the visits to China by U.S. president Richard M. Nixon and Japanese prime minister Kakuei Tanaka, still served as the base for China's international satellite communications network in the mid-1980s. By 1977 China had joined Intelsat and, using ground stations in Beijing and Shanghai, had linked up with satellites over the Indian and Pacific oceans.
In April 1984 China launched an experimental communications satellite for trial transmission of broadcasts, telegrams, telephone calls, and facsimile, probably to remote areas of the country. In February 1986 China launched its first fully operational telecommunications and broadcast satellite. The quality and communications capacity of the second satellite reportedly was much greater than the first. In mid-1987 both satellites were still functioning. With these satellites in place China's domestic satellite communication network went into operation, facilitating television and radio transmissions and providing direct-dial longdistance telephone, telegraph, and facsimile service. The network had ground stations in Beijing, Urumqi, Hohhot, Lhasa, and Guangzhou, which also were linked to an Intelsat satellite over the Indian Ocean.
Telegraph development received lower priority than the telephone network largely because of the difficulties involved in transmitting the written Chinese language. Computer technology gradually alleviated these problems and facilitated further growth in this area. By 1983 China had nearly 10,000 telegraph cables and telex lines transmitting over 170 million messages annually. Most telegrams were transmitted by cables or by shortwave radio. Cutmicrowave transmission also was used. Teletype transmission was used for messages at the international level, but some 40 percent of county and municipal telegrams were transmitted by Morse code.
Apart from traditional telegraph and telephone services, China also had facsimile, low-speed data-transmission, and computer-controlled telecommunications services. These included on-line information retrieval terminals in Beijing, Changsha, and Baotou that enabled international telecommunications networks to retrieve news and scientific, technical, economic, and cultural information from international sources.
High-speed newspaper-page-facsimile equipment and Chinese character - code translation equipment were used on a large scale. Sixty-four-channel program-controlled automatic message retransmission equipment and low- or medium-speed data transmission and exchange equipment also received extensive use. International telex service was available in coastal cities and special economic zones.
The Central People's Broadcasting Station controlled China's national radio network. Programming was administered by the provincial-level units. The station produced general news and cultural and educational programs. It also provided programs directed toward Taiwan and overseas Chinese listeners. Radio Beijing broadcast to the world in thirty-eight foreign languages, Standard Mandarin, and a number of Chinese varieties, including Xiamen, Cantonese, and Hakka. It also provided English-language news programs aimed at foreign residents in Beijing. Medium-wave, shortwave, and FM stations reached 80 percent of the country — over 160 radio stations and 500 relay and transmission stations — with some 240 radio programs.
The nationwide network of wire lines and loudspeakers transmitted radio programs into virtually all rural communities and many urban areas. By 1984 there were over 2,600 wired broadcasting stations, extending radio transmissions to rural areas outside the range of regular broadcasting stations.
In 1987 China Central Television (CCTV), the state network, managed China's television programs. In 1985 consumers purchased 15 million new sets, including approximately 4 million color sets. Production fell far short of demand. Because Chinese viewers often gathered in large groups to watch publicly owned sets, authorities estimated that two-thirds of the nation had access to television. In 1987 there were about 70 million television sets, an average of 29 sets per 100 families. CCTV had four channels that supplied programs to the over ninety television stations throughout the country. Construction began on a major new CCTV studio in Beijing in 1985. CCTV produced its own programs, a large portion of which were educational, and the Television University in Beijing produced three educational programs weekly. The English-language lesson was the most popular program and had an estimated 5 to 6 million viewers. Other programs included daily news, entertainment, teleplays, and special programs. Foreign programs included films and cartoons. Chinese viewers were particularly interested in watching international news, sports, and drama (see Culture of the People's Republic of China).
Recent development[edit]
The former telecoms regulator - the Ministry of Information Industry (MII) - reported in 2004 that China had 295 million subscribers to main telephone lines and 305 million cellular telephone subscribers, the highest numbers in both categories. Both categories showed substantial increases over the previous decade; in 1995 there were only 3.6 million cellular telephone subscribers and around 20 million main-line telephone subscribers. By 2003 there were 42 telephones per 100 population.
Internet use also has soared in China from about 60,000 Internet users in 1995 to 22.5 million users in 2000; by 2005 the number had reached 103 million. Although this figure is well below the 159 million users in the United States and although fairly low per capita, it was second in the world and on a par with Japan’s 57 million users.
By the June 2010, China had 420 million internet users. Incidentally, this is greater than the population of the USA, however penetration rate is still relatively low at just under 32%.[3] See Internet in the People's Republic of China
China’s 2.7 million kilometers of optical fiber telecommunication cables by 2003 assisted greatly in the modernization process. China produces an increasing volume of televisions both for domestic use and export, which has helped to spread communications development. In 2001 China produced more than 46 million televisions and claimed 317 million sets in use. At the same time, there were 417 million radios in use in China, a rate of 342 per 1,000 population. However, many more are reached, especially in rural areas, via loudspeaker broadcasts of radio programs that bring transmissions to large numbers of radioless households.
In March 2012, the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology announced that China has 1.01 billion mobile phone subscribers; of these, 144 million are connected to 3G networks.[4][5][6] At the same time, the number of landline phones dropped by 828,000 within the span of two months to a total of 284.3 million.[4]
Regulation[edit]
The primary regulator of communications, in particular telecommunications, in China is the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT). It closely regulates all of the industries outlined below with the exception of the radio and television sectors, which belong to the remit of the State Administration of Radio, Film, and Television.
Since 2014, the Cyberspace Administration of China is responsible for setting policy and the regulatory framework for user content generated in online social activities on Internet portals.
Sectors[edit]
Telephone[edit]

See: Telecommunications industry in China


Telephones - main lines in use: 284.3 million (March 2012)[4]
Telephones - mobile cellular subscribers: 1.01 billion (March 2012)[4]
Telephone country code: 86 (see Telephone numbers in China)

China imported its first mobile phone telecommunication facilities in 1987 and it took a decade for the number of subscribers to reach 10 million. Four years later, in 2001, the country had the largest number of mobile phone subscribers in the world.
Domestic and international services are increasingly available for private use. But an unevenly distributed domestic system serves principal cities, industrial centers, and many towns. China continues to develop its telecommunications infrastructure, and is partnering with foreign providers to expand its global reach; 3 of China's 6 major telecommunications operators are part of an international consortium which, in December 2006, signed an agreement with Verizon Business to build the first next-generation optical cable system directly linking the United States and China.
On December 2005, its combined main lines and mobile lines exceeded 743 million.
By the end of August 2006, statistics from the Ministry of Information Industry showed that there were more than 437 million mobile phone users in the Chinese mainland, or 327 mobile phones per 1,000 population. The combined main lines and mobile lines is expected to hit 976 million by 2008.[7]
From January to August 2006, mobile phone users on the mainland sent 273.67 million text messages.[8]
On average, China's mobile subscribers increased by 4.78 million each month.
Domestic interprovincial fiber-optic trunk lines and cellular telephone systems have been installed.
A domestic satellite system with 55 earth stations is in place.
International satellite earth stations include 5 Intelsat (4 Pacific Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean region) and 1 Inmarsat (Pacific and Indian Ocean regions).
Several international fiber-optic links include those to Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Russia, and Germany.
Fixed and mobile operators in China include China Mobile, China Netcom, China TieTong, China Satcom (former), China Telecom and China Unicom.
Radio[edit]

See: China National Radio; China Radio International


Radio broadcast stations: AM 369, FM 259, shortwave 45 (1998)
Radios: 428 million [33 per 100 persons] (2000)

Television[edit]
Main articles: Television in the People's Republic of China and Digital television in China

Television companies: 358 (2008)
Television broadcast stations: 3,240 (of which 209 are operated by China Central Television, 31 are provincial TV stations and nearly 3,000 are local city stations) (1997)
Televisions: 493.90 million [38 per 100 persons] (2016)

Internet[edit]

See also: Internet in the People's Republic of China; Internet censorship in China; China Next Generation Internet; Chinese Domain Name Consortium; Online gaming in China


Internet country code: .cn
Internet hosts: 13.57 million (2008)
Internet service providers (ISP): 3 (2000)
Internet users: 513 million (December 2011)[3]
Broadband Internet users: 363.81 million (June 2010)
Personal computers: 52,990,000 units [4 per 100 persons] (2004)
Hosting 29 % of the globally installed bandwidth capacity in 2014 (see Figure)





China is global leader in terms of installed bandwidth capacity[9]



In 2014 only 3 countries (China, US, Japan) host 50 % of the globally installed telecommunication bandwidth potential. China replaced the U.S. in its global leadership in terms of installed bandwidth in 2011. By 2014, China hosts more than twice as much national bandwidth potential than the U.S., the historical leader in terms of installed telecommunication bandwidth (29% versus 13% of the global total) (see pie charts).[9]
China's number of Internet users or netizens topped 137 million by the end of 2006,[10] an increase of 23.4% from a year before and 162 million by June 2007, making China the second largest Internet user after the United States. The latest figure (December 2011) have China's internet users exceeding 513 million making it the largest internet user in the world.[11]
As of 2004, the largest concentration of Internet users were from Guangdong, Zhejiang, Fujian, Jiangsu, Liaoning, Shandong and Hubei provinces. Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin also had a high concentration of Internet users, with 28% of Beijing's population having access to the Internet.
As of 31 December 2005, there were an estimated 37,504,000 broadband lines in China.[12] It represented nearly a world share of 18%. Over 70% of the broadband lines were via DSL and the rest via cable modems.
According to the China Internet Network Information Centre (CNNIC), by June 2006, China's broadband users had reached 77 million or about two-thirds of the total online population, up 45% from a year ago. By June 2007 China's broadband users had reached 122 million. The number of websites had also risen by more than 110,000 to a total of 788,400.
As of 2007, ITU data puts China's broadband speed at 1Mbit/s. China is fast becoming the world's largest broadband economy. It is laying quite a lot of fiber which is a less disruptive option in China because of the amount of new building work being done. It has 14 million fiber lines, compared to 9.6 million in Japan, 1.7m in the US and just a few thousand in the UK but it does not generate the same speeds as in other Asian countries because the fiber tends to feed into apartment blocks rather than individual homes.
There exists a wide gap between Internet use in cities and rural areas, as statistics show. The national average internet penetration rate is still just 31.8% (June 2010). At the end of June 2007 there were 37.41 million netizens in the rural areas, making up only 5.1 percent of the rural population and around 125 million netizens living in the urban areas, making up 21.6 percent of the urban population, according to the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC).[13] The CNNIC survey showed 82.3 per cent of people using the Internet in China were below 35 years old and almost 40 per cent of the netizens were aged 18 to 24. QQ is the most popular form of instant messaging on the Internet in China.
Mobile phone web users[edit]
The number of mobile phone web users in China was 73.05 million by June 2008, making up about 30% of China's 253 million internet users.
Chinese mobile phone users access the Internet mainly via WAP (Wireless Application Protocol). Numbers of active WAP users and WAP sites with independent domain names amounted to 39 million and 65,000 respectively by March 2007.
It is expected that in 2008 there will be 230 million WAP users in China with a total market valued at RMB 22 billion.
Trans-Pacific Express[edit]
Main article: TPE (cable system)
The Trans-Pacific Express is a telecommunications project to connect the United States with China with a fiber-optic cable that is designed to meet increasing internet traffic between the regions, with 60 times more capacity than existing cables.[14] It is to be the first undersea or submarine telecommunications cable that directly links the US with China and the first independent trans-Pacific connection. Current cable links between China and the US run through Japan.[15]
The project includes US Verizon Communications, Chinese firms China Telecom, China Netcom and China Unicom, South Korea's Korea Telecom and Taiwan's Chunghwa Telecom. The project was initiated in December 2006. Work began in mid-October 2007 in Qingdao. It was scheduled to be completed by July 2008 (before the Beijing Olympics).[16]
Earthquake hotspots have been avoided in the planned route of the cable to avoid potential disruption to internet and telephone networks in Asia. The cable will extend more than 18,000 km and will cost about $500m. It will terminate in Nedonna Beach, Oregon with connections to Taiwan and South Korea. When complete, the new cable will be able to support the equivalent of 62 million simultaneous phone calls, with the design capacity to support future internet growth and advanced applications such as video and e-commerce.[17]
See also[edit]

Internationalized domain name (IDN.IDN) for non-ASCII characters
Chinese telegraph code
Digital divide in China
CERNET (China Education and Research Network)
Media in China and its history
Electronics industry in China
Postal system in China
China Software Industry Association
Mobile phone industry in China
EUChinaGRID
Internet censorship in the People's Republic of China

References[edit]



^ Eric Harwit. Spreading Telecommunications to Developing Areas in China: Telephones, the Internet and the Digital Divide The China Quarterly (2004), 180: 1010-1030 Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/S0305741004000724
^ Interfax-China
^ a b "China Internet population hits 420m". China Daily. Retrieved 18 July 2010. 
^ a b c d Donald Melanson, 30 March 2012, China officially tops one billion mobile subscribers, Engadget
^ 2012-03-30, China mobile phone users exceed 1 billion, China Daily
^ 30 March 2012, China's mobile phone subscriptions top a billion, AFP
^ Chinadaily - English
^ Xinhua - English
^ a b "The bad news is that the digital access divide is here to stay: Domestically installed bandwidths among 172 countries for 1986–2014", Martin Hilbert (2016), Telecommunications Policy; free access to the article http://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jp4w5rq
^ Internet users to log in at world No.1
^ east-west-connect.com http://www.east-west-connect.com/chinese-internet-user-demographics-jan-2012.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Register for free information from Point-Topic
^ Internet spreading in China's rural areas
^ Report: China starts work on first direct undersea cable to US
^ Trans-Pacific Express deal signed for US-China cable 19 December 2006
^ Trans-Pacific Express cable ready in 2008 1 June 2006
^ Carriers Plan New Terabit Capacity Trans-Pacific Express Optical Cable



 This article incorporates public domain material from the Library of Congress Country Studies website http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/. [1]
External links[edit]

Ministry of Information Industry at gov.cn
China Academy of Telecommunications Research
China Statistical Information Net







v
t
e


Telecommunications in China




Telecommunications industry



History



CERNET
China Next Generation Internet
Chinese Domain Name Consortium
CNGrid
Digital divide
Electronics industry
ICP license
Internet
Internet censorship

Golden Shield Project
List of websites blocked
List of blacklisted keywords


Mobile phone industry
Online gaming





Government agencies



China Internet Network Information Center
Internet police
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
Cyberspace Administration of China





Telecom operators



China Mobile
China Telecommunications Corporation

China Telecom


China Unicom





Equipment suppliers



Amoi
Datang Telecom Group

Datang Telecom Technology


Huawei
Konka Group
Ningbo Bird
SVA Group
ZTE








Economy
Media
Television












v
t
e


Telecommunications in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Science and technology in China






Architecture
Astronomy
Automotive industry
Biotechnology
Internet
Software
Space program
Logic
Mathematics
Media
Mining
Nuclear power
Railways
Supercomputing
Telecommunications
Cyberwarfare





History



Inventions
Discoveries
History of measurement systems
Calendar
History of metallurgy
Ancient coinage
Printing
Early cartography
Maritime history
Military history





Education



Academic grading
Higher education
Research institutes
Science museums





People



Biologists
Chemists
Computer programmers
Computer scientists
Engineers
Inventors
Mathematicians
Nobel laureates
Pharmacologists
Physicians
Physicists
Science writers





Institutes and programs



863 Program
Research institutes
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Chinese Academy of Engineering
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
National Natural Science Foundation of China












v
t
e


Economy of China




 Companies of China



History



History
Reform
Five-year plans
Industrial Revolution
Iron rice bowl
Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns
Great Leap Forward
Four Modernizations
Socialist market economy
"Grasping the large, letting go of the small"
Scientific Development Concept
Historical GDP





Industries



Industry (history)
Advanced materials
Aquaculture
Automotive
Aviation
Aircraft
Aerospace
Beer
Biotechnology
Business process outsourcing
Cement
Container
Cotton
Electric motor
Electric power
Electronics
Film
Fishing
Gambling
Hedge fund
Internet
Media
 Mining (Gold mining)
Mobile phone
Online gaming
Pearl farming
Pharmaceuticals & Pharmacy
Publishing & Academic publishing
Radio
Railway (Equipment)
Rare earth
Real estate
Renewable energy
Securities
Sex toys
Shipping
Silk
Software
Steel
Telecommunications
Television (Digital)
Tourism
Textiles
Video gaming
Wine





Development Zones



Special Economic Zones
Suzhou Industrial Park
Dalian Software Park
Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park
Metropolitan regions of China





Energy



Energy policy
Coal
Oil

Oil shale
Oil refineries


Nuclear
Renewable

Wind
Solar
Geothermal







Trade and infrastructure



Trade history
World Trade Center
Transport
Communications
Postal history
Tourism
Shipping
Illegal drug trade
Hong Kong Trade Development Council
Ports
Water supply and sanitation
Exports
Trading partners





Law and regulations



Tax system
Labor contract law
Labor relations
Food safety
Intellectual property





Finance and banking



Financial system
Financial services
Chinese currency
Chinese yuan
Renminbi
China Banknote Printing and Minting Corporation
Banking

History
Central bank
Other banks


Foreign exchange reserve
Beijing Financial Street
Stock Exchange Executive Council
Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE Composite Index)
Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE Component Index)
Dalian Commodity Exchange
Shanghai Metal Exchange
Zhengzhou Commodity Exchange
Hedge fund industry
 Accounting





Government institutions



National Development and Reform Commission
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Commerce
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
SASAC
State Administration for Industry and Commerce
State Administration of Taxation
All-China Federation of Trade Unions
China Council for the Promotion of International Trade
General Administration of Customs
China Banking Regulatory Commission
China Securities Regulatory Commission
China Insurance Regulatory Commission
State Administration of Foreign Exchange
Statistics
All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce
CITIC Group
China Investment Corporation
National Energy Commission
China-Africa Development Fund





Development



International rankings
Social welfare
Poverty
Corruption
Standard of living
Foreign aid
Urbanization
Internal migration
Emigration
Rural credit cooperative





National economic initiatives



Belt and Road Initiative
Go Out policy
Made in China 2025
National Innovative Enterprises
Youth Business China





Regional economic initiatives



Pearl River Delta Economic Zone
Bohai Economic Rim
China Western Development
Rise of Central China Plan
Northeast China Revitalization
Western Taiwan Straits Economic Zone
Yangtze River Delta Economic Zone
Beibu Gulf Economic Rim
Central Plains Economic Zone
Closer Economic Partnership Arrangements (Hong Kong)
Mainland and Macau Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement





Events



2005–2011 property bubble
2007 export / pet food recalls
2007 stock bubble
2007 Slave scandal
2008–2009 economic stimulus plan
2010 Expo
2015–16 stock market turbulence (EU Referendum)
Protein export contamination





Related topics



Agriculture
Bankruptcy
Companies

Largest
Top 500
Largest SOEs


The Hongs
Demographics
Globalization

Globalization and women


National Standards
China Compulsory Certificate
Made in China
Chinese people by net worth
Chinese economists
Science and technology








See also:  Category
 Outline of China
Economy of East Asia












v
t
e


 Television broadcasting channels in China



China




National



CCTV

CNTV


CGTN
CETV
CNC
CWTV





Commercial
(National)



Anhui STV
Beijing STV
(Beijing) Kaku
Chongqing STV
(Fujian) Southeast STV
(Fujian) Strait STV
(Fujian) Xiamen STV
Gansu STV
Guangdong STV
(Guangdong) TVS
(Guangdong) Shenzhen STV
(Guangdong) Jiajia
Guangxi STV
Guizhou STV
(Hainan) Travel Channel
(Hainan) Sansha STV
Hebei STV
Heilongjiang STV
Henan STV
Hubei STV
Hunan STV
(Hunan) Aniworld
Nei Mongol STV
Jiangsu STV
(Jiangsu) Youman
Jiangxi STV
Jilin STV
Liaoning STV
Ningxia STV
Qinghai STV
Shaanxi STV
Shaanxi Forestry STV
Shandong STV
Shandong Education STV
(Shanghai) Dragon STV
(Shanghai) Toonmax
Shanxi STV
Shenzhen STV
Sichuan STV
Tianjin STV
Xinjiang STV
Xinjiang STV News
Xinjiang STV Sports and Health
Xinjiang STV Children
(Xinjiang) Bingtuan STV
Xizang STV
Yunnan STV
Zhejiang STV





Non-Chinese
(National)



Qinghai STV Tibetan (Amdo)
Xizang STV Tibetan (Wü-Zang)
Kangba STV Tibetan (Kam)
Nei Mongol STV Mongolian
Xinjiang STV Uyghur
Xinjiang STV Kazakh
Xinjiang STV Uyghur Variety
Xinjiang STV Kazakh Variety
Xinjiang STV Uyghur Life
Yanbian STV (Korean)








Hong Kong




Free-to-air



TVB
RTHK
ViuTV
Approved

Fantastic TV







Cable



Cable TV
TVBNV
now TV
HKBN bbTV





Satellite



China Entertainment TV
Phoenix TV
Sun TV
Dim Sum TV
Hong Kong STV
STAR TV
ECSTV
Health TV
One TV








Macau




Free-to-air



TDM
CTBM





Cable



Macau Cable Television





Satellite



MASTV
Lotus TV
Kung Fu TV
CSTV
NewSky STV
Confucius TV











See also
 Television in Hong Kong
 Television in Macau












v
t
e


Radio stations broadcasting in the Chinese language










v
t
e


Chinese-language radio in Canada




The following channels offer at least some programming in Chinese



Calgary



CHKF





Edmonton



CKER





Montreal



CFMB





Toronto



CHIN
CHKT
CIRV
CJRK





Vancouver



CHKG
CHMB
CJVB















v
t
e


Radio in China



National



China Radio International
China National Radio





Regional



Radio Beijing Corporation
Fujian Radio
Radio Guangdong
Hubei Radio
Hunan Broadcasting System
Inner Mongolia Radio
Heilongjiang Radio
Lanzhou Radio
Nanjing Radio
Shaanxi Radio
Shanghai Media Group
Shenzhen Media Group
Tianjin Radio
Tibet Radio
Urumqi Radio
Xinjiang Radio
Zhejiang Radio





Hong Kong



Radio Television Hong Kong
Commercial Radio Hong Kong
Metro Broadcast Corporation Limited





Macau



Teledifusão de Macau
Radio Vilaverde Lda









China Radio Markets
Beijing
Fujian
Guangdong
Heilongjiang
Shanghai
Sichuan
Tianjin
Xinjiang
Zhejiang



See also
List of radio stations in China















v
t
e


Chinese-language radio in Malaysia



RTM



Ai FM





Cense Media



City Plus FM





Media Prima



One FM





Astro Radio



Melody FM
My FM
goXuan FM





KTS Group



TEA FM





Star Radio Group



988 FM















v
t
e


Chinese-language radio in Singapore



Mediacorp Radio



Y.E.S. 93.3FM
Capital 95.8FM
Love 97.2FM





Others



883JiaFM
96.3 Hao FM
UFM 1003















v
t
e


Radio stations in Taiwan



Government



Radio Taiwan International
National Education Radio
Taipei Broadcasting Station
Voice of Han
Fuxing Radio
Police Radio Station





Private



Broadcasting Corporation of China
Hit FM
ICRT
KISS Radio
PCJ Radio
UFO Radio















v
t
e


Chinese-language radio in the United States




The following channels offer at least some programming in Chinese



Boston



WILD
WROL





Florida



WYFR (Okeechobee)





Honolulu



KHCM





Houston



KCHN





Los Angeles



KAZN
KWRM
KMRB





New York



Chinese Radio New York
Chung Wah Chinese Broadcasting Company
WGBB
WKDM
WZRC
Chinese American Voice





Philadelphia



WNWR





San Francisco



KEST
KVTO
KSQQ
KSFN





Overseas



Radio Free Asia
Voice of America















v
t
e


China articles








History






China

timeline


Ancient China (outline) (2070–221 BCE)
Imperial China (221 BCE–1911 CE)
Republic of China (1912–1949)
People's Republic of China−PRC

PRC 1949–76
PRC 1976–89
PRC 1989–2002
PRC since 2002
Years in the PRC


















Geography
Natural environment






Overviews



Borders
Extreme points
Geology
Natural disasters





Regions



East
Northeast
North
South Central

Central
South


Western

Northwest
Southwest







Terrain



Bays
Canyons
Caves
Deserts
Grasslands
Hills
Islands
Mountains

ranges
passes


Peninsulas
Northeast / North / Central Plains
Valleys
Volcanoes





Water



Canals
Lakes
Rivers
Waterfalls
Wetlands
Water resources





Seas



Bohai
Yellow
East China
South China





Reserves



Protected areas
National parks
Nature reserves
UNESCO Biosphere Reserves





Wildlife



Fauna
Flora
















Government
Politics
Economy







Government
and politics




Civil service
Constitution
Elections
Environmental policy
Foreign relations
Military (People's Liberation Army)
National People's Congress

Standing Committee


National security
Political parties and movements

Communist Party

General Secretary
Politburo


Democratic Parties
Anti-democratisation
Pro-democratisation


President

Vice President


State Council

Premier
Vice Premier








Administrative
divisions




Baseline islands
Border crossings
Cities
Province-level subdivisions





Law



Judicial system
Human rights

LGBT


Law enforcement
Nationality law
Penal system





Economy



Agriculture
Banking

Central bank


Economic history
Energy

Petroleum industry
Renewable energy


Finance system
Foreign aid received
Foreign aid program
Historical GDP
International rankings
Poverty
Reform
Renminbi (currency)
Science and technology

history


Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
Standard of living
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport

airports
ports and harbors


















People
Society
Culture






People



Demographics
Emigration
Ethnic groups
Internal migration
Statistics
Urbanization





Society



Anthem
Chinese Dream
Corruption
Crime
Emblem
Education

universities


Flag
"Generation Y"
Harmonious Socialist Society
HIV/AIDS
Intellectualism
Languages
Poverty
Public health

food safety

incidents




Public holidays
Rural life
Sexuality
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Social issues
Social relations
Social structure
Social welfare
Suicide
Terrorism
Time zones
Urban life
Water supply and sanitation
Women
Xiaokang (middle-class)
Primary stage of socialism





Culture



Archaeology
Archives
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Gardens
Libraries
Literature
Martial arts
Media

newspapers
radio
television


Music
Parks
Philosophy
Religion
Smoking
Sports
Tea culture
Tourism
Variety arts
World Heritage Sites












Index



Category
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_China&oldid=816522577"					Categories: Telecommunications in ChinaSatellite ground stationsTelecommunications by countryTelecommunications in AsiaHidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsUse dmy dates from July 2012Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Library of Congress Country Studies