



The Hormuud Telecom building in Mogadishu.


Communications in Somalia encompasses the communications services and capacity of Somalia. Telecommunications, internet, radio, print, television and postal services in the nation are largely concentrated in the private sector. Several of the telecom firms have begun expanding their activities abroad. The Federal government operates two official radio and television networks, which exist alongside a number of private and foreign stations. Print media in the country is also progressively giving way to news radio stations and online portals, as internet connectivity and access increases. Additionally, the national postal service is slated to be officially relaunched in 2013 after a long absence. In 2012, a National Communications Act was also approved by Cabinet members, which lays the foundation for the establishment of a National Communications regulator in the broadcasting and telecommunications sectors.



Contents


1 Telecommunications

1.1 General
1.2 Regulation
1.3 Firms


2 Mail
3 Radio
4 Television
5 Print
6 Telephone
7 Internet
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Telecommunications[edit]
General[edit]
After the start of the civil war, various new telecommunications companies began to spring up in the country and competed to provide missing infrastructure.[1] Somalia now offers some of the most technologically advanced and competitively priced telecommunications and internet services in the world.[2] Funded by Somali entrepreneurs and backed by expertise from China, Korea and Europe, these nascent telecommunications firms offer affordable mobile phone and internet services that are not available in many other parts of the continent. Customers can conduct money transfers (such as through the popular Dahabshiil) and other banking activities via mobile phones, as well as easily gain wireless Internet access.[1]




Minister of Post and Telecommunications Mohamud Ibrihim Adan at the 2012 World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT) in Dubai.


After forming partnerships with multinational corporations such as Sprint, ITT and Telenor, these firms now offer the cheapest and clearest phone calls in Africa.[3] These Somali telecommunication companies also provide services to every city, town and hamlet in Somalia. There are presently around 25 mainlines per 1,000 persons, and the local availability of telephone lines (tele-density) is higher than in neighboring countries; three times greater than in adjacent Ethiopia.[4] Prominent Somali telecommunications companies include Somtel Network, Golis Telecom Group, Hormuud Telecom, Somafone, Nationlink, Netco, Telcom and Somali Telecom Group. Hormuud Telecom alone grosses about $40 million a year. Despite their rivalry, several of these companies signed an interconnectivity deal in 2005 that allows them to set prices, maintain and expand their networks, and ensure that competition does not get out of control.[1]
In 2008, Dahabshiil Group acquired a majority stake in Somtel Network, a Hargeisa-based telecommunications firm specialising in high speed broadband, mobile internet, LTE services, mobile money transfer and mobile phone services.[5][6] The acquisition provided Dahabshiil with the necessary platform for a subsequent expansion into mobile banking, a growth industry in the regional banking sector.[7][8] In 2014, Somalia's three largest telecommunication operators, Hormuud Telecom, NationLink and Somtel, also signed an interconnection agreement. The cooperative deal will see the firms establish the Somali Telecommunication Company (STC), which will allow their mobile clients to communicate across the three networks.[9]
Investment in the telecom industry is held to be one of the clearest signs that Somalia's economy has continued to develop.[1] The sector provides key communication services, and in the process facilitates job creation and income generation.[4]
Regulation[edit]
Somalia's telecommunication sector is governed by the National Communications Law (also called the Telecoms Act) that was signed into law by president Abdullahi Farmajo on 2 October 2017, after passing the Cabinet and the two Houses of Parliament (Senate and House of the People). It entered into effect immediately.
This Act had a very long way in coming, as its drafting had already started in 2005. It was already approved by the Somali Cabinet in 2012. The new law paves the way for the establishment of a National Communications Regulatory Commission in the broadcasting and telecommunications sectors. The bill was passed following consultations between government representatives and communications, academic and civil society stakeholders. According to the Ministry of Information, Posts and Telecommunication, the Act is expected to create an environment conducive to investment and the certainty it provides will encourage further infrastructural development, resulting in more efficient service delivery.[10][11]
Firms[edit]
Companies providing telecommunication services in Somalia include:




Hormuud Telecom
Somlink Wireless Networks
AirSom Comm Somalia
Gaani Wireless
Galkom
Global Internet Company
Golis Telecom Somalia





Haatif Telecom Somalia
Dalkom Somalia
OnkoTel
NationLink Telecom
Netco





Sahal Telecom Somalia
Somafone
Somali Data Network
Somali Telecom Group
Somtel Network





Somtel Puntland
Telenet International
Telesom
Wayrah Telecom
Xiriirka Fone




Mail[edit]
The Somali Postal Service (Somali Post) is the national postal service of the Federal Government of Somalia. It is part of the Ministry of Information, Posts and Telecommunication.[12]
The national postal infrastructure was completely destroyed during the civil war. In order to fill the vacuum, Somali Post signed an agreement in 2003 with the United Arab Emirates' Emirates Post to process mail to and from Somalia. Emirates Post's mail transit hub at the Dubai International Airport was then used to forward mail from Somalia to the UAE and various Western destinations, including Italy, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Switzerland and Canada.[13]
Concurrently, the Somali Transitional Federal Government began preparations to revive the national postal service. The government's overall reconstruction plan for Somali Post is structured into three Phases spread out over a period of ten years. Phase I will see the reconstruction of the postal headquarters and General Post Office (GPO), as well as the establishment of 16 branch offices in the capital and 17 in regional bases. As of March 2012, the Somali authorities have re-established Somalia's membership with the Universal Postal Union (UPU), and taken part once again in the Union's affairs. They have also rehabilitated the GPO in Mogadishu, and appointed an official Postal Consultant to provide professional advice on the renovations. Phase II of the rehabilitation project involves the construction of 718 postal outlets from 2014 to 2016. Phase III is slated to begin in 2017, with the objective of creating 897 postal outlets by 2022.[14]
On 1 November 2013, international postal services for Somalia officially resumed. The Universal Postal Union is now assisting the Somali Postal Service to develop its capacity, including providing technical assistance and basic mail processing equipment.[15]
Radio[edit]
There are a number of radio news agencies based in Somalia. Established during the colonial period, Radio Mogadishu initially broadcast news items in both Somali and Italian.[16] The station was modernized with Russian assistance following independence in 1960, and began offering home service in Somali, Amharic and Oromo.[17] After closing down operations in the early 1990s due to the civil war, the station was officially re-opened in the early 2000s by the Transitional National Government.[18] In the late 2000s, Radio Mogadishu also launched a complementary website of the same name, with news items in Somali, Arabic and English.[19]
Other radio stations based in Mogadishu include radio Dalsan,[20] Mustaqbal Media corporation and the Shabelle Media Network, the latter of which was in 2010 awarded the Media of the Year prize by the Paris-based journalism organisation, Reporters Without Borders (RSF).[21] In total, about one short-wave and ten private FM radio stations broadcast from the capital, with several radio stations broadcasting from the central and southern regions.[22]
The northeastern Puntland region has around six private radio stations, including Radio Garowe, Radio Daljir, Radio Codka-Nabbada and Radio Codka-Mudug. Radio Gaalkacyo, formerly known as Radio Free Somalia, operates from Galkayo in the north-central Mudug province. Additionally, the Somaliland region in the northwest has one government-operated radio station.[22]
As of 2007, transmissions for two internationally based broadcasters were also available.[22]
Television[edit]




News show on the Somali private channel Horn Cable Television.


The Mogadishu-based Somali National Television is the principal national public service broadcaster. On March 18, 2011, the Ministry of Information of the Transitional Federal Government began experimental broadcasts of the new TV channel. After a 20-year hiatus, the station was shortly thereafter officially re-launched on April 4, 2011.[23] SNTV broadcasts 24 hours a day, and can be viewed both within Somalia and abroad via terrestrial and satellite platforms.[24]
Additionally, Somalia has several private television networks, including Horn Cable Television and Universal TV. Two such TV stations re-broadcast Al-Jazeera and CNN. Eastern Television Network and SBC TV air from Bosaso, the commercial capital of Puntland. The Puntland and Somaliland regions also each have one government-run TV channel, Puntland TV and Radio and Somaliland National TV, respectively.[22]
Print[edit]
In the early 2000s, print media in Somalia reached a peak in activity. Around 50 newspapers were published in Mogadishu alone during this period, including Qaran, Mogadishu Times, Sana'a, Shabelle Press, Ayaamaha, Mandeeq, Sky Sport, Goal, The Nation, Dalka, Panorama, Aayaha Nolosha, Codka Xuriyada and Xidigta Maanta. In 2003, as new free electronic media outlets started to proliferate, advertisers increasingly began switching over from print ads to radio and online commercials in order to reach more customers. A number of the broadsheets in circulation subsequently closed down operations, as they were no longer able to cover printing costs in the face of the electronic revolution. In 2012, the political Xog Doon and Xog Ogaal and Horyaal Sports were reportedly the last remaining newspapers printed in the capital. According to Issa Farah, a former editor with the Dalka broadsheet, newspaper publishing in Somalia is likely to experience a resurgence if the National Somali Printing Press is re-opened and the sector is given adequate public support.[25]
Online news oulets covering Somalia include Garowe Online, Wardheernews, Horseedmedia, Calannka, Jowhar, Hiiraan, Boramanews and Puntland Post.
Telephone[edit]
To call in Somalia, the following format is used:[26]

yxx xxxx, yy xxx xxx or yy xxx xxx - Calls within Somalia
+252 yxx xxxx, +252 yy xxx xxx or +252 yyy xxx xxx - Calls from outside Somalia

As of the end of 2013, over 52% of Somalia's population used a cellphone.[27]
Internet[edit]

Internet users: 163,185 in 2014 (156th in the world) or 1.51% of the population (156nd in the world).[28] According to Global Internet, one of the largest Internet providers in central and southern Somalia, unofficial estimates on local Internet usage are higher, with 2.0% of the population estimated to have Internet access as of 2011.[29]
Internet hosts: 186 hosts in 2012 (202nd in the world).[22]
IPv4: 10,240 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 1.0 addresses per 1000 people (2012).[30][31]
.so is the Internet top-level domain (ccTLD) for Somalia. After a long absence, the .so domain was officially relaunched in November 2010 by the .SO Registry. Regulated by the national Ministry of Posts and Telecommunication, the registrar offers several domain name spaces geared toward specific communities and interest groups:[32]

.so – General usage
com.so – Commercial enterprises
net.so – Networks
org.so – Non-profit organizations[32]
gov.so – Government agencies



According to the Centre for Law and Democracy (CLD) and the African Union/United Nations Information Support Team (IST), Somalia did not have systemic internet blocking or filtering as of December 2012. The application of content standards online was also unclear.[33]
Somalia established its first ISP in 1999, one of the last countries in Africa to get connected to the Internet. According to the telecommunications resource Balancing Act, growth in internet connectivity has since then grown considerably, with around 53% of the entire nation covered as of 2009. Both internet commerce and telephony have consequently become among the quickest growing local businesses.[34]
According to the World Bank, the number of internet users in Somalia rose from only 200 in the year 2000 to 1.8% of the population in 2015, with the percentage continuing to rise. The number of mobile cellular subscriptions rose much faster, from 1.1 per 100 people in 2000 to 52.5 per 100 people in 2015.[35]
The Somali Telecommunication Association (STA), a watchdog organization that oversees the policy development and regulatory framework of Somalia's ICT sector, reported in 2006 that there were over half a million users of internet services within the territory. There were also 22 established ISPs and 234 cyber cafes, with an annual growth rate of 15.6%.[34]
As of 2009, dial up, wireless and satellite services were available. Dial up internet services in Somalia were among the fastest growing on the continent, with an annual landline growth rate of over 12.5%. The increase in usage was largely due to innovative policy initiatives adopted by the various Somali telecom operators, including free local in-town calls, a flat rate of $10 per month for unlimited calls, a low charge of $0.005 per minute for Internet connections, and a one-time connection fee of $50. Global Internet Company, a firm jointly owned by the major Somali telecommunication networks Hormuud Telecom, Telcom Somalia and Nationlink, was the country's largest ISP. It was at the time the only provider of dial up services in Somalia's south-central regions. In the northern Puntland and Somaliland regions, online networks offered internet dial up services to their own group of subscribers. Among these firms was Golis Telecom Somalia in the northeast and Telesom in the northwest.[34]
Broadband wireless services were offered by both dial up and non-dial up ISPs in major cities, such as Mogadishu, Bosaso, Hargeisa, Galkayo and Kismayo. Pricing ranged from $150 to $300 a month for unlimited internet access, with bandwidth rates of 64 kbit/s up and down. The main patrons of these wireless services were scholastic institutions, corporations, and UN, NGO and diplomatic missions. Mogadishu had the biggest subscriber base nationwide and was also the headquarters of the largest wireless internet services, among which were Dalkom (Wanaag HK), Orbit, Unitel and Webtel.[34]
As of 2009, Internet via satellite had a steady growth rate of 10% to 15% per year. It was particularly in demand in remote areas that did not have either dialup or wireless online services. The local telecommunications company Dalkom Somalia provided internet over satellite, as well as premium routes for media operators and content providers, and international voice gateway services for global carriers. It also offered inexpensive bandwidth through its internet backbone, whereas bandwidth ordinarily cost customers from $2,500 to $3,000 per month through the major international bandwidth providers. The main clients of these local satellite services were internet cafes, money transfer firms and other companies, as well as international community representatives. In total, there were over 300 local satellite terminals available aross the nation, which were linked to teleports in Europe and Asia. Demand for the satellite services gradually began to fall as broadband wireless access rose. However, it increased in rural areas, as the main client base for the satellite services extended their operations into more remote locales.[34]
In December 2012, Hormuud Telecom launched its Tri-Band 3G service for internet and mobile clients. The first of its kind in the country, this third generation mobile telecommunications technology offers users a faster and more secure connection.[36]
In November 2013, Somalia received its first fiber optic connection. The country previously had to rely on expensive satellite links due to the civil conflict, which limited internet usage. However, residents now have access to broadband internet cable for the first time after an agreement reached between Hormuud Telecom and Liquid Telecom. The deal will see Liquid Telecom link Hormuud to its 17,000 km (10,500 mile) network of terrestrial cables, which will deliver faster internet capacity. The fiber optic connection will also make online access more affordable to the average user. This in turn is expected to further increase the number of internet users.[37][38] Dalkom Somalia reached a similar agreement with the West Indian Ocean Cable Company (WIOCC) Ltd, which it holds shares in. Effective the first quarter of 2014, the deal will establish fiber optic connectivity to and from Somalia via the EASSy cable. The new services are expected to reduce the cost of international bandwidth and to better optimize performance, thereby further broadening internet access. Dalkom Somalia is concurrently constructing a 2,600-square-kilometre (1,000 sq mi) state-of-the-art data center in Mogadishu. The site will facilitate direct connection into the international fiber optic network by hosting equipment for all of the capital's ISPs and telecommunication companies.[39]
See also[edit]

Media of Somalia
Terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Somalia

References[edit]



^ a b c d Telecom Firms Thrive in Somalia Despite War, Shattered Economy – The Wall Street Journal
^ "Freeing Finance: If money makes the world go round, Dahabshiil CEO Abdirashid Duale makes sure it goes to the right people". Forbescustom.com. Retrieved 2010-06-27. 
^ Christopher J. Coyne, After war: the political economy of exporting democracy, (Stanford University Press, 2008), p. 154.
^ a b The African Executive. "Somalia: The Resilience of a People". Africanexecutive.com. Archived from the original on 2015-06-26. Retrieved 2010-12-30. 
^ International Association of Money Transfer Networks
^ Yahoo! Finance
^ TechChange
^ Monty Munford "Guest Post: Could Tiny Somaliland Become the First Cashless Society?", TechCrunch.com (5 September 2010).
^ "Hormuud, Somtel, Nationlink sign interconnection deal". TeleGeography. 23 July 2014. Retrieved 12 October 2014. 
^ Somali President signs telecommunications bill, Garowe Online, 2 October 2017. Accessed on 3 October 2017.
^ "Somali government to establish communications regulatory commission". Sabahi. 23 March 2012. Retrieved 25 December 2012. 
^ Ministry of Information, Posts and Telecommunications, Government of Somalia, 2012. Retrieved 9 December 2012.
^ Emirates Post and Somali Post sign agreement to establish money transfer and mail services, AMEinfo.com, 30 June 2003. Retrieved 9 December 2012. Archived here.
^ Reconstruction of Somalia Post, Presentation to the U.P.U., Berne, Somali Ministry of Information, Posts and Telecommunications, 2 March 2012. Retrieved 9 December 2012. Archived here.
^ "International mail services officially resume in Somalia". Universal Postal Union. 1 November 2013. Retrieved 7 November 2013. 
^ World radio TV handbook, (Billboard Publications., 1955), p.77.
^ Thomas Lucien Vincent Blair, Africa: a market profile, (Praeger: 1965), p.126.
^ SOMALIA: TNG launches “Radio Mogadishu”
^ Radio Muqdisho.net Archived 2010-11-27 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Radio Dalsan FM 91.5 MHz | Warar Sugan | Somalia News". www.radiodalsan.com. Retrieved 2016-10-11. 
^ "Press Freedom Prize goes to Somali radio station Radio Shabelle". En.rsf.org. Retrieved 2011-06-12. 
^ a b c d e Central Intelligence Agency (2011). "Somalia". The World Factbook. Langley, Virginia: Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 2011-10-05. 
^ After 20 years, Somali president inaugurates national TV station
^ Somalia launches national TV[permanent dead link]
^ Ahmed, Majid (11 December 2012). "Radio and electronic media edge out newspapers in Somalia". Sabahi. Retrieved 21 December 2012. 
^ "Somalia (country code +252)" (PDF). ITU. Retrieved 10 June 2013. 
^ Somalia - Telecoms, Mobile and Broadband - Market Insights and Statistics
^ Internet Users by Country (2014)
^ "Internet accessibility growing steadily in Somalia". Sabahi. 15 October 2012. Retrieved 17 January 2014. 
^ Select Formats Archived 2009-05-13 at the Wayback Machine., Country IP Blocks. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Site is said to be updated daily.
^ Population, The World Factbook, United States Central Intelligence Agency. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Data are mostly for 1 July 2012.
^ a b SO Registry
^ "Somalia: Media Law and Policy Review" (PDF). African Union/United Nations Information Support Team (IST) and the Centre for Law and Democracy. December 2012. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 
^ a b c d e "Somalia's civil war hides steady growth of internet services". Issue no 345. Balancing Act. Retrieved 17 January 2014. 
^ "World Development Indicators". DataBank. The World Bank. Retrieved 19 May 2017. 
^ "Somalia gets 3G mobile service". Shabelle Media Network. 30 December 2012. Archived from the original on 8 January 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2012. 
^ "Internet Usage Statistics for Africa". Somali Technology News. Retrieved 17 January 2014. 
^ "Somalia gets first fiber optic link to the world". Garowe Online. 12 November 2013. Retrieved 17 January 2014. 
^ "Somalia: Mogadishu Gets International Fiber Connectivity". Issue no 681 15th November 2013. Balancing Act. Retrieved 17 January 2014. 



External links[edit]

Media and Telecommunications Lansdcape in Somalia[permanent dead link], a infoasaid guide, January 2012, 92 pp.








v
t
e


Somalia articles



History




Chronology



Laas Geel
Land of Punt
Walashma dynasty
Adal Sultanate
Warsangali Sultanate
Ajuran Empire
Sultanate of the Geledi
Majeerteen Sultanate
Sultanate of Hobyo
Dervish state
Italian Somaliland
British Somaliland
Trust Territory of Somaliland
Ogaden War
Rebellion (1986–1992)
Piracy
Civil War

War in Somalia (2006–2009)
War in Somalia (2009–present)







By topic



Maritime
Military
Postal











Geography











Cities
Climate
Wildlife
Greater Somalia
Cape Guardafui
Hafun
Waterfalls

Iskushuban
Lamadaya


Mountain ranges

Golis Mountains
Cal Madow
Ogo Mountains


Mountains

Shimbiris
Bahaya
Dul Madoba


Island

Sa'ad ad-Din Islands
Bajuni Islands







Regions



Awdal
Bakool
Banaadir
Bari
Bay
Galguduud
Gedo
Hiran
Middle Juba
Lower Juba
Mudug
Nugal
Sanaag
Middle Shebelle
Lower Shebelle
Sool
Togdheer
Woqooyi Galbeed





States



Galmudug
Hirshabelle
Jubaland
Puntland
Somaliland
Khatumo
South West State











Politics











Cabinet
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
Human rights

LGBT


LGBT history
Judiciary
Law (Xeer)
Parliament

Speaker


Political parties
President

List


Prime Minister of Somalia

List







Military



History
National Army
Air Force
Navy











Economy







Agriculture
Central Bank
Companies
Economic history
EEZ
Mineral industry
Oil industry
Shilling (currency)
Communications
Tourism
Transportation








Society







Anthem
Coat of arms
Demographics
Diaspora
Education
Flag
Public holidays





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Literature
Media
Music
Religion
Sports
Languages











 Book
 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Communications in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)
Western Sahara













v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Internet censorship and surveillance by country



Africa



Algeria
Angola
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo DR
Congo RO
Egypt
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritania
Morocco (Western Sahara)
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Argentina
Bahamas
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Greenland
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States (Puerto Rico)
Uruguay
Venezuela





Asia



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
East Timor
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Malaysia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
North Korea
Oman
Pakistan
Palestinian territories
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





Europe



Albania
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany (YouTube video blocking)
Georgia
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communications_in_Somalia&oldid=813844753"					Categories: Communications in SomaliaTelecommunications by countryInternet by countryInternet censorship by countryCommunications in AfricaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Articles with permanently dead external links