






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article is written like a personal reflection or opinion essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Network science














Theory







Graph
Complex network
Contagion
Small-world
Scale-free
Community structure
Percolation
Evolution
Controllability
Graph drawing
Social capital
Link analysis
Optimization
Reciprocity
Closure
Homophily
Transitivity
Preferential attachment
Balance theory
Network effect
Social influence




Network types




Informational (computing)
Telecommunication
Transport
Social
Scientific collaboration
Biological
Artificial neural
Interdependent
Semantic
Spatial
Dependency
Flow




Graphs





Features




Clique
Component
Cut
Cycle
Data structure
Edge
Loop
Neighborhood
Path
Vertex
Adjacency list / matrix
Incidence list / matrix




Types




Bipartite
Complete
Directed
Hyper
Multi
Random
Weighted










Metrics
Algorithms







Centrality
Degree
Betweenness
Closeness
PageRank
Motif
Clustering
Degree distribution
Assortativity
Distance
Modularity
Efficiency




Models





Topology




Random graph
Erdős–Rényi
Barabási–Albert
Fitness model
Watts–Strogatz
Exponential random (ERGM)
Hyperbolic (HGN)
Hierarchical
Stochastic block model
Lancichinetti–Fortunato–Radicchi benchmark




Dynamics




Boolean network
agent based
Epidemic/SIR










Lists
Categories







Topics
Software
Network scientists


Category:Network theory
Category:Graph theory







v
t
e





A telecommunications network is a collection of terminal nodes,[1] links are connected so as to enable telecommunication between the terminals.[1] The transmission links connect the nodes together. The nodes use circuit switching, message switching or packet switching to pass the signal through the correct links and nodes to reach the correct destination terminal.
Each terminal in the network usually has a unique address so messages or connections can be routed to the correct recipients. The collection of addresses in the network is called the address space.
Examples of telecommunications networks are:[2]

computer networks
the Internet
the telephone network
the global Telex network
the aeronautical ACARS network188.255.228.76NOKIA LUMIA 925




Contents


1 Benefits of telecommunications and networking
2 Network structure
3 Example: the TCP/IP data network
4 References



Benefits of telecommunications and networking[edit]
Telecommunications can greatly increase and expand resources to all types of people. For example, businesses need a greater telecommunications network if they plan to expand their company. With Internet, computer, and telephone networks, businesses can allocate their resources efficiently. These core types of networks will be discussed below:
Computer network: a computer network consists of computers and devices connected to one another. Information can be transferred from one device to the next. For example, an office filled with computers can share files together on each separate device. Computer networks can range from a local network area to a wide area network. The difference between the types of networks is the size. These types of computer networks work at certain speeds, also known as broadband. The Internet network connects computers worldwide.
Internet network: access to the network allows users to use many resources. Over time the Internet network will replace books. This will enable users to discover information almost instantly and apply concepts to different situations. The Internet can be used for recreational, governmental, educational, and other purposes. Businesses in particular use the Internet network for research or to service customers and clients.
Telephone network: the telephone network connects people to one another. This network can be used in a variety of ways. Many businesses use the telephone network to route calls and/or service their customers. Some businesses use a telephone network on a greater scale through a private branch exchange. It is a system where a specific business focuses on routing and servicing calls for another business. Majority of the time, the telephone network is used around the world for recreational purposes.
Network structure[edit]
In general, every telecommunications network conceptually consists of three parts, or planes (so called because they can be thought of as being, and often are, separate overlay networks):

The data plane (also user plane, bearer plane, or forwarding plane) carries the network's users' traffic, the actual payload.
The control plane carries control information (also known as signaling).
The management plane carries the operations and administration traffic required for network management. The management plane is sometimes considered a part of the control plane.

Example: the TCP/IP data network[edit]
The data network is used extensively throughout the world to connect individuals and organizations. Data networks can be connected to allow users seamless access to resources that are hosted outside of the particular provider they are connected to. The Internet[3] is the best example of many data networ[1]ks from different organizations all operating under a single address space.
Terminals attached to TCP/IP networks are addressed using IP addresses. There are different types of IP address, but the most common is IP Version 4. Each unique address consists of 4 integers between 0 and 255, usually separated by dots when written down, e.g. 82.131.34.56.
TCP/IP are the fundamental protocols that provide the control and routing of messages across the data network. There are many different network structures that TCP/IP can be used across to efficiently route messages, for example:

wide area networks (WAN)
metropolitan area networks (MAN)
local area networks (LAN)
Internet area networks (IAN)
campus area networks (CAN)
virtual private networks (VPN)

There are three features that differentiate MANs from LANs or WANs:

The area of the network size is between LANs and WANs. The MAN will have a physical area between 5 and 50 km in diameter.[3]
MANs do not generally belong to a single organization. The equipment that interconnects the network, the links, and the MAN itself are often owned by an association or a network provider that provides or leases the service to others.[3]
A MAN is a means for sharing resources at high speeds within the network. It often provide connections to WAN networks for access to resources outside the scope of the MAN.[3]

References[edit]



^ a b c "Design Elements - Telecommunication networks". 
^ "Telecommunication Network - Types of Telecommunication Networks". 
^ a b c d "Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)". Erg.abdn.ac.uk. Retrieved 2013-06-15. 









v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_network&oldid=817222412"					Categories: Telecommunications engineeringNetwork architectureTelecommunications infrastructureHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing style editing from February 2017All articles needing style editingArticles needing additional references from February 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles with multiple maintenance issues