





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Suburban communication towers in Pretoria


Telecommunications infrastructure in South Africa provides modern and efficient service to urban areas, including cellular and internet services. In 1997, Telkom, the South African telecommunications parastatal, was partly privatised and entered into a strategic equity partnership with a consortium of two companies, including SBC, a U.S. telecommunications company. In exchange for exclusivity (a monopoly) to provide certain services for 5 years, Telkom assumed an obligation to facilitate network modernisation and expansion into the unserved areas[citation needed].
A Second Network Operator was to be licensed to compete with Telkom across its spectrum of services in 2002, although this license was only officially handed over in late 2005 and has recently begun operating under the name, Neotel[citation needed]. Four cellular companies provide service to over 30 million subscribers, with South Africa considered to have the 4th most advanced mobile telecommunications network worldwide[citation needed]. The four cellular providers are Vodacom, MTN, Cell C, and Telkom (Mobile), which is run by Telkom[1][2].



Contents


1 History
2 Television
3 Internet
4 Telecommunication landmarks
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
The first use of telecommunication in the Republic of South Africa was a single line telegraph connecting Cape Town and Simonstown[citation needed]. At about the time of the Bell Telephone Company's development of the telephone industry post-1876, early undersea telegraph links were introduced, first connecting Durban and Europe, and later connecting the country to the rest of the world[citation needed]. In the mid-twentieth century undersea telephone cables were also commissioned.
The network continued to develop through internal financing in a heavily regulated market as international technology developed. At this point, telephone services were operated by the South African Post Office. In the 1960s, South Africa was connected to 72 nations and total outgoing annual international calls numbered over 28,800[citation needed].
In the 1990s, South Africa launched its mobile operations, underwritten by Telkom in partnership with Vodafone. This subsidiary grew to be Vodacom, which Telkom sold in late 2008 in preference for its own 3G network[citation needed]. Vodacom has a subscriber base of more than R45M, with an ARPU of more than R60 across both rural and urban subscribers[citation needed]. Vodacom, together with the other operators, have come under criticism in late 2009 by government and the public for high interconnect charges.[3] This issue was currently being discussed by the Parliamentary Committee on Telecommunications[citation needed].
In 2004, the Department of Communications redefined the Electronics Communications Act, which consolidated and redefined the landscape of telecommunications licensing in South Africa (both mobile and fixed)[citation needed]. The Independent Communications Authority (ICASA) currently licenses more than 400 independent operators with the Electronic Communications Network License (with the ability to self-provision) as well as issuing Electronic Communications Service Licenses for service deployment over infrastructure in the retail domain[citation needed].
Telkom is no longer the single operator in South Africa, and faces competition from the second Fixed Network Operator Licensee, Neotel, as well as the three mobile operators, Vodacom, MTN and Cell-C[citation needed]. However, it still receives criticisms (see later) from smaller operators and the Competition Commission for setting South African broadband pricing in its favour[citation needed].
Television[edit]
Main article: Television in South Africa
Four main television stations are available to the public. These are namely SABC 1, SABC 2, SABC 3 and eTV[citation needed]. Other community-based stations are also on offer, such as Soweto TV and Cape Town TV (ctv).
DStv is currently South Africa's only operating and Africa's largest satellite television provider. The company provides over 100 video and over 78 audio channels, and in 2008 introduced its first HD video channel. Since then an additional five HD channels have been introduced - namely M-Net HD, SuperSport HD, Discovery HD, SuperSport HD 2, M-Net Movies 1 HD and SuperSport HD 3.[4]
In 2008, additional pay-TV licenses were granted to various companies in South Africa. As of January 2010, none of the companies granted a license have begun providing services. However, On Digital Media (ODM), have stated that they are on track to begin sale of their product in May 2010, and that prices will be significantly cheaper than their competitor DStv[citation needed]. In 2012, DSTV now has added 8 more channels all for movies.
Internet[edit]
Main article: Internet in South Africa
Although expensive compared to more developed nations, broadband is easily obtainable in South Africa. Fixed line options such as ADSL, ISDN, Diginet and Leased Lines are available from the national operator Telkom. Recently,[when?] legislation was passed by government allowing all licensed telecommunications providers to build their own fixed line networks, resulting in a scramble by companies such as Vodacom, MTN South Africa and Neotel to construct their own country and citywide fibre-optic networks. Individual South African cities such as Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg and Pretoria are also in the process of, or have completed construction of city-owned fibre-optic networks. These will provide services to city and government-owned establishments, and will act as an extra source of income through the sale of excess bandwidth mainly to companies.
Wireless options are available from Sentech, iBurst, Vodacom, MTN, Cell C, Telkom and a number of other ISP's. They typically provide speeds of up to 7.6 Mbit/s with HSDPA. HSUPA is also available. MTN South Africa was among the very first mobile networks in the world to offer HSDPA services to its customers. Satellite options are available from both Sentech and Telkom.
A SNO, Neotel, has been licensed in South Africa and is currently offering a wireless service in selected areas. According to Neotel, up-take of its services has exceeded expectations, and as a result Neotel are rapidly expanding services throughout major metropolitan areas in South Africa. In 2009, SEACOM - the second undersea cable to land in South Africa - jointly owned and operated by Neotel - was switched on. Neotel have stated that sale of SEACOM bandwidth, too, has exceeded expectations, and will drive the continual downward-spiral of internet prices in the country. As of January 2010, South Africa has over 2 million broadband subscribers. Whilst this is the largest number in Africa, South Africa's broadband penetration of 4% is significantly below international standards.
Telecommunication landmarks[edit]
The first telephone patent was issued to Alexander Graham Bell in March 1876. The first use of telecommunication in the Union of South Africa was a single line telegraph connecting Cape Town and Simonstown. After Bell Labs' development of undersea telephone signal repeaters, the first undersea links were introduced connecting Durban and Europe, and soon after to the rest of the world. The network continued in a heavily regulated market as international technology developed. Until 1991 telephone services were operated by the South African Postal Service.
Telkom was incorporated on 30 September 1991 as a public limited liability company registered under the South African Companies Act, 61 of 1973, as amended.[5]
In 1993 GSM was demonstrated for the first time in Africa at Telkom '93 in Cape Town. In 1994 the first GSM networks in Africa were launched in South Africa.[6]
The first public videoconference between the continent of Africa and North America occurred on 24 June 1995 (2:00-3:00 p.m. PST). The Cybersafari Digital Be-In and Internet Love-Fest linked a technology fair at Fort Mason in San Francisco[7] with a techno "rave" and cyber-deli in Woodstock, Cape Town. For one hour, members of the public communicated with each other via a simple Picturetel system using a 128kb ISDN line. "Cognitive dissident" and communications activist David Robert Lewis initiated the video conference and peacecast[8] on the San Francisco side, and Freddie Bell answered the call in Woodstock, Cape Town. Because of different ISDN standards, a video bridge via Boston was used to achieve the link, which also featured interactive dancing. Organisations which took credit were technology sponsors Picturetel and Telkom, plus Peacecast organisors Unity 95, Parallel University, Vortex, Creativity Cafe and line producer "Cybersafari to Africa".
See also[edit]

Digital Divide in South Africa
Internet censorship in South Africa

References[edit]



^ "SA mobile subscribers in 2017: Vodacom vs MTN vs Cell C vs Telkom". Retrieved 2017-11-15. 
^ "Vodacom vs MTN vs Cell C vs Telkom – Mobile subscriber numbers". Retrieved 2017-11-15. 
^ Consumer Fair site
^ [1] DStv.com Channels
^ Telkom Profile
^ History of GSM
^ http://www.unityfoundation.org/past90.html
^ http://creativity.net/KidCast/



External links[edit]

Neotel
SA Telecoms and Communications News







v
t
e


Economy of South Africa



By province



Western Cape
Gauteng










Natural resources



Mining industry

Coal


Agriculture
Whaling





Industry



Automotive industry





Services



Banks
Gambling
Tourism

Ecotourism
LGBT tourism


Telecommunications
Nuclear power
Power stations





Economic history



Mineral Revolution

Witwatersrand Gold Rush


Great Depression
Disinvestment





Affirmative action



Black Economic Empowerment
Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment
Qualifying Small Enterprises

Scorecard


Exempted Micro Enterprises





Macroeconomics



National Treasury
Taxation
South African rand
Reserve Bank
Consumer price index
Provinces by HDI





Misc.



Trade unions
Corruption
Companies
JSE Limited

Traded companies


Krugerrand












v
t
e


South Africa articles



History







Timeline (nl)

Years


Early history
Cape Colony
Orange Free State
Transvaal
First Boer War
Second Boer War
Great Depression
World War II
Apartheid
Border War
Since 1994





By topic



Economy
Military








Geography







Districts
Earthquakes
Estuaries
Forests
Islands
Lakes
Mountain ranges
Municipalities
National parks
Populated places
Provinces
Rivers
Wildlife








Politics











Constitution
Courts
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
Human rights
Law
Parliament
Political parties
President






State security
and intelligence




Minister
Co-ordinating committee (NICC)
Intelligence agency (NIA)
Communications centre (NCC)
Communications security (COMSEC)
Secret Service (SASS)
Intelligence academy (SANAI)





Law enforcement



Department of Police
Police Service

Criminal intelligence (SAPS)
Special Task Force
National Intervention Unit
NFDD


Municipal Police
Independent Complaints Directorate
Department of Correctional Services
Biometrics use








Military



Department of Defence
Defence Force
Air Force
Army
Navy
Military Health Service
Special Forces
Commando System
Intelligence








Economy







Agriculture
Communications
Economic history
Energy
Foreign trade
Mining industry
Rand (currency)
Stock exchange
Taxation
Tourism
Trade unions
Transportation
Water and sanitation








Society







Crime
Education
Feminism
Health
Healthcare
Immigration
Intersex
Languages
LGBT
Racism
Religion
Sexual violence
Social movements
Xenophobia





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Flag
HIV/AIDS
Homelessness
Literature
Media
Music
Public holidays
Sports





Demographics



Asian

Indian
Chinese


Bantu

Ndebele
Pedi
Sotho
Swazi
Tsonga
Tswana
Venda
Xhosa
Zulu


Coloured

Cape Coloured
Cape Malay
Griqua


Khoisan
White

Afrikaner
British














Outline
Index



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Telecommunications in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)
Western Sahara













v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_South_Africa&oldid=810454848"					Categories: Communications in South AfricaTelecommunications in South AfricaTelecommunications by countryTelecommunications in AfricaHidden categories: Use dmy dates from August 2012Use South African English from August 2012All Wikipedia articles written in South African EnglishArticles needing additional references from January 2012All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2012All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from July 2011Interlanguage link template link number