





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Adults employed in the information media and telecommunications industry as a percentage of the adult population in Australia divided geographically by statistical local area, as of the 2011 census


Communication in Australia through electronic means using devices such as telephone, television, radio or computer, and services such as the telephony and broadband networks have always been important in Australia given the 'tyranny of distance' with a dispersed population. Governments have driven telecommunication development and have a key role in regulation.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Colonial period
1.2 At Federation (1901)
1.3 After Federation


2 Broadcasting in Australia

2.1 Television


3 Core technologies, the network, backhaul and the local loop

3.1 Copper cable and optical fibre networks
3.2 Cable
3.3 Satellite
3.4 Submarine cables


4 Telephony and related arrangements
5 Regulation

5.1 General censorship
5.2 Internet censorship


6 Internet

6.1 Broadband access
6.2 xDSL
6.3 Telstra FTTN
6.4 Wireless broadband
6.5 Rural coverage
6.6 National Broadband Network


7 References
8 External links



History[edit]




A memorial at Narrandera, New South Wales to the 'J' trunk route linking the Australian cities and towns on the east coast


Colonial period[edit]
Each of the six Australian colonies had their own telephony communications network prior to Federation of Australia in 1901. The Australian networks were government assets operating under colonial legislation modelled on that of Britain. The UK Telegraph Act 1868 for example empowered the Postmaster-General to 'acquire, maintain and work electric telegraphs' and foreshadowed the 1870 nationalisation of competing British telegraph companies.
Australia's first telephone service (connecting the Melbourne and South Melbourne offices of Robinson Brothers) was launched in 1879. The private Melbourne Telephone Exchange Company opened Australia's first telephone exchange in August 1880. Around 7,757 calls were handled in 1884.
The nature of the networks meant that regulation in Australia was undemanding: network personnel were government employees or agents, legislation was enhanced on an incremental basis and restrictions could be achieved through infrastructure. All the colonies ran their telegraph networks at a deficit through investment in infrastructure and subsidisation of regional access, generally with bipartisan support.
Government-operated post office and telegraph networks - the largest parts of the bureaucracy - were combined into a single department in each colony on the model of the UK Post Office: South Australia in 1869, Victoria in 1870, Queensland in 1880 and New South Wales in 1893.
At Federation (1901)[edit]
At Federation, the colonial networks (staff, switches, wires, handsets, buildings etc.) were transferred to the Commonwealth Postmaster-General's Department responsible for domestic postal, telephone and, telegraph services becoming the responsibility of the first Postmaster-General (PMG), a federal. With 16,000 staff (and assets of over £6 million) the PMG accounted for 80% of the new federal bureaucracy.
Public phones were available in a handful of post offices. Subscriber telephones were initially restricted to major businesses, government agencies, institutions and wealthier residences. Eight million telegrams were sent that year over 43,000 miles of line.
There were around 33,000 phones across Australia, with 7,502 telephone subscribers in inner Sydney and 4,800 in the Melbourne central business district.
Overseas cable links to Australia remained in private hands, reflecting the realities of imperial politics, demands on the new government's resources, and perceptions of its responsibilities.
After Federation[edit]
A trunk line between Melbourne (headquarters of the PMG Department) and Sydney was established in 1907, with extension to Adelaide in 1914, Brisbane in 1923, Perth in 1930 and Hobart in 1935.




An old bakelite ash tray showing an example of a single digit phone number used in the early days of telecommunication.


On 12 July 1906 the first Australian wireless overseas messages were sent between Point Lonsdale, Victoria and Devonport, Tasmania.[1] Australia and New Zealand ratified the 1906 Berlin Radio-telegraph Convention in 1907. The PMG department became responsible for some international shortwave services - particularly from the 1920s - and for a new Coastal Radio Service in 1911, with the first of a network of stations operational in February 1912.
Broadcasting in Australia[edit]
Main article: History of broadcasting in Australia
Australia developed its own radio broadcasting system, through its own engineers, manufacturers, retailers, newspapers, entertainment services, and news agencies. Initially hobbyists and amateurs were dominant, however with the Commonwealth Government setting up the first radio system, and business interests becoming increasingly involved, hobbyists and amateurs were marginalised. The Australian Labor Party was especially interested in radio because it allowed them to bypass the newspapers, which were mostly controlled by their opposition. Both parties agreed on the need for a national system, and in 1932 set up the Australian Broadcasting Commission was set up as a government agency largely separate from political interference.
The first commercial broadcasters, originally known as 'B' class stations were on the air as early as 1925. Many were sponsored by newspapers in Australia,[2] by theatrical interests, by amateur radio enthusiasts and radio retailers, and by retailers generally.[3] Almost all Australians were within reach of a station by the 1930s, and the number of stations remained relatively stable through the post-war era. However, in the 1970s, the Labor government under Prime Minister Gough Whitlam commenced a broadcasting renaissance so that by the 1990s there were 50 different radio services available for groups based on tastes, languages, religion, or geography.[4] The broadcasting system was largely deregulated in 1992, except that there were limits on foreign ownership and on monopolistic control. By 2000, 99 percent of Australians owned at least one television set, and averaged 20 hours a week watching it.[5]
Television[edit]
Main article: Television broadcasting in Australia
As early as 1929, two Melbourne commercial radio stations, 3UZ and 3DB were conducting experimental mechanical television broadcasts – these were conducted in the early hours of the morning, after the radio stations had officially closed down. In 1934 Dr Val McDowall[6] at amateur station 4CM Brisbane[7] conducted experiments in electronic television.
Television broadcasting officially began in Sydney and Melbourne just prior to the Melbourne Olympic Games in November/December 1956 and then phased in at other capital cities, and then into rural markets. Many forms of entertainment, particularly drama and variety, proved more suited to television than radio, so the actors and producers migrated there.
It now includes a broad range of public, commercial, community, subscription, narrowcast, and amateur stations across the country. Colour television in the PAL 625-line format went to a full-time basis in 1975. Subscription television, on the Galaxy platform, began in 1995. Digital terrestrial television was introduced in 2001.[8]
Australia moved from PAL 625 to DVB-T on 10 December 2013.
Subscription television, whether Foxtel or Netflix type services, has become more important and is one factor driving demand for the National Broadband Network.
Core technologies, the network, backhaul and the local loop[edit]
Copper cable and optical fibre networks[edit]
See also: Fiber to the x
Prior to the government opening telecommunications to multi player competition the PMG operated a vertically integrated system, providing the Core network, backhaul, ancillary networks and a range of services to end users.
With opening telecommunications to multi provider competition the government required Telstra to sell wholesale access to its core facilities and networks.
In the 2000s, larger ISPs began taking over more of the delivery infrastructure themselves by taking advantage of regulated access to the unconditioned local loop. As well as significantly reducing costs, it gave the service providers complete control of their own service networks, other than the copper pair (phone line from the exchange to the customer).[9]
Telstra in 2006 proposed replacing its copper network with an optical fibre node network with the drop connection into end user premises being the existing copper cable. They abandoned this as under competition policy they would be required to open their network to competing carriers on a wholesale basis.
Further options were explored with the first Rudd government deciding to set up a National Broadband Network using Fibre To The Premises as the main carrier network, supported by satellite and wireless to remote areas.
After the election of the Abbott government in 2013 a Multi Technological Mix was implemented, replacing FTTP where development was yet to start with Fibre To The Node and also repurposing the Telstra and Optus hybrid fibre-coaxial networks.
Cable[edit]
In the late 1990s, Telstra and Optus rolled-out separate cable Internet services, focusing on the east coast.
Satellite[edit]
The Overseas Telecommunications Commission (OTC) was established by Australia in August 1946 with responsibility for all international telecommunications services into, through and out of Australia.
In 1981 Aussat Pty Ltd was established as a GBE to operate domestic satellite telecommunication and broadcasting services. Aussat's charter restricted it from acting as a competitor to Telecom, including a prohibition on interconnecting public switched traffic with Telecom's network.
Proposals for a merger of Aussat and OTC (thereby permitting national delivery of telecommunication services in competition with Telecom) were rejected in favor of disposal of the satellite operator to a non-government entity that would be allowed to compete with Telecom.
Satellites are used to provide telecommunications services in very remote areas. These are primarily the Optus satellites C1 D1 and D2.
There are also a number of satellite earth stations, which provide access points into the Australian networks:

Intelsat has 10 earth stations, 4 for the Indian Ocean and 6 for the Pacific Ocean.
Inmarsat has 2 earth stations, which serve the Indian and Pacific Ocean regions.
SingTel Optus Earth Stations has several earth stations located in the major cities.
Sky Muster satellites operated as part of the National Broadband Network.

Submarine cables[edit]
Due to Australia's large size, sparse population, and relative remoteness to other countries, a significant amount of infrastructure is required for Internet communications. The vast majority of Australia's international telecommunications transit capacity is sourced from undersea several fibre-optic cables to Asia and the US:

Southern Cross Cables to New Zealand, Hawaii and the US mainland with a capacity of 620Gbit/s, with planned upgrade in Q2 2012.
Southern Cross Cables to Fiji, Hawaii and the US mainland with a capacity of 620Gbit/s, with planned upgrade in the Q2 2012.
Australia-Japan Cable to Guam and Japan. Primarily used as an alternative path to the United States with a capacity of 320Gbit/s.
Sea-Me-We3 to Indonesia and onto Asia, Middle East, the United States and other destinations with a capacity of 40Gbit/s.[dubious – discuss]
APNG2 (previously part of Pac Rim West) to Papua New Guinea with a capacity of 2x565Mbit/s.
Jasaraus (linking to APCN Asia Pacific) to Indonesia with a capacity of 5Gbit/s.
Gondwana-1 to New Caledonia.
TASMAN-2 to New Zealand.
PPC-1 (a joint venture of PIPE Networks and Videsh Sanchar Nigam) to Guam with lit capacity of 80Gbit/s, and potential capacity of 2.56Tbit/s.[10]
Telstra Endeavour to Hawaii with a capacity of 320Gbit/s.

Telephony and related arrangements[edit]
See also: Postmaster-General's Department and Telstra
The Postmaster-General's Department regulated telecommunications and operated telephone and related communications within Australia over the copper telephony network from federation up to 22 December 1975,[11] replaced by the Postal and Telecommunications Department.
In mid-1975 the department was disaggregated by the Fraser Government into the two Government Business Enterprises: the Australian Telecommunications Commission (trading as Telecom Australia) and the Australian Postal Commission (trading as Australia Post) with a new Postal and Telecommunications Department.[12] The change was intended to take account of the increase in the functions of the department to include all electronic media matters which had previously been the responsibility of the Department of the Media.[12]
The 1982 Davidson Inquiry regarding private sector involvement in delivery of existing/proposed telecommunications services recommended ending Telecom Australia's monopoly.[13]
In June 1991, legislation was passed allowing duopoly competition with Telstra, Optus Communications became Australia's second general telecommunications carrier.[14] It was guaranteed access to Telecom's existing infrastructure on reasonable terms - meant to ensure its viability. Other players were prevented from entering the general telephone market until 1997.
Telecom Australia changed its name to Telstra in 1995 and has since been privatised. It faced growing competition in market niches such as long distance corporate voice and data services. Telstra was progressively privatised (33.3% 1997, 16.6% 1999, 33.3% 2006, with 17% transferred to the Future Fund.)
Numbers of licensed telecommunications carriers grew from: ~20 controlling facilities in Australia at 1998 (with several hundred entities providing services using those facilities to end users); to 99 at 2002.
Regulation[edit]
The Postmaster-General's Department regulated telecommunications and operated telephone and related communications within Australia over the copper telephony network from federation up to 22 December 1975,[11] replaced by the Postal and Telecommunications Department.
On 1 July 2005, the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) brought together the Australian Broadcasting Authority (ABA) and the Australian Communications Authority (ACA).[15]
General censorship[edit]
Main articles: Censorship in Australia and Australian Classification Board
Internet censorship[edit]
Main article: Internet censorship in Australia § Federal law
On 31 December 2007, Stephen Conroy announced the federal government's intention to censor 'inappropriate material' from the Internet.[16][17] Under the proposed system any Australian who subscribes to an ISP would receive a 'clean' version of the Internet. The Federal Government's stated aim is to protect children from accessing violent and pornographic websites. This plan was later abandoned and the Australian government continues to only block websites that violate online laws.
Internet[edit]
Main article: Internet in Australia
Permanent Internet access was first available in Australia to universities via AARNet in 1989.[18][19][20] The first commercial dial-up Internet Service Provider (ISP) appeared in capital cities soon after,[21] and by the mid-1990s almost the entire country had a range of choices of dial-up ISPs.[22] Today, Internet access is available through a range of technologies, i.e. hybrid fibre coaxial cable, Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) and satellite Internet. The Australian Government, in partnership with the industrial sector, began rolling out a nationwide FTTP broadband network in July 2009.[23]
The .au domain (ccTLD) was delegated to Robert Elz of the Australian Computing Science Network (ACSNet) in March 1986.[24] From then, universities connected one at a time to allow for the sending and receiving of email and for use newsgroup facilities. An earlier restricted IP-based network, linking academic institutions within Australia, known as ACSNet, used the .oz domain. This domain was subsumed under .au to become .oz.au.[25]
A permanent connection between AARNet and ARPANet was established in May 1989 by a satellite connection.[18][19][20]
In 1992 there were two competing commercial ISPs expanding to excess of 100 by June 1995 [Internet Australasia Magazine], attributing some fifth of all AARNet traffic.
The Vice Chancellors' Committee sold all commercial customers with Telstra leading the commercial push of the Internet into Australia.[26]
Broadband access[edit]
Broadband internet access is available in Australia using predominantly ADSL, plus cable, fibre, satellite and wireless technologies. Since July 2008 almost two thirds of Australian households have had internet access, with broadband connections outnumbering dial-up two to one.[27] According to the recent ABS statistics the non-dial-up services outnumber dial up services 3.6 to 1.
xDSL[edit]
In 2000, the first consumer ADSL services were made available via Telstra Bigpond, at speeds of 256/64 kbit/s (downstream/upstream), 512/128 kbit/s, and 1500/256 kbit/s. Telstra chose to artificially limit all ADSL speeds to a maximum of 1500/256 kbit/s. As ADSL required access to the telephone exchange and the copper line — which only Telstra had — this allowed Telstra to be dominant due to the expense of roll-out for other companies and Telstra's established customer base. Other ISPs followed suit soon after; reselling connections purchased wholesale from Telstra.[28]
In response to Telstra's monopolisation of ADSL provision other carriers installed their own DSLAMs.[29] Internode[30]
The presence of non-Telstra DSLAMs allowed the service providers to control the speed of connection, and most offered 'uncapped' speeds, allowing the customers to connect at whatever speed their copper pair would allow, up to 8 Mbit/s. Ratification of ADSL2 and ADSL2+ increased the maximum to 12 Mbit/s, then 24 Mbit/s.[citation needed]
In November 2007 the first Naked DSL product was announced by iiNet.[31] Shortly after this other internet providers also started to provide DSL products without telephony service over copper, reducing line rental fees.[32][33]
Telstra FTTN[edit]
Telstra proposed to upgrade to Fibre to the Node (FTTN) in 2006 but did not pursue the development because it would be required to share the network.[34]
Wireless broadband[edit]
Wireless broadband in Australia is widespread, with many point-to-point fixed wireless broadband providers serving broadband-poor regional and rural areas, predominantly with Motorola Canopy and WiMAX technologies. Telstra's 2006 introduction of the 'Next G' HSPA network (which reportedly covers 99% of the Australian population as of September 2008) with speeds advertised of being up to 14 Mbit/s[35] stimulated investment in wireless broadband by competitors Optus, Vodafone and Hutchison Telecommunications, who are presently expanding their HSPA networks to cover 96–98% of the Australian population.[36][37][38]
Rural coverage[edit]
See also: Universal service
Delivering competitive telecommunications services to regional and rural areas is a major issue, with Telstra having a Universal Service Obligation regarding telephony services. Government monies have been made available on a competitive basis to carriers to address broadband and mobile telephone blackspots and gaps in service provision.
National Broadband Network[edit]
Main article: National Broadband Network
The National Broadband Network was initially a fibre to the home (FTTH) open-access network in planning and trial operation in Australia by the federal government. The national broadband network aimed to provide up to 1000 Mbit/s speeds and to connect to 93% of Australian households and businesses.[39] This has since been revised under a Coalition government to a Mixed-Technology system relying largely on Australia's existing and largely depreciated copper networks. This revision aims for 50 Mbit/s to 100 Mbit/s, with consumer reports ranging from 1 Mbit/s to 100 Mbit/s. The government will hold a majority share (51%) in the network company, with the remainder being held by private firms.[40] The Australian government had previously called for proposals to build a Fibre to the Node (FTTN) broadband network providing download speeds up to 100 and upload speeds up to 40Megabits per second. The government also utilises fixed wireless technology and satellite technology to provide fast broadband connection in rural area and very remote area. Fixed wireless provides speeds up to 50/20 Mbit/s.[41] Satellite technology uses two Sky Muster communication satellites launched in 2015 and 2016 to provide fast broadband in very remote areas and offshore. It provides speeds up to 25/5 Mbit/s.[42]
The network will be the largest single infrastructure investment in Australia's history.[43]
References[edit]


^ http://tja.org.au/index.php/tja/article/view/9/30 Given, Jock. 2010. ‘Wireless politics: Marconi and the Parliament at Point Lonsdale, 12 July 1906’. Telecommunications Journal of Australia. 60 (4): pp. 60.1 to 60.7. Monash University ePress.
^ Denis Cryle, 'The press and public service broadcasting: Neville Petersen's news not views and the case for Australian exceptionalism.' (2014) Media International Australia, Incorporating Culture & Policy Issue 151 (May 2014): 56+.
^ R.R. Walker, The Magic Spark – 50 Years of Radio in Australia (1973).
^ John Potts, Radio in Australia (1986)
^ Graeme Davison et al., eds., The Oxford Companion to Australian History (2001), pp 546–47, 637–38
^ College Roll: McDowall, Valentine, The Royal Australasian College of Physicians
^ Charles Porter, (1962), Broadcasting in Queensland. Journal of the Royal Historical Society of Queensland, 6 4, pp. 750-761.
^ Albert Moran and Chris Keating. The A to Z of Australian Radio and Television (Scarecrow Press, 2009)
^ 'iinet archives' Retrieved on 25 September 2008.
^ ITNews, PPC-1 delivers more speed than expected by Ben Grubb Oct 8, 2009
^ a b CA 9: Postmaster-General's Department, Central Administration, National Archives of Australia, retrieved 5 December 2013 
^ a b Fraser, Malcolm (18 December 1975). "Major Changes In Ministerial And Departmental Responsibilities And Functions" (Press release). Archived from the original on 11 January 2014. 
^ Committee of Inquiry into Telecommunications Services in Australia; Davidson, J. A. (James Arthur), 1922-; Australia. Parliament (1982), Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Telecommunications Services in Australia, Australian Government Publishing Service, ISBN 978-0-644-01231-7 CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Mitchell Bingemann, (30 January 2012), Optus rings up 20 years, sticking to its guns, The Australian Retrieved 9 February 2017
^ CA 9024: an Communications and Media Authority, Central Office, Canberra, National Archives of Australia, retrieved 9 December 2013 
^ "Conroy announces mandatory internet filters to protect children". ABC News. 31 December 2007. Retrieved 3 March 2008. 
^ "Government Claims Data Retention Laws Only Target Extremists". Retrieved 20 November 2014. 
^ a b "Roger Clarke's 'The Internet in Australia' – 4.3 1985–1989". Rogerclarke.com. Retrieved 13 December 2010. 
^ a b "History". AARNET. Archived from the original on 20 December 2010. Retrieved 13 December 2010. 
^ a b "Hobbes' Internet Timeline". Zakon.org. Retrieved 13 December 2010. 
^ Origins and Nature of the Internet in Australia – Roger Clarke. Published 29 January 2004
^ Origins and Nature of the Internet in Australia – Roger Clarke. Published 29 January 2004
^ "A separate company for a broadband network". Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy. 11 April 2008. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 5 December 2008. 
^ "ccTLD Agreement Signed with auDA". ICANN. Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "Roger Clarke's 'The Internet in Australia' – 4.2 1975–1984". Rogerclarke.com. Retrieved 13 December 2010. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 18 February 2008. Retrieved 2008-01-04.  AARNet History
^ "Latest Stories From News.Com.Au". 
^ Telstra Wholesale
^ Optus "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2012.  Press Release — First competitive DSL network opens for business
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 6 January 2007. Retrieved 2007-05-21. 
^ 'ZDnet iiNet keeps Raincoat on, ready to expose naked DSL' Retrieved on 9 December 2008.
^ 'AAPT Promises Naked DSL by Christmas'[permanent dead link] Retrieved on 9 December 2008
^ "iiNet leaps out and exposes naked DSL". Zdnet.com.au. Retrieved 13 December 2010. 
^ "Telstra scraps broadband network plan". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 7 August 2006. 
^ 'example of Bigpond plan' Archived 15 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 25 September 2008.
^ Znet Optus story Retrieved on 25 September 2008.
^ 'Vodafone news.com' Archived 2 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 25 September 2008.
^ Hutchison Telecommunications news.com Archived 17 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 25 September 2008.
^ "NBN now to reach 93% of population – Communications – News". Zdnet.com.au. Retrieved 13 December 2010. 
^ BigPond News – NBN Archived 11 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Fibre To The Node Explained". NBN co. NBN co. Retrieved 6 July 2016. 
^ Francis, Hannah. "Ten cool facts about NBN's forthcoming Sky Muster satellite service". Retrieved 6 July 2016. 
^ Egan, Michael (5 September 2008). "A separate company for a broadband network". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 7 September 2008. 


External links[edit]

Whirlpool – 'Whirlpool.net.au is a fully independent, non-commercial, community website, run by a team of unpaid volunteers, which is devoted to keeping the public informed about the state of broadband in Australia.' Australian ADSL news, information, and forums.
Internet Choice – Broadband Comparison website comparing a range of the leading internet providers in Australia.







v
t
e


Australia articles



History







Timeline
Bibliography
Prehistory
Archaeology
European Exploration
Territorial evolution
1788–1850
1851–1900
1901–1945
Since 1945





By topic



Constitutional
Diplomatic
Economic
Federation
Immigration
Indigenous
Military
Monarchy
Railway








Geography







Climate
Continent
Deserts
Environment

issues


Earthquakes
Flora
Fauna
Forests
Geology
Islands
Mountains
Regions
Protected areas
Rivers





Subdivisions



States and Territories
Capitals
Cities








Politics







Constitution
Courts
Elections

Donations
Electoral system
Parties


Federal budget
Foreign relations
Government
Governor-General
Human rights

Intersex
LGBT
Transgender


Intelligence and security
Law

Constitution
Judiciary
Enforcement


Military
Monarchy
National debt
Parliament
Public Service
Women

Government leaders
Government ministers










Economy







Agriculture
Dollar (currency)
Energy
Gross state product
Home ownership

Public housing


Household income
Manufacturing
Media
Mining
Poverty
Reserve Bank
Stock Exchange
Superannuation
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transportation
Welfare system








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Healthcare
Homelessness
Immigration
Languages
Religion
Women





Culture



Architecture
Art
Arts
Australian English
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Literature
Music
Public holidays
Radio
Sport
Symbols
Television
Theatre












Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Economy of Australia



History



Economic history
Great Depression
Snowy Mountains Scheme
Australian pound
Four pillars policy
Banking crisis of 1893





Currency



Australian dollar





State economies



NSW
Queensland
Western Australia
Tasmania





Industries



Agriculture
Automotive
Fishing
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Real estate
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport

Ports


Superannuation
Wine





Taxation



Goods and Services Tax
Minerals Resource Rent Tax
Passenger Movement Charge
Fuel taxes
Luxury Car Tax
Tax return





Banking and Finance



Financial system
Official cash rate
Banking





Regulatory agencies



Reserve Bank
ACCC
Corporate law
AIRC
APRA
ASIC
ASX
S&P/ASX 50
S&P/ASX 200
Corporations power





Energy



Energy policy of Australia
Energy efficiency rating
Biofuel
Wind power
Geothermal power
National Electricity Market
Green electricity
Carbon pricing





Economic conditions



Income in Australia
Wealth in Australia
Poverty in Australia
Economic inequality in Australia
Social class in Australia
Home ownership
Property bubble
Government debt





Unions



Labour movement
ACTU





Trade agreements



Australia–United States FTA
Australia–Chile FTA
Australia–New Zealand FTA
China–Australia FTA
Japan–Australia FTA
Australia–Korea FTA
Trans-Pacific Partnership








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Telecommunications in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_Australia&oldid=815582900"					Categories: Telecommunications by countryTelecommunications in AustraliaTelecommunications in OceaniaHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listPages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksArticles needing additional references from December 2009All articles needing additional referencesUse Australian English from December 2013All Wikipedia articles written in Australian EnglishUse dmy dates from December 2013All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from December 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2009