





This article needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (December 2013)



Myanmar has begun the liberalization of its telecoms market in 2013.[1]



Contents


1 Telecommunication networks

1.1 Telephone system


2 Media
3 Internet
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Telecommunication networks[edit]
See also: Telephone numbers in Burma




Private street telephone post in Myanmar


Previously, Myanmar Post and Telecommunication had a monopoly in the country. In 2013, the government started taking steps to open up the telecommunications market, issuing licenses to new service providers. In 2014, Qatar-based Ooredoo and Norwegian Telenor Group entered the market, resulting in the reduction of consumer prices and a rapid growth in the number of subscribers, as well as the expansion of the country's infrastructure.[2] In November 2015, Ericsson named Myanmar the world's fourth fastest-growing mobile market.[3] As of June 2015, Myanmar has a mobile phone penetration rate of 54.6%, up from less than 10% in 2012.[4]
Telephone system[edit]
General assessment: meets minimum requirements for local and intercity service for business and government Domestic: system barely capable of providing basic service; cellular phone system is grossly underdeveloped with a subscribership base of less than 1 per 100 persons[needs update] International: country code - 95; landing point for the SEA-ME-WE 3 optical telecommunications submarine cable that provides links to Asia, the Middle East, and Europe; satellite earth stations - 2, Intelsat (Indian Ocean) and ShinSat (2007)
Bids have been offered for two fresh telecom licenses by the Myanmar government. The deadline was set to be 8 February 2013. The licenses were expected to be issued in June and carry a contract duration of up to 20 years. Two more licenses were expected to be offered following this round of bidding.[5]
According to government statistics, 5.4 million of Myanmar’s 60 million population had a mobile phone subscription at the end of 2012, giving the country a mobile penetration of 9 per cent.[6]
According to official figures released in mid-2012, Myanmar had 857 base transceiver stations (BTS) for 1,654,667 local GSM mobile users, 188 BTSs for 225,617 local WCDMA mobile users, 366 BTSs for 633,569 local CDMA-450 mobile users, and 193 BTSs for 341,687 CDMA-800 mobile users. Huawei who has built 40 percent of the towers and ZTE has built 60 percent in Myanmar, which amounts to 1500 across the country, said it has built the towers mostly in Yangon, Mandalay and Naypyidaw.[7]
The Myanmar Telecommunications Operator Tender Evaluation and Selection Committee selected Norwegian Telenor Group and Ooredoo of Qatar as winners of the bidding, for the two telecom licences issued by the government of Myanmar.[7] The licenses allow the operators to build and operate a nationwide wireless network for 15 years. Ooredoo began selling low-price SIM cards at a price of US$1.5 in Yangon, Mandalay and Naypyidaw in August 2014. Prior to 2012, during military rule, SIM cards cost USD 1,500.[8]
Media[edit]
Further information: Media of Burma
Radio broadcast stations AM 2, FM 9, shortwave 3 (2015)
Television broadcast stations: 6 (2015)
Press

Kyehmon (Burmese: ကြေးမုံ) - state-run daily
The New Light of Myanmar (Burmese: Myanma A-lin) - English and Burmese language organ of SPDC
The Myanmar Times (Burmese: Myanma Taing) - private-run English-language weekly
Myanmar Business Today - the country's first and the only private-run business weekly

Television

MRTV state-run, operated by Myanmar Government - Broadcasts With DVB-T2 System. Including 14 TV Channels Burmese, Arakanese, Shan, Karen, Kachin, Kayah, Chin, Mon and English
MITV - Showing about Myanmar to around the World.
Myawady TV army-run network

Broadcasts 7 Free Digital Channel available in Naypyidaw, Yangon & Mandalay.

SKYNET Largest Pay TV Service In Myanmar. Providing 110 TV Channels (Local & International) Including 10 High Definition Channel. Broadcasts With DTH system on Apstar 7 Satellite. SKYNET Have Official Broadcaster To England Premier League, Spain LaLiga, Italy Serie-A, France League 1 In 2015/16 Season.
4TV - Second Largest Pay TV Service In Myanmar. operated by Forever Group.

Providing Free to air Channels, Local & International Pay TV Channels, and High Definition Channels. 4TV Has Only Broadcasts 2 Way With DTH and DVB-T2 In Myanmar.

Democratic Voice of Burma - Activists from the 88 Generation launched it. Based in Norway, it makes both TV and Radio broadcasts

Radio

Radio Myanmar - state-run, operated by Myanmar TV and Radio Department
Thazin Radio - Military operated station
City FM - entertainment-based, operated by Yangon City Development Committee
Bagan FM
Cherry FM - Commercial station broadcasting music based programs to main cities
Mandalay FM
Padamyar FM
Pyinsawaddy FM
Shwe FM
Democratic Voice of Burma - opposition station based in Norway, broadcasts via shortwave

News agency

Myanmar News Agency (MNA) - state-run

Internet[edit]
Main article: Internet in Burma
The government now allows unrestricted access to the Internet. Many people are using the internet freely, often with widely available smart phones.
Myanmar Teleport[9] (formerly Bagan Cybertech), Information Technology Central Services (ITCS),[10] and the state-owned Myanmar Post and Telecommunication (MPT)[11] are two of the Internet service providers in Myanmar.[12][13] Internet cafés are common in the larger cities of the country. Satellite (VSAT)internet connection is also available from Skynet, a satellite television provider, and another (VSAT) Operator Com & Com.
According to MPT's official statistics as of July 2010, the country had over 400,000 Internet users (0.8% of the population) with the vast majority of the users located in the two largest cities, Yangon and Mandalay.[14] More recent figures are hard to find, but the widespread use of smart phones and tablets with cellular modems on the 3G and 4G networks means that internet usage is likely to be far higher than the figures from 2010 indicate.
See also[edit]

Censorship in Burma

References[edit]



^ Thomas, Daniel; Robinson, Gwen (4 April 2013). "Myanmar opens up new telecoms frontier". Financial Times. Retrieved 11 May 2016. 
^ http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/opinion/16415-advancing-myanmar-s-telecom-infrastructure.html
^ http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/business/technology/17727-myanmar-named-fourth-fastest-growing-mobile-market-in-the-world-by-ericsson.html
^ Thant, Htoo (2 June 2015). "Mobile penetration reaches half the country". Myanmar Times. Retrieved 11 May 2016. 
^ "Myanmar telecom bidding war heats up". Investvine.com. 31 January 2013. Retrieved 1 February 2013. 
^ "Vodafone, China Mobile eye Myanmar". Investvine.com. 5 April 2013. Retrieved 5 April 2013. 
^ a b "Myanmar's two telecom licences goes to Telenor and Ooredoo", Yozzo Telecom News, 27 June 2013
^ "Myanmar's Mobile Revolution Kicks On". TNW News. Retrieved 22 May 2015. 
^ "Company at a glance", Yatanarpon Teleport Co., Ltd.
^ "New consortium to shake up IT sector", Ye Kaung Myint Maung, Myanmar Times, vol.19, no.370 (11–17 June 2007)
^ "Internet Services Tariff", Information Technology department, Ministry of Communications, Posts and Telegraphs. Retrieved 10 June 2011
^ "Myanmar Internet Provider", Guide for Myanmar 2007
^ "Internet service hampered as Myanmar Teleport server breaks down", Mizzima News Agency, 10 February 2009
^ Wai-Yan Phyo Oo and Saw Pyayzon (30 July 2010). "State of Internet Usage in Myanmar". Bi-Weekly Eleven (in Burmese). Yangon. 3 (18): 1–2. 



External links[edit]

Myanmar Post and Telecoms - the government ISP







v
t
e


Myanmar articles








Myanmar is also known as Burma






History



Prehistory
Pyu city-states
Pagan Kingdom
Myinsaing Kingdom
Pinya Kingdom
Sagaing Kingdom
Ava Kingdom
Prome Kingdom
Hanthawaddy Kingdom
Kingdom of Mrauk U
Taungoo Dynasty (First Toungoo Empire)
Restored Hanthawaddy Kingdom
Konbaung Dynasty
Shan States
Karenni States
British rule
Japanese occupation
Union of Burma
Socialist Republic
Union of Myanmar





Geography







Cities
Deforestation
Ecoregions
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Protected areas
Rivers
Wildlife
Volcanoes








Politics







Administrative divisions
Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Human rights

LGBT


Internal conflicts
Law enforcement
Military
Parliament
Political parties
President

List


Prime Minister (defunct)








Economy







Agriculture
Central bank
Telecommunications
Burmese kyat (currency)
Tourism
Transportation
Units of measurement








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Health
Languages
Women





Culture



Flag
Coat of arms
Calendar
Censorship
Cinema
Clothing
Cuisine
Dance
Etymology
Festivals
Folklore
Literature
Media
Music
National symbols
Prostitution
Public holidays
Religion
Tattooing












Outline
Index



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Telecommunications in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_Myanmar&oldid=817362213"					Categories: Communications in MyanmarTelecommunications in MyanmarTelecommunications by countryTelecommunications in AsiaHidden categories: CS1 Burmese-language sources (my)EngvarB from November 2015Use dmy dates from November 2015Wikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2013All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingWikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2016Articles containing Burmese-language text