Telecommunications in Peru include radio and television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.



Contents


1 Regulation
2 Radio and television
3 Telephones
4 Internet

4.1 Internet censorship and surveillance


5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Regulation[edit]
The technical regulator of communications in Peru is the Presidency of the Minister Council, through the Organismo Supervisor de la Inversión Privada en Telecomunicaciones (OSIPTEL) in English, Supervisory Agency for Private Investment in Telecommunications. The Ministry of Transport and Communications grants concessions, authorizations, permits and licenses.[1]
The resale of telecommunication services is permitted as a regulated activity. Voice Over IP (VoIP) services are not expressly regulated, but may need a concession or a registry depending on the type of service provided. Carrier interconnection is mandatory and interconnection fees are regulated. The Peruvian government maintains a Telecommunications Investment Fund (FITEL) to promote universal service within the country's most isolated regions, including rural areas and areas of social interest.[1] Following the successful implementation of mobile number portability, the government requires fixed number portability be launched by July 2014.[2]
All telecommunication services have been liberalized and are rendered under a free competition regime according to the Telecommunications Law. Under Peru’s single concession regime all telecom services, including fixed-line, mobile, pay TV, and Internet, are provided under unified concessions that cover the entire country.[1]
Privatization began in 1994 when the state-owned companies Compañía Peruana de Teléfonos S.A. (CPT) and Entel Perú were auctioned to Telefónica de España. In December 1994, Entel Perú was merged into CPT. In 1995, CPT changed its name to Telefónica del Perú S.A. (TdP).[1] Telefónica del Perú continues to dominate the market for basic telephone services.[3]
The operation of broadcasting companies is governed by the Law of Radio and Television (Law Nº 28278). Spectrum is managed and controlled by the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC).[1]
Radio and television[edit]
Main article: Television in Peru

Radio stations: More than 2,000 radio stations, including a substantial number of indigenous language stations (2010).[4]
Radios: 24 million (2005).[needs update]
TV networks: 10 major TV networks of which only one, Television Nacional de Peru, is state-owned; multi-channel cable TV services are available (2010).[4]
Television sets: 5.5 million (2003).[needs update]
Pay television subscribers: 967,943 (June 2010).[5]
Broadcast television system: NTSC,[6] NTSC broadcasts to be abandoned by 31 December 2017, simulcasting ISDB-Tb.[7]

Telephones[edit]




A document from the Peruvian Telephone Company, Lima, 1895.


See also: Telephone numbers in Peru

Calling code: +51.[4]
International call prefix: 00[8]
Fixed lines: 3.4 million lines in use (2012).[4][9]
Fixed-line teledensity: about 12 per 100 persons (2010).[4]
Mobile subscribers: 15.2 million unique subscribers (end of 2013).[10]
Mobile lines: 29.4 million (2012),[4] 29.6 million (2013).[10]
Mobile teledensity: exceeds 100 telephones per 100 persons, spurred by competition among multiple providers (2010).[4]
Domestic system: nationwide microwave radio relay system and a domestic satellite system with 12 earth stations, which is adequate for most requirements (2010).[4]
International communication cables: South America-1 (SAm-1) and Pan American (PAN-AM) submarine cables link to parts of Central and South America, the Caribbean, and the US (2010).[4]
International satellite earth stations: 2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) (2010).[4]

Peru's fixed-line penetration is the third lowest in South America after Bolivia and Paraguay. Barriers include widespread poverty, expensive services, little meaningful competition, and the geographical barriers imposed by the Andean mountains and Amazon jungles.[3]
Under the name Movistar, Telefónica del Perú dominates the basic telephone market. América Móvil’s Claro occupies second place, while Americatel Peru is third with roughly 1% of the market. The remaining companies have market shares below 0.3%.[3]
Mobile penetration is below the regional average with about one quarter of the population having no mobile phone at all, while others, primarily in urban areas, have multiple subscriptions.[11]
Telefónica, operating as Movistar, is the mobile leader; América Móvil, operating as Claro, is second; and Mobile Perú is third. Vietnam’s Viettel is expected to begin offering mobile services in the second half of 2014 and Virgin Mobile is expected to enter the market as a Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO).[11]
Internet[edit]

Top-level domain: .pe.[4]
Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 158 providers[dubious – discuss] (2005).[needs update]
Internet hosts: 234,102 hosts (2012).[4]
Internet users: 11.3 million users, 37th in the world; 38.2% of the population, 115th in the world (2012).[12]
Fixed broadband: 1.4 million subscriptions, 49th in the world; 4.8% of the population, 107th in the world (2012).[13]
Mobile broadband: 820,295 subscriptions, 77th in the world; 2.8% of the population, 121st in the world (2012).[14]

Peru enjoyed a remarkably high dial-up Internet penetration rate, but broadband Internet penetration is more than two-thirds below the average for Latin America and Caribbean countries. Barriers include widespread poverty, limited literacy, limited computer ownership and access, rugged topography and, perhaps most significant, a lack of meaningful competition which has made broadband Internet access in Peru one of the slowest and most expensive in the region.[15]
Internet censorship and surveillance[edit]
In 2011 the OpenNet Initiative reported no evidence of Internet filtering in all areas (political, social, conflict/security, and Internet tools) for which it tests.[16]
There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority.[17] Individuals and groups engage in the free expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail. The chief impediment to Internet access is a lack of infrastructure.
The constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights. Generally, an independent press and a functioning democratic political system combine to promote freedom of speech and press. A number of journalists and media outlets report experiencing threats or intimidation. Some observers claim that media outlets self-censor for fear of harassment or violence. The Press and Society Institute (IPYS) reports that the aggressors are often government officials (e.g., mayors, heads of government offices, regional presidents). The penal code criminalizes libel, and officials reportedly use it to intimidate reporters. The law designates all information about national security and defense as secret. Press freedom activists and local NGOs, such as IPYS, criticized the law as an attack on transparency, freedom of information, and freedom of the press.[17]
In October 2013 the government passed a cybercrimes law designed to combat data sharing and the illegal access of information. The Press and Society Institute (IPYS) and other local NGOs criticized the law as legally ambiguous and argued that it could be used broadly to target journalists and limit freedom of the press.[17]
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Radio stations in Peru.



Media of Peru

References[edit]

 This article incorporates public domain material from the CIA World Factbook website https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html.
 This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Department of State.



^ a b c d e "Peru Telecommunication Regulation", Maria Luisa Gubbins, Lex Mundi, 2010.
^ "Peru - Telecom Market Trends, Key Statistics and Regulatory Overview", Budde.com, 21 May 2014.
^ a b c "Peru - Fixed-Line Market and Infrastructure - Overview, Statistics and Forecasts", Budde.com, 21 May 2014.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "Peru", World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 9 August 2014.
^ "Suscriptores de TV paga por empresa" [Pay TV company subscribers] (in Spanish), Organismo Regulador de las Telecomunicaciones del Perú (OSIPTEL).
^ Michael Hegarty; Anne Phelan; Lisa Kilbride (1 January 1998). Classrooms for Distance Teaching and Learning: A Blueprint. Leuven University Press. pp. 260–. ISBN 978-90-6186-867-5. 
^ Philip J. Cianci (9 January 2012). High Definition Television: The Creation, Development and Implementation of HDTV Technology. McFarland. pp. 302–. ISBN 978-0-7864-8797-4. 
^ Dialing Procedures (International Prefix, National (Trunk) Prefix and National (Significant) Number) (in Accordance with ITY-T Recommendation E.164 (11/2010)), Annex to ITU Operational Bulletin No. 994-15.XII.2011, International Telecommunication Union (ITU, Geneva), 15 December 2011. Retrieved 2 January 2014.
^ "Líneas telefónicas instaladas por empresa" [Telephone lines installed by company] (in Spanish), Organismo Regulador de las Telecomunicaciones del Perú (OSIPTEL).
^ a b "Country Overview: Peru", GSMA Mobile for Development Impact.
^ a b "Peru - Mobile Market - Insights, Statistics and Forecasts", Budde.com, 6 August 2014.
^ "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000-2012", International Telecommunications Union (Geneva), June 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2013.
^ "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013.
^ "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013.
^ "Peru - Broadband and Broadcasting Market - Overview, Statistics and Forecasts", Budde.com, 21 May 2014.
^ "Summarized global Internet filtering data spreadsheet", OpenNet Initiative, 20 September 2013. Retrieved 12 November 2013.
^ a b c "Peru", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2013, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 11 March 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2014.


External links[edit]

.pe domain registration web site (in Spanish)
Ministry of Transport and Communications (in Spanish)
Organismo Supervisor de Inversión Privada en Telecomunicaciones (OSIPTEL) (in Spanish)







v
t
e


Telecommunications in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Internet censorship and surveillance by country



Africa



Algeria
Angola
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo DR
Congo RO
Egypt
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritania
Morocco (Western Sahara)
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Argentina
Bahamas
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Greenland
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States (Puerto Rico)
Uruguay
Venezuela





Asia



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
East Timor
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Malaysia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
North Korea
Oman
Pakistan
Palestinian territories
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





Europe



Albania
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany (YouTube video blocking)
Georgia
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea












v
t
e


Peru articles



History




Timeline



Ancient cultures
Inca Empire

Spanish conquest
Neo-Inca State


Viceroyalty
War of Independence
Guano Era
War of the Pacific
Colombia–Peru War
Ecuadorian–Peruvian War
Internal conflict





By topic



Demographic
Economic








Geography







Cities
Climate
Earthquakes
Flora
Mountains
Natural regions
Protected areas
Rivers
Wildlife








Politics







Constitution
Elections

electoral system


Government
Foreign relations
Human rights

LGBT


LGBT history
Law

enforcement


Military
Nationality law
Political parties

Alliance for the Future
APRA
National Unity
Possible Peru
Peruvian Nationalist Party
Popular Action
Union for Peru


Regions and provinces








Economy







Agriculture
Central Bank
Companies
Sol (currency)
Electricity
Stock Exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
International rankings
Languages
List of Peruvians
Public holidays
Religion
Water supply and sanitation





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Llama
Literature
Machu Picchu
Media
Music
Religion
Sport
Symbols












Outline
Index



Category
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_Peru&oldid=787377033"					Categories: Telecommunications in PeruTelecommunications in South AmericaInternet by countryInternet censorship by countryHidden categories: Articles with Spanish-language external linksWikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2014All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from August 2014Commons category without a link on WikidataWikipedia articles incorporating text from the World FactbookWikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Department of State