

Telecommunications





Communications towers in Kampong Thom


Telephone land lines
530,000 (2011)[1]


Mobile lines
13.8 million (2011)[1]


Telephone country code
+855[1]


Internet hosts
13,784 (2012)[1]


Internet users
738,641 (2012)[2]


Internet country code
.kh[1]





Telecommunications in Cambodia include telephone, radio, television, and Internet services, which are regulated by the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications. Transport and posts were restored throughout most of the country in the early 1980s during the People's Republic of Kampuchea regime after being disrupted under the Khmer Rouge.
In January 1987, the Soviet-aided Intersputnik space communications station began operation in Phnom Penh and established two-way telecommunication links between the Cambodian capital and the cities of Moscow, Hanoi, Vientiane and Paris. The completion of the earth satellite station restored the telephone and telex links among Phnom Penh, Hanoi, and other countries for the first time since 1975. Although telecommunications services were initially limited to the government, these advances in communications helped break down the country's isolation, both internally and internationally.
Today, with the availability of mobile phones, communications are open to all, though the country's Prime Minister Hun Sen decreed that 3G mobile phones would not be allowed to support video calling.



Contents


1 Telephones

1.1 List of mobile networks


2 Radio and television

2.1 Radio stations

2.1.1 Phnom Penh
2.1.2 Provincial stations


2.2 Television

2.2.1 Broadcast and cable networks
2.2.2 Provincial television stations




3 Internet

3.1 Internet censorship and surveillance


4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Telephones[edit]

Fixed: 530,000 lines, 95th in the world, 4 per 100 persons (2011)[1]
Mobile cellular: 13.8 million lines, 58th in the world, 92 per 100 persons (2011)[1]
Satellite earth stations: 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean region)[1]
International access code: 855[1]

The government state communications corporation is Telecom Cambodia, founded in 2006 as an expansion of the telecom operating department of the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications.
Fixed line service in Phnom Penh and other provincial cities is available. Mobile-phone systems are widely used in urban areas to bypass deficiencies in the fixed-line network. Mobile phone coverage is rapidly expanding in rural areas. Mobile-cellular usage, aided by increasing competition among service providers, is increasing.[1]
International calling access is adequate, but expensive. Fixed line and mobile service is available to all countries from Phnom Penh and major provincial cities.[1]
List of mobile networks[edit]


Network
Company
Notes



Smart


Smart Axiata Co., Ltd



Incorporates the former Hello Axiata and Star-Cell
[3]





Mobitel


CamGSM Co., Ltd.



Also known as Cellcard
Incorporates the former Mfone
[4]





CooTel


Xinwei (Cambodia) Telecom Co., Ltd



[5][6]





SEATEL


South East Asia Telecom (Cambodia) Co., Ltd.



Incorporates the former GT-TEL
[7]





Metfone


Viettel (Cambodia) Pte., Ltd.



Incorporates the former Beeline
[8]





qb


Cambodia Advance Communications Co., Ltd. (CADCOMMS)



[9]




Radio and television[edit]
In 2009 Cambodian broadcasters were a mixture of state-owned, joint public-private, and privately owned companies.[1]
Radio stations[edit]
In 2009 there were roughly 50 radio broadcast stations - 1 state-owned broadcaster with multiple stations and a large mixture of public and private broadcasters. Several international broadcasters are also available.[1]
Phnom Penh[edit]





Apsara Radio FM 97
Angel Radio 96.3Mhz Kampot
Dance Radio 96.6Mhz
DAP Radio FM 93.75
Family FM 99.5
Hang Meas Radio FM 104.5
Koh Santepheap Daily FM 87.75
National Radio Kampuchea
Phnom Penh Radio FM 103
Radio FM 90.5
Radio Beehive FM 105
DaunPenh eFM 87.50Mhz
ABC News FM 107.5




Radio Free Asia
Radio Khmer FM 107
Radio Love FM 97.5
Radio Town FM 102.3 MHz
Raksmey Hang Meas Radio FM 95.7000
Royal Cambodia Armed Forces Radio FM 98
Voice of America Khmer
Women's Media Centre of Cambodia (WMC) Radio FM 102





Provincial stations[edit]
There are radio stations in each of the following provinces: Banteay Meanchey, Battambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Thom, Kampot, Kandal, Pailin, Preah Vihear, Siem Reap, Sihanoukville and Svay Rieng.
Television[edit]
In 2009 there were 9 TV broadcast stations with most operating on multiple channels, including 1 state-operated station broadcasting from multiple locations, 6 stations either jointly operated or privately owned with some broadcasting from several locations, and 2 TV relay stations - one relaying a French TV station and the other relaying a Vietnamese TV station. Multi-channel cable and satellite systems are also available.[1]
Broadcast and cable networks[edit]





PNN TV
Apsara Television (TV11)
Bayon Television
Bayon News Television
Cambodia Cable Television (CCTV)
Cambodian News Channel (CNC)
Cambodian Television Network (CTN)
CTV 8 HD
Hang Meas HDTV




Khmer Television 9 HDTV (TV9 HDTV)
My TV
National Television of Cambodia (TVK)
One TV (Royal Media Entertainment Corporation, LTD)
Phnom Penh Municipal Cable Television (PPCTV Co., LTD)
Phnom Penh Television (TV3)
TV5 Cambodia





Provincial television stations[edit]

Kandal Province - Broadcasting on channel 27, Bayon Television is Cambodia's only UHF channel. A private television company belonging to Prime Minister Hun Sen, it also operates Bayon Radio FM 95 MHz. It was established in January 1998.
Mondulkiri - Established in 1999, relays TVK on channel 10.
Preah Vihear - Established in 2006, broadcasts on channel 7.
Ratanakiri - Established in 1993, relays TVK on channel 7.
Siem Reap - Established in 2002, relays TV3 on channel 12.

Internet[edit]
During 2012 Internet access was somewhat available to the people of Cambodia, particularly in urban centers, and some 50 percent of Cambodians were able to access the Internet through their mobile phones, according to the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications.[10]

Internet Users: 738,641 users, 122nd in the world; 4.9 per 100 persons, 187th in the world (2012)[2]
Fixed broadband: 30,653 subscriptions, 121st in the world; 0.2 per 100 persons, 158th in the world (2012)[11]
Mobile broadband: 1,032,781 subscriptions, 70th in the world; 6.9 subscriptions per 100 persons, 100th in the world (2012)[12]
Internet Hosts: 13,784 hosts, 129th in the world (2012)[1]
Country code: .kh[1]

List of Internet service providers





AngkorNet
AZ (Online)
Cambo Technology (ISP) Co., Ltd.
Cambodia Internet Corp
Cambotech
Camintel
Camnet (Telecom Cambodia)
CB (Cambodian Broadband)
CDC
Cellcard (Mobitel)
Chuan Wei
CIDC IT
Citylink
Digi ISP
Dragon Royal Telecom
EmCom




Everyday
Ezecom
GTD
Hiway Telecom
Kingtel Communications Limited
MekongNet (Angkor Data Communication Group)
Metfone
MKN
Mobilastic
Neocom ISP (NTC)
NTC - NeocomISP Limited
Open Net
PCP
PP Net Phone
PPCTV Broadband Internet Service
SEATEL
SINET(S.I Group Co., Ltd)
TeleSURF
TODAY ISP (Today Communication Co., Ltd)
Vimean Seile
Wicam
WIP
Wireless Internet Provider
WirelessIP
Y5Net (BDKTel Co,LTD)





Internet censorship and surveillance[edit]
In its Freedom on the Net 2013 report, Freedom House gives Cambodia a "Freedom on the Net Status" of "partly free".
Compared to traditional media in Cambodia, new media, including online news, social networks and personal blogs, enjoy more freedom and independence from government censorship and restrictions. However, the government does proactively block blogs and websites, either on moral grounds, or for hosting content deemed critical of the government. The government restricts access to sexually explicit content, but does not systematically censor online political discourse. Since 2011 three blogs hosted overseas have been blocked for perceived antigovernment content. In 2012, government ministries threatened to shutter internet cafes too near schools—citing moral concerns—and instituted surveillance of cafe premises and cell phone subscribers as a security measure.[13]
Early in 2011, very likely at the urging of the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, all Cambodian ISPs blocked the hosting service Blogspot, apparently in reaction to a December 2010 post on KI-Media, a blog run by Cambodians from both inside and outside the country. The site, which is often critical of the administration, described the prime minister and other officials as "traitors" after opposition leader Sam Rainsy alleged they had sold land to Vietnam at a contested national border. All ISPs but one subsequently restored service to the sites following customer complaints. In February 2011, however, multiple ISPs reinstated blocks on individual Blogspot sites, including KI-Media, Khmerization—another critical citizen journalist blog—and a blog by the Khmer political cartoonist Sacrava.[13]
There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority. During 2012 NGOs expressed concern about potential online restrictions. In February and November, the government published two circulars, which, if implemented fully, would require Internet cafes to install surveillance cameras and restrict operations within major urban centers. Activists also reported concern about a draft “cybercrimes” law, noting that it could be used to restrict online freedoms. The government maintained it would only regulate criminal activity.[10]
The constitution provides for freedom of speech and press; however, these rights were not always respected in practice. The 1995 press law prohibits prepublication censorship or imprisonment for expressing opinions; however, the government uses the penal code to prosecute citizens on defamation, disinformation, and incitement charges. The penal code does not prescribe imprisonment for defamation, but does for incitement or spreading disinformation, which carry prison sentences of up to three years. Judges also can order fines, which may lead to jail time if not paid. The constitution requires that free speech not adversely affect public security.[10]
The constitution declares that the king is “inviolable,” and a Ministry of Interior directive conforming to the defamation law reiterates these limits and prohibits publishers and editors from disseminating stories that insult or defame government leaders and institutions. The continued criminalization of defamation and disinformation and a broad interpretation of criminal incitement constrains freedom of expression.[10]
The law provides for the privacy of residence and correspondence and prohibits illegal searches; however, NGOs report that police routinely conduct searches and seizures without warrants.[10]
Corruption remains pervasive and governmental human rights bodies are generally ineffective. A weak judiciary that sometimes fails to provide due process or fair trial procedures is a serious problem. The courts lack human and financial resources and, as a result, are not truly independent and are subject to corruption and political influence.[10]
See also[edit]


Cambodia portal



Media of Cambodia
Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, Cambodia

References[edit]
 This article incorporates public domain material from the CIA World Factbook website https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html.


^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p "Communications", Cambodia, World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 24 October 2013.
^ a b "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000-2012", International Telecommunications Union (Geneva), June 2013, retrieved 22 June 2013
^ Smart, website. Retrieved 24 October 2013.
^ Cellcard, website. Retrieved 24 October 2013.
^ CooTel, website. Retrieved 24 October 2013.
^ Xinwei, website. Retrieved 24 October 2013.
^ SEATEL, website. Retrieved 1 January 2015.
^ Metfone, website. Retrieved 24 October 2013.
^ qb, website. Retrieved 24 October 2013.
^ a b c d e f "Cambodia", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 21 March 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2013.
^ "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013.
^ "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013.
^ a b "Cambodia country report", Freedom on the Net 2013, Freedom House, 3 October 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2013.


External links[edit]

Internet Providers in Cambodia
Which are the best internet providers in Phnom Penh, Cambodia?
Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications
Telecom Cambodia
Television stations in Cambodia
"3G phones banned in anti-porn drive", China Daily (Associated Press), 26 May 2006. Retrieved 24 October 2013.







v
t
e


Telecommunications in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_Cambodia&oldid=787376381"					Categories: Telecommunications in CambodiaTelecommunications by countryTelecommunications in AsiaCommunications in CambodiaHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the World Factbook