
Telemundo




Type
Broadcast television network


Country
United States


Availability
National


Founded
July 26, 1954; 63 years ago (1954-07-26)


Headquarters
Hialeah, Florida


Owner
NBCUniversal Telemundo Enterprises
(NBCUniversal)



Key people

Luis Silberwasser
(President, Telemundo)
Ron Meyer
(Vice Chairman, NBCUniversal)
Steve Burke
(CEO, NBCUniversal)



Former names

NetSpan (1984–87)



Picture format

1080i (HD)



Official website

telemundo.com


Language
Spanish




Telemundo


Sister channel(s)



NBC
Universo
Telemundo Puerto Rico
TeleXitos





Timeshift service



East
West






Availability



Terrestrial


Affiliated with broadcast stations in many markets
List of affiliates


Satellite


Dish Network



835 (East; SD)
836 (West; SD)
2 (Puerto Rico)





DirecTV



406 (East; SD)
407 (West; SD)
2 (Puerto Rico)





Cable


OTA affiliates available on certain U.S. cable systems
Consult your local cable provider or program station and provider





National feed available on select U.S. cable systems in markets without a local affiliate
2 (Puerto Rico)



Consult your local cable provider or program listings source for channel availability


IPTV


AT&T U-verse
3007 (SD) (OTA affiliates available in certain markets)


Streaming media


PlayStation Vue
Internet Protocol television


FuboTV
Internet Protocol television


Telemundo (Spanish pronunciation: [teleˈmundo]) is an American Spanish-language terrestrial television network owned by Comcast through the NBCUniversal division NBCUniversal Telemundo Enterprises. It is the second largest provider of Spanish content nationwide behind American competitor Univision, with programming syndicated worldwide to more than 100 countries in over 35 languages.
The channel broadcasts programs and original content aimed at Hispanic and Latino American audiences in the United States and worldwide, consisting of telenovelas, sports, reality television, news programming, and films — either imported or Spanish-dubbed. In addition, Telemundo operates NBC Universo, a separate channel directed towards young Hispanic audiences;[1] Telemundo Digital Media, which distributes original programming content across mass media, the Telemundo and NBC Universo websites; Puerto Rico telestation WKAQ-TV; and international distribution arm Telemundo Internacional.
Telemundo is headquartered in the Miami suburb of Hialeah, Florida, and has 1,900 employees worldwide.[2][3] The majority of Telemundo's programs are filmed at an operated studio facility in Miami, where 85% of the network's telenovelas were filmed during 2011.[4] The average hourly primetime drama costs $70K to produce.[5]



Contents


1 History

1.1 1954–1983

1.1.1 WKAQ-TV


1.2 NetSpan

1.2.1 1984–1987


1.3 Telemundo

1.3.1 1988–1997
1.3.2 1997–2001
1.3.3 2001–2009
1.3.4 2011–present




2 Programming

2.1 English subtitles
2.2 News programming
2.3 Sports
2.4 Children's programming
2.5 Specials


3 Stations
4 Related services

4.1 Current sister channels

4.1.1 Universo
4.1.2 Telemundo Puerto Rico
4.1.3 TeleXitos


4.2 Video-on-demand services

4.2.1 Telemundo Now


4.3 Telemundo HD


5 Controversies

5.1 SAG-AFTRA
5.2 2016 presidential election


6 International broadcasts

6.1 Mexico


7 See also
8 References
9 External links



History[edit]
1954–1983[edit]
WKAQ-TV[edit]
Main article: WKAQ-TV
The Telemundo brand traces back to the sign-on of WKAQ-TV (channel 2) in San Juan, Puerto Rico on March 28, 1954, which was founded by Ángel Ramos – owner of Puerto Rico's main newspaper at the time, El Mundo, and the U.S. territory's first radio station, WKAQ (also known as "Radio El Mundo"). Ramos wanted to maintain a consistent branding for his media properties based around the "mundo" theme (the Spanish word for "world"), and chose to brand his new television property as "Telemundo" (in effect, translating to "Teleworld" or "World TV"). Ramos had tried to obtain a television station license as early as the mid-1940s; however, because of a freeze imposed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that suspended the filing and approval of broadcast license applications for new television stations in the United States and its territories due to World War II, he had to wait until 1954 to obtain the license.[6]
In its early years, Ramos maintained continuity between his radio and television stations by signing an exclusive deal with the most well-known and influential actor/comedian/producer in Puerto Rico, Ramón Rivero – better known as Diplo – whose comedy show El Tremendo Hotel ("The Tremendous Hotel"), which was broadcast on WKAQ radio, was the most popular radio program in Puerto Rican broadcasting history. Rivero produced the first comedy/variety series for WKAQ-TV, "La Taberna India", and La Farándula Corona on YouTube, which helped to catapult the television station to the top of the ratings.
During the 1970s and 1980s, WKAQ-TV, then branded as "Telemundo Canal 2" ("Telemundo Channel 2"), had become a major producer of telenovelas. The station was also known for its "fingers" logo – a bold number "2" with the silhouette of two upright fingers inside the number – and referred to itself as "El canal de los dedos" ("The Channel of the Fingers"). On April 14, 1983, Ramos sold WKAQ-TV to John Blair & Co.[citation needed]
NetSpan[edit]
1984–1987[edit]
In 1984, the owners of WNJU (channel 47) in Linden, New Jersey (serving the New York City area) and KSTS (channel 48) in San Jose, California formed NetSpan, the second Spanish-language television network in the continental United States (behind the longer-established Spanish International Network, the forerunner to Univision). These stations joined KVEA (channel 52) in Los Angeles, run by its general manager and part-owner Joe Wallach, in 1985.[7] The following year, KVEA's part-owner, Reliance Group Holdings, acquired the Telemundo brand when it purchased John Blair & Co., which also owned WSCV (channel 51) in Fort Lauderdale–Miami-West Palm Beach in addition to WKAQ-TV. In late 1986, Reliance also purchased WNJU.
In 1987, Reliance Capital Group executives Saul Steinberg and Henry Silverman merged all these stations into the Telemundo Group.[8] The new corporation quickly went public, and in 1987, Reliance decided to rebrand NetSpan as Telemundo. Later that year, it purchased additional stations in San Francisco, Houston (KTMD, channel 47) and San Antonio (KVDA, channel 60).
Telemundo[edit]
1988–1997[edit]




Historic Telemundo logos.


Between 1988 and 1993, Telemundo acquired or affiliated with television stations in Texas (KFWD channel 52, in Dallas–Fort Worth, now a MundoMax affiliate), New Mexico (KTEL-CD channel 47, in Albuquerque), Arizona (KHRR channel 40, in Tucson) and Washington, D.C. (W64BW, channel 64; now WZDC-CD on channel 25).
In May 1992, Telemundo underwent another management change, appointing former Univision president Joaquin Blaya – who resigned from that network after discovering in an FCC filing for A. Jerrold Perenchio's purchase of the network from Hallmark Cards that Univision would increase its reliance on programming from Televisa and Venevision to levels that resulted in him concluding that there would be fewer opportunities for the addition of local programs on Univision's stations, and was subsequently joined by four other Univision executives – to head the network.[9]
The following year in 1993, Telemundo underwent an extensive rebranding, introducing the signature framed "T" letter logo (which has been used by the network since that point in various design elements), and a promotional campaign using the slogan "Arriba, Telemundo, Arriba" ("Upwards, Telemundo, Upwards"). The network also began to produce its own original telenovelas, the first of which to premiere were Angélica, mi vida ("Angelica, My Life"), Marielena, Guadalupe, Señora Tentación ("Lady Temptation") and Tres Destinos ("Three Destinations"). International distributors soon approached the network for the syndication rights to air these programs on television networks in other countries. Telemundo's effort faced an initial setback when Mexico's leading broadcaster, Televisa, purchased production company Capitalvision, which had been producing the telenovelas in conjunction with the network. Parent company Telemundo Group experienced major financial challenges during this time, filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 1994, due to a debt load of more than $300 million that the company owed to its creditors.
In an effort to boost its tepid ratings and quell complaints from advocacy organizations such as the National Hispanic Media Coalition that criticized both networks for not featuring content relatable to American Latinos, Telemundo outlined a new strategy to better compete against Univision by increasing production of domestically produced programs. In 1995, under the direction of executive vice president of programming Harry Abraham Castillo, Telemundo opened its first network studio on the West Coast. Housed at Raleigh Studios in Hollywood, the network began daily production of three shows on the lot that year: La Hora Lunática ("The Crazy Hour"), a daytime talk-variety show hosted by Los Angeles radio personality Humberto Luna, comedians Mario Ramírez Reyes "El Comodín" and Hugo Armando, and producer Jackie Torres; El y Ella ("He and She"), a daily talk show focusing on gender-related issues that was created and produced by Gigi Graciette, who co-hosted the program with Antonio Farre; and Dando y Dando ("Giving and Giving"), an audience and viewer participation game show hosted by Rafael Sigler.[10]
The first wave of major changes to Telemundo came on August 11, 1997, when the network revamped its prime time schedule by cutting an hour of its prime time telenovela lineup; concurrently, local newscasts on the network's owned-and-operated and affiliate stations were moved an hour earlier to 10:00 p.m. (or 9:00, depending on the time zone) – placing them directly against late-evening newscasts on Fox, WB, UPN and independent stations in many markets – followed by a late-evening national newscast produced by cable news channel CBS Telenoticias; movies were also added during the 8:00 to 10:00 p.m. Eastern time slot on certain weeknights to help bolster its late newscasts.[11]
1997–2001[edit]
On November 25, 1997, Liberty Media and Sony Pictures Entertainment purchased a majority interest in Telemundo from Reliance Capital Group for $539 million, beating out a bid made days earlier by an investment group led by Telemundo Group chairman Leon Black, who had already owned 40.3% of the network through Apollo Global Management and remained a minority partner in Telemundo Group through the purchase;[12][13] under the deal, Liberty acquired a 40% interest and Sony (which made its entry into domestic broadcasting ownership with the deal) acquired a 35% stake in Telemundo, with the remaining interest held by investment firms Apollo Global Management and Bastion Capital Fund. On November 25, 1997, several investors who held shares in Telemundo Group filed an injunction to block the sale in a Delaware Chancery Court, in order to investigate whether executives were shortchanging shareholders in accepting the offer; that request, as well as a separate injunction request by Univision Communications, were later rejected.[14]
After the sale received FCC approval on July 31, 1998,[15] Sony and Liberty formed a holding company that was operated as a 50/50 joint venture between both companies, Telemundo Communications Group. Helmed by yet another management team under the leadership of former CBS entertainment president Peter Tortorici as president and CEO and Nely Galán as president of entertainment, Telemundo explored avenues to attract the bilingual market.[16] The network then launched an image campaign using the slogan "Lo mejor de los dos Mundos" ("The Best of Both Worlds"), with several billboard ads being erected in cities such as Miami and San Francisco as part of the campaign, heralding a "new era" for Telemundo.
Tortorici dramatically overhauled Telemundo's schedule in an effort to boost its viewership among American Spanish language audiences, as its total audience share had slid from more than 40% early in the decade to less than 20% (and only a 13% share during prime time) by 1998. This "new era" broke from the conventional Spanish-language programming model, the changes made for the 1998–99 lineup included the complete removal of telenovelas from its prime time schedule, citing the inferior quality of the South American serial dramas that it had been acquiring compared to the Mexican serials from Televisa that were carried by Univision.[17] The revamped evening lineup that premiered on September 28, 1998 included several new sitcoms, traditional scripted dramas and game shows with higher production values, including several scripted shows that were remakes of English language series owned by Columbia TriStar Television (now Sony Pictures Television), to position the network as a younger-skewing alternative to Univision more acculturated to assimilated American Latinos. Among them were Angeles ("Angels"), a remake of Charlie's Angels; Un Angel en la Casa ("An Angel in the House"), a sitcom loosely based on Who's the Boss?; Solo en America ("Living in America"), a remake of One Day at a Time. Also added to the lineup were updated Spanish language versions of The Dating Game, The Newlywed Game and Candid Camera; and the police procedural Reyes y Rey ("Kings and King"). The network's existing prime time novelas were relegated to a three-hour block on weekday mornings, while movies were added in prime time on Tuesday and Thursday nights as part of the showcase "Cinemundo", featuring dubbed versions of recent American film releases (many of which were sourced from the Sony movie library).[18]
In addition, to better take advantage of the region's pool of writers and directors, Tortorici decided to migrate Telemundo's main base of operations – transferring its programming and management divisions – from Hialeah, Florida to a new facility in Santa Monica, California in December of that year, resulting in the hiring or transfer of approximately 45 employees; more than 300 other employees continued to be based at its Hialeah offices.[19] The changes proved to be disastrous as Telemundo's ratings for the overhauled prime time lineup sharply fell by 42% to an 8% audience share among Latino households against the telenovela-dominated lineup programmed by Univision (which held a roughly 91% share) in that slot by the February 1999 sweeps period; the network was even forced to air numerous commercials for free as part of contractual makegoods to advertisers, resulting in a loss of more than $1 million in potential revenue.[20]
After Tortoricci resigned from the network in July 1999, Telemundo tapped former Universal Television president Jim McNamara as its president and chief executive officer, and Alan Sokol as chief operating officer to helm its operations.[21] Their programming strategy reverted to a more traditional approach to Spanish-language television than the mainstream concept implemented by Tortoricci. The new team struck a programming agreement with TV Azteca for the U.S. rights to the Mexican broadcaster's novelas and other programming, and restored a two-hour block of telenovelas originating from Mexico, Colombia and Brazil – later expanded to three hours with the shift of its late local and national newscasts to the traditional 11:00 (or 10:00) p.m. time slot in 2000 – as part of its Monday through Friday prime time slate which resulted in the cancellation of Angeles and Reyes el Rey. Reality, entertainment and newsmagazine programs were also added to the schedule, while prime time movies were relegated to weekend evenings.[22]
In September 1999, Telemundo began transferring the bulk of its programming and marketing operations from its Santa Monica headquarters and consolidated all operations of the network at its offices in Hialeah. Most of the network's management staff migrated to the Hialeah facility including McNamara, Sokol and Galan, either on a temporary or long-term basis, with most other staff being given the option of either accepting the relocation offer or resigning from the network; some positions based at the Santa Monica facility were eliminated entirely, with around a dozen workers remaining at the West Coast office.[19]
During McNamara's tenure, Telemundo premiered shows such as Laura en América ("Laura in America"), a "conflict talk" show hosted by Peruvian lawyer Laura Bozzo; the telenovelas Yo Soy Betty, La Fea ("Ugly Betty", or literally translated as "I Am Betty, the Ugly"), starring Ana Maria Orozco; and a novela adaptation of the Brazilian comedy film Xica, starring Tais Araujo; A Oscuras Pero Encendidos ("In the Dark, but Turned On"), a talk show hosted by Paul Bouche; a game show Números Rojos ("Red Numbers"), hosted by Wilmer Ramirez; and the Argentine children's program Agrandaditos. It also acquired the rights to broadcast a weekly series from World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) on Saturday nights. The network also entered into a co-production agreement with Columbia TriStar International Television (now Sony Pictures Television International) to produce original telenovelas for Mexican audiences.[22][23][24] The network also launched Protagonistas ("Protagonists"), a staged, unscripted reality series that followed a group of 16 aspiring actors living together in a Miami television studio for several weeks, for the opportunity to win a role on one of the network's telenovelas.[25]
2001–2009[edit]




Telemundo's former logo used from 1999 to December 7, 2012.


In the summer of 2001, Sony, Liberty and Reliance announced that they would sell Telemundo Communications Group. Companies that expressed interest in acquiring the network included Viacom, the Hispanic Broadcasting Corporation, The Walt Disney Company and AOL Time Warner; NBC subsequently entered into negotiations to acquire the network and its related properties.[26][27]
On October 11, 2001, NBC (which itself would merge with Vivendi Universal a year-and-a-half later to become the present-day NBC Universal) purchased Telemundo Communications Group from Sony and Liberty Media for $1.98 billion (increasing to $2.7 billion by the sale's closure) and the assumption of $700 million in debt, in an equal cash and stock split by NBC parent General Electric. Upon the announcement, many media industry experts thought that NBC overpaid for Telemundo, given the network's lower Hispanic audience reach (attracting about 20% of all Hispanic viewers in the United States, while Univision had a reach of about 80%). Jim McNamara and Alan Sokol remained at the helm of the network after the acquisition was finalized on April 12, 2002.[26][27]
Under NBC, Telemundo brought greater emphasis to original programming and product placement, while the network's owned-and-operated stations in larger markets began producing their own early morning newscasts in an effort to become more competitive in their respective markets; the Telemundo "T" logo also received an overhaul, replacing the sphere with a curved outline which similarly represented a globe. Telemundo's main competitor, Univision, continued to beat the network in the ratings, although not in all time periods. In 2004, Telemundo Communications Group formed Telemundo Television Studios (now known as simply Telemundo Studios) in Miami, as part of its expansion of original programming through the acquisition of RTI Colombia's interest in their joint venture Telemundo-RTI, subsequently signing an agreement to acquire the operational assets of its international distributor, Tepuy International (now Telemundo International); the network spent $100 million per year on programming producing during the mid-2000s.[2]
After the NBC Universal merger, Telemundo ceased importing telenovelas from Latin America and start producing its own dramas, either independently or through co-production arrangements with other production companies. To that end, Telemundo partnered with Colombian-based producer RTI Colombia and Mexican production company Argos Comunicación. In an effort for its telenovelas – which follow the Mexican model – to be recognized by U.S. and Latin American audiences, Telemundo hired well-known actors and actresses from Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela, Argentina and Puerto Rico to star in its dramas; over time, Telemundo also began to hire American-born Hispanic actors and actresses who are fluent Spanish speakers. In 2005, McNamara retired as CEO of the network; he was replaced by Don Browne, who had previously served as president and general manager of NBC's Miami O&O (and WSCV sister station) WTVJ.
In March 2007, NBC Universal announced that it would restructure Telemundo's entertainment division in an effort to narrow Univision's ratings dominance.[28] The company also announced its intention to sell the original Telemundo station in Puerto Rico, WKAQ-TV, and Spanish independent station KWHY (channel 22, now a MundoMax affiliate) in Los Angeles in order to help finance its acquisition of Oxygen Media. On December 21, 2007, NBC Universal announced that it would no longer seek a buyer for WKAQ-TV, indicating that Telemundo Puerto Rico would remain within the NBC corporate umbrella.[29]
2011–present[edit]
In 2010, Comcast announced that it would acquire a 51% majority stake in NBC Universal for $6.5 billion; the deal was completed on January 28, 2011, with Comcast acquiring control of Telemundo as part of the deal.[30][31][32] In October 2011, Emilio Romano was appointed as president of Telemundo, a role he would handle until his abrupt resignation from the network in October 2013.[33]
On May 14, 2012, Telemundo announced that it would launch a new branding campaign that would include the debut of a new slogan and on-air identity, including the replacement of its framed "T" logo (a variant of the 1992-era design that had been introduced by the network in 1999), with a new logo featuring two partial red spheres forming the "T", described to "capture the duality of Telemundo’s audience, balancing the strong connection to their Latin roots with their contemporary mindset of living in the U.S." The new logo and graphics package debuted on-air on December 8 of that year.[34] Telemundo achieved ratings success during 2012, with the telenovela series Rosa Diamante ("Diamond Rose"; a remake of Enrique Torres' Perla Negra) and the Caracol TV-produced Pablo Escobar. That year, Telemundo debuted the "social novela" Secreteando on Facebook, with comments made on other social media websites.[35]
During the 2000s, Univision also lost several key on-air personalities to Telemundo, including longtime weekend news anchor Maria Antonieta Collins (who left to host the morning program Cada Dia), Primer Impacto anchor María Celeste Arrarás (who became the host of a similarly formatted newsmagazine, Al Rojo Vivo) and sports announcers Andrés Cantor (known to many Americans for his exuberant announcement of "Goal!" during football matches[36]) and Norberto Longo. By the middle of the decade, Univision overtook UPN and The WB – which shut down in September 2006 and were replaced by The CW, which Univision also outranks – as the fifth highest-rated network in total viewership; since then, it also sometimes posts higher viewership in the key age demographics of Adults 18–34 and Adults 18–49.
Other key on-air personalities that joined Telemundo from Univision or Televisa in the 2000s are Lucero, Pedro Fernandez, Kate del Castillo, Aracely Arámbula, Raúl González, Blanca Soto, Laura Flores, Ana María Canseco, Cristina Saralegui.
Continuing the momentum in 2013 were telenovelas La Patrona ("The Return") and El Señor de los Cielos ("The Lord of the Skies"),[37] and the musical competition series La Voz Kids ("The Voice Kids"; a Spanish language adaptation of The Voice franchise featuring children as contestants), hosted by Daisy Fuentes and Jorge Bernal, featuring musical coaches Paulina Rubio, Prince Royce and Roberto Tapia. With the debut of El Señor de los Cielos that spring, Telemundo also launched the "Super Series" format, a slate of action-oriented telenovelas – which usually air during the final hour of the network's prime time novela block – designed as a reinvention of the genre using the multiple-season continuity model common with English language drama series, shorter episode runs (between 60 and 80 episodes per season, compared to traditional single-season novelas, which produce between 100 and 200 episodes on average) and the incorporation of storylines more relatable to American audiences.[38]
These programs helped Telemundo decrease its ratings gap in the key demographic of Adults 18-49, decreasing the gap between the two networks by 54% between 2010 and 2015, with Telemundo even beating Univision four times during the 2014–2015 television season on nights when the former aired sports events and specials; the network also narrowed the ratings differentials with Univision in total prime time viewership from a gap of 1.2 million viewers in July 2013 to 238,000 in July 2015.[38] Telemundo also began improving its ratings during the 10:00 p.m. (Eastern Time) hour, following its transition from traditional novelas to the "Super Series" format, with El Señor de los Cielos posting some of the network's highest viewership for an entertainment program, when its second-season finale in 2014 drew 3.2 million total viewers.[37]
On May 13, 2014, during the network's 2014–15 upfront presentation at Frederick P. Rose Hall in New York City, Luis Silberwasser was named president of Telemundo Network, LLC, maintaining overall responsibilities for the Telemundo network and production division Telemundo Studios.[39]
On July 21, 2015, Telemundo beat Univision for the first time in a singular-night demographic, averaging 969,000 viewers and a .76 rating in the demographic (26K more viewers and a .2 higher share than the 943K and .74 earned by Univision's prime-time schedule); El Senor de los Cielos 3 ("Lord of the Skies 3") also beat the Televisa-produced novela Yo No Creo En los Hombres ("I Don't Trust Men Anymore") on Univision in the demographic during the 10:00 p.m. hour, with a 1.4 rating (over the 0.7 rating earned by Yo No Creo En Hombres) and was the most-watched television program among Adults 18-49 during the hour that evening. For the week of July 20–24, Telemundo came within 40,000 viewers of beating Univision in prime time viewership.[38] Overall, the network ended the 2014–15 season posting its highest average total prime time viewership against Univision with 1.46M, a 23% increase in total viewership yearly, compared to Univision's 2.29M and decrease of 21% yearly.[40][41]
Programming[edit]
Main articles: List of programs broadcast by Telemundo and List of telenovelas of Telemundo
As of 2015[update], Telemundo operates on a 147½-hour network programming schedule. Its base programming feed provides various types of general entertainment programming weekdays from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. and weekends from 8:00 to 9:30 (a portion which is occupied by the children's programming block, MiTelemundo, which features programs compliant with FCC educational programming requirements) and 11:00 to 1:00 a.m. Eastern and Pacific Time. A separate block of feature films (and occasionally, other entertainment programs) also airs overnights on Monday through Wednesdays from 3:30 to 5:00 a.m., Thursdays and Fridays from 3:00 to 5:00 a.m., and weekends from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Eastern and Pacific Time. All remaining time periods are filled with infomercials.
While Telemundo's owned-and-operated stations and affiliates largely rely on Telemundo's master schedule to fill their broadcast day, many of its stations also produce their own local programming (which may pre-empt certain programs within the base network schedule), usually in the form of newscasts and public affairs programs (production of local infotainment programming, and leasing of brokered programs such as direct response and religious content, is at the station's discretion). Many Telemundo stations usually air limited local news programming, which are commonly reserved for early and late evening timeslots on Monday through Friday nights; some Telemundo stations may also air newscasts on weekday mornings (these are mainly limited to the network's O&Os in larger markets) and/or on weekend evenings.
The majority of Telemundo's programming consists of first-run telenovelas and series, many of which are produced by the network itself through its Telemundo Studios unit; however, some shows broadcasts by the network are produced by outside companies (including Caracol Television and Promofilm). Telemundo's schedule does not incorporate situation comedies, although some comedy series have aired on the network in the past, particularly during the 1990s and early 2000s. Variety shows – a common format in Spanish language television in the U.S. and other countries – have had a limited presence on Telemundo's lineup in recent years; with La Voz Kids being the only such show appearing on the network as of July 2013. Two additional variety series debuted in 2015: Si Se Puede, an adaptation of the Armoza Formats celebrity talent competition franchise I Can Do That, and ¡Qué Noche! con Angelica y Raul ("What a Night! with Angelica and Raul"), a family-oriented series using the traditional Saturday evening variety program model that was created to fill part of the void opened up by the cancellation of Univision's Sabado Gigante.[38][42]
From 2010 to 2013, Telemundo utilized an off-time scheduling format for its prime time programming (similar to the "Turner Time" format used by TBS from 1981 to 2000), in which programs that aired weeknights from 8:00 to 11:00 p.m. (Eastern and Pacific Time) started on a three-minute delay – resulting from intentional overruns of the network's 7:00 p.m. program (Caso Cerrado: Edićion Estelar ("Case Closed: Special Edition")) into the 8:00 p.m. timeslot. As a result, until this format was discontinued, conventional "top-and-bottom" start times were not restored until the evening's final prime time program aired at 10:00 p.m. (Eastern and Pacific), allowing late local newscasts seen on some Telemundo stations to start at 11:00 p.m. (or 10:00 p.m. in the Central and Mountain Time Zones).
Daytime programming on weekdays features a mix of consisting of repeats of past Telemundo-produced telenovelas and acquired serials (which are re-edited as extended 90-minute and two-hour episodes) during the late morning and early afternoon hours, while newsmagazine, reality and court series (such as Caso Cerrado ("Case Closed") and Suelta La Sopa ("Tell Me What You Know")[43]) making up its afternoon programming. The network also regularly airs Spanish-dubbed English-language films (primarily those produced by American film studios such as Universal Pictures, Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures and Sony Pictures Entertainment) that make up much of the network's weekend afternoon and prime time lineup, as well as films natively produced in Spanish (imported from various Latin American countries) that it usually airs daily during the overnight hours; the network also airs films in place of regularly scheduled programming on select national holidays (such as Thanksgiving and Christmas).
English subtitles[edit]




On-screen bug used on programs captioned in Spanish and English.


Telemundo provides English subtitles via closed captioning primarily on weekdays from 7:00 to 11:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific Time, during the network's prime time lineup. The subtitles are transmitted over the CC3 caption channel in standard definition and the CS2 caption channel available on most digital tuners in high definition. The network produces the translations in-house, and intends them to attract Hispanic viewers who may not be fluent in Spanish as well as other non-Spanish speakers.[44][45] Programs that include English captions are identified on-air by a special digital on-screen graphic seen at the start of each episode, denoting the specific caption channels in which viewers can receive subtitles in either Spanish or English (see right).
Telemundo was the first Spanish-language network in the United States to incorporate English captions during its programming, beginning with the premieres of La Cenicienta ("Cinderella") and Amor Descarado ("Barefaced Love") on September 8, 2003;[45] this generated a small, loyal fan base among English-speaking viewers.[46] The subtitles were briefly discontinued without notice on October 14, 2008, citing budget cuts made by NBC Universal and the network's switch from analog to digital broadcasts; representatives for Telemundo also cited the need to concentrate resources on its core Spanish-speaking audience. However, the network soon reversed its decision due to demand by viewers in favor of the English subtitles,[46] which returned on all prime time novelas on March 30, 2009. The use of English captions was later adopted by Univision, which began airing them on its evening programming (primarily with its weeknight telenovelas, along with select weekend prime time series) on January 30, 2012, and (in the same manner as Telemundo) transmits them over the CC3 caption channel;[45] Azteca also transmits English language captions on certain programs.
Programs that include English-language captions during their original broadcast may also include them in repeat broadcasts airing outside of the network's prime time schedule after the program's original run on the network or, since 2012, as part of the network's late-night novela repeat block. Some programs (notably the defunct long-running erotic anthology Decisiones ("Decisions"), which the network now airs only in reruns), only include English captions in certain episodes, depending on when they were produced. Programs that use English captions are primarily consist of telenovelas, though a few shows outside the genre (such as the prime time court show Caso Cerrado: Edición Especial) are also transcribed in both languages. Availability of English subtitles is limited to the technical capacity of the local station, cable or satellite provider, or other outlet to disseminate them over the network feed.
News programming[edit]
Main article: Noticias Telemundo
The network operates a news division, Noticias Telemundo ("Telemundo News"), which produces a half-hour early evening flagship newscast, Noticiero Telemundo, that has aired daily for most of its run (Telemundo also produced a secondary newscast, Noticiero Telemundo Internacional, until 2011, which aired in place of late local newscasts on affiliates without their own news department or which opted to preempt regularly scheduled local newscasts on certain holidays). It also produces the morning news and lifestyle program Un Nuevo Día ("A New Day"), the late afternoon newsmagazine series Al Rojo Vivo con Maria Celeste ("Red Hot Live with Maria Celeste") and the Sunday morning talk show Enfoque ("In Focus"); the network previously produced weekend editions of Al Rojo Vivo and Noticiero Telemundo until 2007, which were replaced with feature films and reality-based series; the latter returned to a daily broadcast with the restoration of Saturday and Sunday editions on September 4, 2014.
The beginnings of the news division trace back to 1987, when the network debuted its first news program Noticiero Telemundo-HBC ("Telemundo-HBC News"), through an outsourcing agreement with the Miami-based Hispanic-American Broadcasting Corporation. The following year, Telemundo outsourced news production to CNN, which produced Noticiero Telemundo CNN ("Telemundo CNN News"), consisting of two Atlanta-based daily newscasts that were anchored by Jorge Gestoso and María Elvira Salazar.[47] When Salazar accepted a position as a reporter for Noticiero Univision in Miami, Chilean former Miss Universe Cecilia Bolocco joined Gestoso on the Telemundo newscast. The final incarnation produced in Atlanta was co-anchored by Patricia Janiot. Following the sale of its cable news channel Telenoticias to CBS Cable in late 1996, Telemundo entered into a content partnership with the channel to produce early-evening and prime time newscasts that would air on the broadcast network.
Former CBS News vice president Joe Peyronnin founded Telemundo's news division in 1999 and served as its executive vice president until 2006. Additional news programs were created in the wake of the September 11, 2001 attacks: Hoy en el Mundo ("Today in the World") on ABC News, anchored by Marian de la Fuente and Jose Diaz-Balart, debuted to inform viewers of national and international events. This program and its companion show En la Madrugada ("In Early Morning") were cancelled due to the much heralded arrival of Maria Antonieta Collins from Univision. Cada Dia with Maria Antonieta ("Every Day with Maria Antonieta") replaced these shows in September 2006; Collins continued to host the program along with the much recycled Diaz-Balart – who anchored the network's morning news program Noticiero Telemundo: Madrugada ("Telemundo News: Early Morning"), later to be anchored by Ana Patricia Candiani – as co-host. Cada Dia was cancelled in May 2008, after Collins announced that she would leave Telemundo when her contract expired in August of that year return to news anchoring and as a result of low ratings for the program;[48] it was replaced by a new morning show called ¡Levántate! ("Get Up"), another hybrid news and lifestyle format, which was broadcast out of the studios of WKAQ-TV, and initially produced by Telemundo Puerto Rico. The hybrid program, which was retitled Un Nuevo Día in July 2012, originally included local participation of the network's Miami owned-and-operated station WSCV from its studios in the suburb of Miramar, Florida, and bureaus located in New York City, Los Angeles and Mexico City. The show was later revamped, dropping the local cut-ins and relocating its production operations to Telemundo's headquarters in Hialeah, Florida in February 2011.[49][50][51]
Sports[edit]
Main article: Telemundo Deportes
The network also maintains a sports division, Telemundo Deportes, which superseded the network-operated division Deportes Telemundo when NBCUniversal created the current division within its NBC Sports Group in May 2015.[52] The division, which is responsible for the production of sports content on Telemundo and NBC Universo, produces association football matches for the network from Liga MX, as well as CONCACAF Champions League tournament events (including Olympic qualifying matches). Through broadcasting agreements with NBC Sports, Telemundo also holds the Spanish-language broadcast rights to the Summer and Winter Olympic Games and Spanish play-by-rights to association football matches from the Premier League. The network also produces Boxeo Telemundo, a weekly late-night boxing series that airs on most Friday nights (except during the summer) showcasing fights from up-and-coming boxing talents.
In 2014, Deportes Telemundo acquired the Spanish language rights to broadcast the FIFA Men's and Women's World Cup for a reported $600 million. The deal, which began with the 2015 Women's World Cup and runs through 2026, includes rights to associated FIFA-sanctioned tournaments (including the FIFA U-17 and U-20 World Cups, and the FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup), which will be telecast on Telemundo and NBC Universo.[38][39]
In addition, the division also produces three weekly sports-related talk and magazine programs for Telemundo: flagship sports highlight/discussion program Titulares Telemundo ("Telemundo Headlines"), which airs on Saturday and Sunday evenings (and is offered to Telemundo stations on a half-hour tape delay to accommodate local late-evening newscasts); the male-oriented Sunday afternoon sports/lifestyle program Ritmo Deportivo ("Rhythm Sports"; which debuted in 2003, and briefly aired on Saturdays from September 2013 to April 2015); and the late-night sports talk show Titulares y Mas ("Headlines and More"; which originally aired on Thursday and Friday nights until 2014, when it expanded into a five-night-a-week broadcast).
Children's programming[edit]
Main articles: Qubo and NBC Kids
For much of its history, the bulk of NetSpan/Telemundo's children's programming has been derived of mainly live-action and animated programming from American and international producers, with most consisting of dubbed versions of series natively produced in English. In September 1995, Telemundo launched a Saturday morning program block, Telemundo Infantil ("Telemundo Kids"), which was developed via input from viewers on what they wanted to be featured in a children's show.[10]
On September 15, 1998, Telemundo entered into a programming agreement with Nickelodeon to carry the cable channel's programming as part of a morning children's program block, "Nickelodeon en Telemundo" ("Nickelodeon on Telemundo"). The block, which debuted on November 9, 1998, consisted of Spanish dubs of Nickelodeon's animated series aimed at older children and preschool-oriented programs aired by the channel's Nick Jr. block (such as Rugrats, Aaahh!!! Real Monsters, Hey Arnold!, Rocko's Modern Life and Blue's Clues); the block ran on weekdays until September 5, 2000, when it was relegated to Saturday and Sunday mornings in order to make room for Hoy En El Mundo (lit. "Today in the World" or "In the World Today"); Nickelodeon's contract with Telemundo ended in November 2001, following the network's acquisition by NBC.[53][54]
In 2005, Telemundo launched a weekend morning block called "Telemundo Kids". The two most watched shows were Dora The Explorer and Jacob Two-Two. Both of these shows were very popular. This also marks the first time the first time that both of these 2 shows were dubbed in Spanish, and the first time that Jacob Two-Two aired in the United States. The block lasted until September 16, 2006. However, out of all the shows that aired in the Telemundo Kids block, Jacob Two-Two continued to air on Telemundo (it was just transferred to the Qubo block).
On September 16, 2006, Telemundo debuted a weekend morning block aimed at younger children as part of the Qubo endeavor, which was formed through a partnership between NBC Universal, Ion Media Networks, Teletoon, Nelvana, Scholastic Media, Classic Media and its subsidiary Big Idea Productions. It felt a little bit similar to the Telemundo Kids block since Jacob Two-Two also aired on the Qubo block. The Qubo block featured Spanish dubs of programs seen on its companion blocks on NBC, Ion Television, and its companion 24/7 network (alternatively known as Qubo Channel), with Telemundo's Qubo block airing on Saturday and Sunday mornings in 90-minute blocks.[55]
On March 28, 2012, NBCUniversal announced an agreement with sister cable channel PBS Kids Sprout (now Sprout, which was integrated into NBCUniversal through its 2011 acquisition by the channel's existing part-owner Comcast) to produce and program new weekend morning preschool blocks for NBC and Telemundo. The block, MiTelemundo, premiered on July 7, 2012 and also airs Saturday and Sunday mornings; as with its predecessors, it consists of Spanish dubbed versions of programs seen on its sister broadcast network's Saturday morning block, NBC Kids, which debuted on the same date.[56][57][58][59][60] With NBC Kids being replaced with Litton Entertainment's The More You Know E/I block on NBC by September 25, 2016, MiTelemundo retained on television with the same programming from the former NBC Kids block.
Specials[edit]
Telemundo holds the broadcast rights to several annual specials and award show telecasts. From 2003 to 2014, the network held the Spanish language rights to two of the three pageants organized by the Miss Universe Organization: the Miss Universe and Miss USA pageants, through NBC's existing contractual agreement for the pageant. Although parent NBCUniversal held half-ownership in the organization at the time, the rights were obtained by Univision Communications in February 2015 with the intent to move the Miss Universe and Miss USA telecasts to UniMás (Univision later terminated the contract that July following now-former part-owner Donald Trump's remarks in his speech declaring his Republican Presidential campaign disparaging Mexicans immigrating into the United States as being mostly made up of those involved in criminal activity, later culminating in Trump's sale of the Miss Universe Organization to WME-IMG in September 2015, after NBCUniversal sold its interest).[61][62][63][64][65][66]
Since 1999, Telemundo has served as the official U.S. broadcaster of the Billboard Latin Music Awards ("Premios Billboard a la Música Latina"), an offshoot of the Billboard Music Awards honoring songs from Latin music artists during the previous year that are chosen by viewer voting.[67] In 2012, the network also debuted Premios Tu Mundo ("Your World Awards"), a viewer-decided awards show honoring the achievements of Hispanics and Latinos in media, maintaining a format similar to the People's Choice Awards with categories pertaining to television, film, music, fashion and sports.[68][69]
In October 2015, through a licensing agreement with Dick Clark Productions signed in July 2014, Telemundo became the originating broadcaster of the Latin American Music Awards ("Premios de la Música Latinoamericana"), a Latin music-focused version of the American Music Awards.[70][71]
Stations[edit]
Main articles: List of Telemundo affiliates (table), List of Telemundo affiliates (by U.S. state), and NBC Owned Television Stations
As of October 2017[update], Telemundo has 19 owned-and-operated stations, and current and pending affiliation agreements with 70 additional television stations encompassing 49 states, the District of Columbia and the U.S. possession of Puerto Rico;[72][73] this makes Telemundo the largest American Spanish language broadcast television network by total number of affiliates. The network has an estimated national reach of 61% of all households in the United States (or 190,605,981 Americans with at least one television set).
While Telemundo does not have any over-the-air stations in a few major markets with relatively sizeable populations of Hispanic and Latino residents, most notably Kansas City, Missouri (which receives only rimshot coverage from affiliate KNPG-LD3 in the adjacent St. Joseph market), Cleveland, Ohio and Raleigh, North Carolina, it conversely maintains affiliations in several markets where Univision currently does not have over-the-air availability, including New Orleans (KGLA-DT), Indianapolis (WDNI-CD)[74] Boise (KKJB) and Richmond (WZTD-LD). Telemundo maintains affiliations with low-power stations (broadcasting either in analog or digital) in a few markets, such as Orlando (WTMO-CD), Milwaukee (WYTU-LD), Tampa (WRMD-CD), Albuquerque (KTEL-CD and its repeater K46GY) and Minneapolis (KMBD-LD). In some markets, including the former two mentioned, these stations also maintain digital simulcasts on a subchannel of a full-power television station, usually (though not in all cases) one that is owned or managed with the Telemundo outlet.
The network also maintains a sizeable number of subchannel-only affiliations, consisting of a mix of stations in cities located within and outside of the 50 largest Nielsen-designated markets; the largest Telemundo subchannel affiliate by market size is WKTB-CD in Norcross, Georgia (serving the Atlanta market), which carries the network on its second digital subchannel. In other areas of the U.S., Telemundo provides a national cable network feed that is distributed directly to cable, satellite and IPTV providers as an alternative method of distribution in markets without either the availability or the demand for a locally based owned-and-operated or affiliate station.
Currently outside of the network's core O&O group, News-Press & Gazette Company is the largest operator of Telemundo stations by numerical total, owning or providing services to eight primary affiliates (all but one of which are simulcast on subchannels of the group's Big Four network stations) and four additional subchannel-only affiliates); ZGS Communications is the largest operator of Telemundo stations in terms of overall market reach, owning ten Telemundo-affiliated stations (including affiliates in larger markets such as Tampa, Orlando, Boston, Hartford and Washington, D.C.).
Related services[edit]
Current sister channels[edit]
Universo[edit]
Main article: Universo (TV network)
Universo is an American digital cable and satellite television network that is aimed at Latinos between the ages of 18 and 49, featuring a mix of sports, scripted and reality series and music programming (including programs that originated on Telemundo and other NBCUniversal-owned cable networks). It was originally launched on October 10, 1993 as GEMS Television, under the ownership by Empresas 1BC, featuring programs aimed at Latino females. The network was as GEMS Television by former owner and later co-owned with Cox Communications the following year.
Telemundo parents Sony Pictures Entertainment and Liberty Media purchased GEMS in 2001, and relaunched it as mun2 (a portmanteau pun of Telemundo and "dos", the Spanish word for "2", though intended to reflect the "two worlds" that Latino Americans live in), a network featuring a mix of Spanish and English language programs (including some Spanish-dubbed versions of American programs and series incorporating Spanish language subtitles) aimed at adults ages 18 to 49.[75] On December 24, 2014, NBCUniversal announced that mun2 would be rebranded as NBC Universo – shifting it under the NBC umbrella – on February 1, 2015, to coincide with its Spanish-language broadcast of Super Bowl XLIX.[75]
Telemundo Puerto Rico[edit]
Main article: Telemundo Puerto Rico (TV channel)
Telemundo Puerto Rico is a digital cable and satellite network that originally launched in December 1994 as Telenoticias, a Spanish language cable news channel originally serving Latin America (and broadcasting in Spanish and Portuguese) that was developed by Telemundo in partnership with Grupo Clarín (owner of Argentina-based broadcaster Artear), Spain-based Antena 3 and Reuters.[76] Due to struggles in obtaining sufficient viewership and disagreements between its co-owners, the partnership sold Telenoticias to CBS – which rebranded the network as "CBS Telenoticias" – in June 1996; with that sale, the network expanded across the Americas, with distribution in 22 countries. In 1998, CBS later sold Telenoticias back to Telemundo parents Sony Pictures Entertainment and Liberty Media,[77] which subsequently relaunched the network as the bilingual entertainment channel Telemundo Internacional in 2000. In 2006, the channel was reformatted as Telemundo Puerto Rico, becoming a national superstation feed of San Juan O&O WKAQ-TV.
TeleXitos[edit]
Main article: TeleXitos
TeleXitos is a digital multicast network that was originally launched by the network's parent division Telemundo Television Group in January 2012 as Exitos TV. In its original format, the network primarily featured reruns of telenovelas previously aired on Telemundo, and was exclusive to Telemundo's owned-and-operated stations.[78] The network adopted its current name on December 1, 2014, when it was relaunched with a new focus toward Spanish-dubbed reruns of action and adventure series as well as feature films sourced primarily from the content library of corporate sister NBCUniversal Television Distribution, in addition to featuring select programs from other distributors.[79]
Video-on-demand services[edit]
Telemundo maintains several video on demand services for delayed viewing of the network's programming, including its TV Everywhere service Telemundo Now; a traditional VOD service called Telemundo on Demand, which is carried on most traditional cable and IPTV providers (and like the video-on-demand television services provided by the other U.S. broadcast networks, disallows fast forwarding of accessed content); and via Hulu and iTunes through content deals with those services. Through its ownership by Comcast, the network's programming is also available through Xfinity on Demand.[80] Catalogged episodes of past telenovelas seen on the network are also available on DramaFever, a streaming service that had originally exclusively focused on television shows and movies imported from various Asian countries, through a distribution deal signed on December 13, 2013.[81]
Telemundo Now[edit]
On October 22, 2013, Telemundo launched "Telemundo Now", a multi-platform streaming service (which derived its name from that of a similar TV Everywhere service operated by sister network Bravo, "Bravo Now"), originally encompassing a dedicated streaming portal at TelemundoNow.com and a mobile app for smartphones and tablet computers supporting the iOS and Android platforms. Recent full-length episodes of the network's shows as well as specials are usually made available on Telemundo Now (as well as Telemundo on Demand) the day after their original broadcast to authenticated subscribers of participating pay television providers (such as Comcast, AT&T U-verse, Optimum, Charter Communications, Cox Communications, DirecTV, Dish Network, Mediacom, Suddenlink Communications and Verizon FiOS) using an ISP account via an authenticated user login. The service also offers special features like "Mi Lista," viewers can catalogue their favorite shows for fast access and easily resume play to pick up right where they left off.[82][83][84]
Telemundo HD[edit]
Telemundo's master feed is transmitted in 1080i high definition, the native resolution format for NBCUniversal's U.S. television properties. However, twelve Telemundo-affiliated stations (including a standard definition simulcast of San Francisco O&O KSTS that is carried on a subchannel of sister station KNTV) transmit the network's programming in 720p HD, while 31 other affiliates owned by various companies carry the network feed in 480i standard definition[72] either due to technical considerations for affiliates of other major networks that carry Telemundo programming on a digital subchannel or because a primary feed Telemundo affiliate has not yet upgraded their transmission equipment to allow content to be presented in HD.
Telemundo became the first national Spanish-language broadcaster in the U.S. to provide its prime time programming in high definition through the network and its local stations (nine years after the major English language broadcast networks began their conversion to HD) with the launch of its simulcast feed, Telemundo HD, on April 23, 2009, with that year's edition of the Billboard Latin Music Awards as its inaugural HD broadcast. Concurrently, Telemundo's owned-and-operated television stations in nine markets (New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Dallas-Fort Worth, San Francisco, Houston, Miami, Las Vegas, and San Juan) became the first to begin broadcasting the network's programming in HD; the remaining O&Os upgraded their digital signals to allow the transmission of high definition content over the next twelve months, while its affiliated stations gradually followed suit over a four-year period. The network's scripted prime time telenovelas became the first regularly scheduled Telemundo shows to upgrade to the format, beginning with Mas Sabe El Diablo ("Falling Angel"), which premiered in September 2009.[85]
All of the network's first-run entertainment and sports programming, as well as specials and select acquired programs, have been presented in HD since 2012 (with the current exception of archived programs that were made prior to 2009 – such as dubbed versions of Criss Angel Mindfreak and World's Most Amazing Videos ("Videos Más Asombrosos del Mundo") – and were originally produced in 4:3 standard definition, as well as most older Mexican-produced feature films). The weekend morning MiTelemundo E/I block has also been broadcast in HD since its debut in July 2012.
As of September 1, 2016, Telemundo, along with its competitor, Univision, has not have its presentation converted to a 16:9 presentation (except for sports events), and continues to broadcast in a 4:3 presentation. On October 27, 2016, Al Rojo Vivo became the first program to be presented in a 16:9 format, beginning Telemundo's transition to such presentation.
Controversies[edit]
SAG-AFTRA[edit]
On February 9, 2016, NBC Universal, Telemundo's parent company, faced claims by SAG-AFTRA of operating under a double standard between its Spanish-language and English-language talent at NBC and Telemundo. In their response, the network released a statement claiming they are “committed to making Telemundo a great place to work for our employees and will continue to invest in them to ensure their salaries and working conditions are competitive with the rest of the broadcasting industry in accordance with market size and station revenues.”
A few days later on February 13, 2016 SAG-AFTRA came back and added that Telemundo had been treating its employees like “second-class professionals” given that many actors do not receive basic workplace guarantees that SAG-AFTRA contracts provide, such as fair pay, water breaks, health insurance and residuals. At that time, Telemundo president Luis Silberwasser responded saying that SAG-AFTRA asked for recognition of the union as the bargaining agent for employees — rather than seeking a vote by employees. However, SAG-AFTRA claimed that intimidation tactics had been taking place within the network to keep employees from unionizing and that they believe “there is no such thing as a ‘fair vote’ when workers are afraid for their careers and livelihoods, and live with the fear of retaliation if they are seen as actively wanting to unionize. SAG-AFTRA wants to ensure full protection for workplace democracy and performers’ rights to choose through a truly fair process.”[86]
In August 2016, Telemundo once again found itself up against the union when the network refused to air an ad placed by SAG-AFTRA detailing the unfair wage gap and lack of benefits Telemundo employees face as opposed to unionized performers at NBCUniversal. The ad was set to air during the network’s premiere people’s choice awards Premios Tu Mundo but was never placed into rotation. A Telemundo spokesperson responded saying, “After legal review, we have concluded the ad did not pass legal standards for issue-based advertisement.” Meanwhile, other Spanish-language networks such as MegaTV and Estrella TV aired the ad nationwide.[87]
SAG-AFTRA continued to stand its ground, stating that "Telemundo's decision to censor 30 seconds of truthful commentary about its working conditions shows just how averse it is to having a transparent discussion about its refusal to fairly compensate Spanish-speaking performers."[87]
2016 presidential election[edit]
On May 28, 2016, filmmaker Andrew Marcus caught a camera man from Telemundo filming a #NeverTrump protest in San Diego. According to the filmmaker, the protest was staged. L. Brent Bozell III, the president of Media Research Center responded by demanding Telemundo to apologize to Donald Trump and to fire the crew involved with the incident. Meanwhile, Ken Oliver-Méndez, the director of MRC Latino, described that the incident as a "self-inflicted wound on Telemundo's credibility." Telemundo responded to Oliver-Méndez by claiming that "the integrity of the broadcast was not compromised since the material was not used by the Network news team." Telemundo also claimed that the network is "known for its balance and accuracy,” and that it “did not, nor would it ask any full-time or temporary worker to stage events.”[88][89]
International broadcasts[edit]
Mexico[edit]
Telemundo programming is available in Mexico through affiliates in markets located within proximity to the Mexico–United States border (such as owned-and-operated stations KHRR/Tucson, Arizona and KTLM/Rio Grande City; and affiliates KESE-LP-KECY-DT4/Yuma, KTDO/El Paso and KGNS-DT3/Laredo), whose signals are readily receivable over-the-air in border areas of northern Mexico. The network also has a Mexico-based affiliate XHAS-TDT in Tijuana (owned by Tele Nacional S. de RL de CV, and operated by U.S.-based Entravision Communications), which primarily serves American viewers in the adjacent San Diego market.
On March 18, 2008, Grupo Televisa and NBC Universal announced a ten-year multiplatform agreement that would allow 1,000 hours of Telemundo programming, including news; entertainment; specials and sports, to be broadcast over both Televisa's free-to-air channels, as well as its co-owned cable provider SKY México starting that April. The deal also included plans to launch a Telemundo channel that would be operated as a joint venture between both companies; the Mexican cable-satellite version of the network launched in August 2009. NBC Universal had considered launching a Mexican version of Telemundo as early as 2005, which led to a legal battle between it and TV Azteca over allegations that Azteca "engaged in the wrongful use of force" to shut down production of the Telemundo-produced reality singing competition series Quinceañera: Mama Quiero Ser Artista ("Sweet 15: Mom, I Want to Be an Artist") in Mexico and a news story featured on an Azteca news program that accused then-NBC Universal parent General Electric and Grupo Casa Saba of fraud and corporate corruption with the intent to torpedo the approval of a license application by Telemundo and Grupo Xtra to operate a television network in Mexico.[90][91]
See also[edit]


Miami portal
Companies portal
Hispanic and Latino American portal



List of Spanish-language television networks in the United States
List of United States television networks

References[edit]


^ "Breaking News - In Landmark Move, NBC Universal Television Group Signs Development Deal With Galan Entertainment For Production Of Telenovelas In English Across Its Many Networks". The Futon Critic (Press release). February 27, 2006 – via NBC Universal Television Group. 
^ a b Meg James (July 26, 2007). "NBC tacks on Telemundo oversight to Gaspin's tasks". Los Angeles Times. Tribune Publishing. Retrieved May 14, 2010. 
^ "Legal corporate english". Telemundo. Retrieved February 3, 2009. 
^ Zachary S. Fagenson (June 23, 2011). "Telemundo Plans To Tape 1100 Hours Of Telenovelas In Miami". Miami Today. 
^ Cynthia Littleton (July 30, 2013). "How to Build a Better Telenovela". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. 
^ "Corporate Information". Telemundo. Retrieved February 3, 2009. 
^ Felix Gutierrez (June 1, 1986). "Spanish Media in L.A. on Upswing". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved October 14, 2014. 
^ "TELEMUNDO - The Museum of Broadcast Communications". Museum of Broadcast Communications. Retrieved April 27, 2010. 
^ Claudia Puig (May 27, 1992). "Univision President Bolts to Rival Telemundo". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ a b Claudia Puig (June 3, 1995). "New Focus for Telemundo Network". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Kevin Baxter (July 19, 1997). "Telemundo, KVEA-TV Will Revamp Nighttime Schedule". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Marla Matzer (November 25, 1997). "Telemundo Agrees to Be Acquired by Sony, Liberty". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "COMPANY TOWN : Group Bids for Rest of Telemundo". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Bloomberg News. November 20, 1997. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "Telemundo Holders Sue to Stop Sale". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Bloomberg News. November 26, 1997. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "BRIEFLY / COMPANY TOWN ANNEX: FCC Approves Sale of Telemundo". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Bloomberg News. August 1, 1998. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Sallie Hofmeister (August 14, 1998). "Company Town: New Executives Tapped to Head Telemundo Network". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Kevin Baxter (September 21, 1998). "Spanish-Language Networks Seek Wider Niche". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Kevin Baxter (June 20, 1998). "Telemundo Changes Format to U.S.-Style Dramas, Sitcoms". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ a b Kevin Baxter (August 25, 1999). "Telemundo Moves Operations to Florida". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Kevin Baxter (March 5, 1999). "After Lineup Change, Telemundo Plunges in the February Ratings". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Kevin Baxter (July 8, 1999). "Low-Rated Telemundo Gets New CEO". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ a b Kevin Baxter (May 18, 1999). "Ailing Telemundo Seeks Cure by Adopting Proven Format". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Mary Sutter (May 16, 2000). "Telemundo sets fall sked". Variety. Cahners Business Information. Retrieved February 24, 2008. 
^ Dana Calvo (May 16, 2000). "Telemundo Has a New Game Plan". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Dana Calvo (May 15, 2001). "Telemundo Takes a Cue From 'Survivor'". Los Angeles Times. Tribune Publishing. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ a b "NBC speaks Spanish". CNN Money. Time Warner. October 11, 2001. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ a b Meg James (October 12, 2001). "NBC to Acquire Telemundo Network for $1.98 Billion". Los Angeles Times. Tribune Publishing. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "Telemundo divisions to be revamped". Variety. Reed Business Information. March 21, 2007. 
^ WKAQ-TV "Telenoticias a las 5:00 P.M." in a short message by Don Browne (NBC/Telemundo Network president).
^ "Comcast, NBC U Merger a Done Deal". Variety. Reed Business Information. January 29, 2011. 
^ "Comcast-NBCU Deal Done: $30B Later, Comcast Is Proud Owner of the Peacock". The Wrap. The Wrap Media, LLC. January 29, 2011. 
^ "Comcast Takes Over NBC Universal After Long Review". ABC News. The Walt Disney Company. January 29, 2011. 
^ Alex Ben Block (October 4, 2013). "Emilio Romano Suddenly Departs Telemundo". The Hollywood Reporter. Prometheus Global Media. 
^ Veronica Villafañe (May 14, 2012). "Telemundo unveils new logo, rebrands network". Media Moves. 
^ "Telemundo Pitches Power of Homegrown Programming". Broadcasting & Cable. NewBay Media. May 6, 2013. p. 14.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ Alan Siegel (October 10, 2013). "In the U.S., Soccer Has a Distinctive Voice, and It Belongs to Andrés Cantor". Tablet. Nextbook. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ a b John Consoli (April 21, 2015). "MBPT Spotlight: Telemundo Marketing Effort Aims to Draw Young Viewers to 'Super Series'". Broadcasting & Cable. NewBay Media. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ a b c d e Rene Rodriguez. "Telemundo: revitalized and stronger than ever". Miami Herald. The McClatchy Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ a b "Telemundo Slate Includes New Novelas, Musical Competition Series & More". Deadline.com. Penske Media Corporation. May 13, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Rick Kissell (July 22, 2015). "Telemundo Notches Ratings Milestone in Beating Univision for the Night". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "Telemundo closes historic gap on Univision thanks to its bloody 'narco-novelas'". Fox News Latino. Fox News Network, LLC. Associated Press. October 28, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Veronica Villafañe (November 6, 2015). "Telemundo premieres Saturday night variety show". Media Moves. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "Telemundo anuncia nuevo programa "Suelta la sopa"". Diario Las Américas. Retrieved July 14, 2014. 
^ Allan Johnson (September 14, 2003). "In subtitles it's `Ooh-la-la'". Chicago Tribune. Tribune Publishing. Retrieved November 8, 2015. 
^ a b c "Commentary: Telemundo will use English captions". Quickstart.clari.net. United Press International. September 7, 2003. Retrieved April 27, 2010. 
^ a b "Telenovelas: Doña Barbara And "The Picture In My Head"". Telenovelas-carolina.Blogspot.com. August 5, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2010. 
^ Victor Valle (March 24, 1988). "Cable News Network Agrees to Produce a Spanish Newscast". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ In an interview in "People En Espanol".
^ Veronica Villafañe (November 10, 2010). "Telemundo moves morning show to Miami". Media Moves. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Veronica Villafañe (February 25, 2011). "Telemundo revamps morning show". Media Moves. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Veronica Villafañe (July 12, 2012). "Telemundo rebrands morning show, actress debuts as co-host". Media Moves. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "Upfronts 2015: NBC Deportes Ramps Up". Multichannel News. NewBay Media. May 16, 2015. 
^ "Telemundo, Nickelodeon in pact". Advertising Age. Crain Communications. September 15, 1998. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Richard Katz (October 23, 1998). "Telemundo deal: Nick in Spanish". Variety. Cahners Business Information. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Ed Robertson (August 24, 2006). "Qubo, for English- and Spanish-speaking youngsters". Media Life Magazine. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "NBC Will Launch NBC Kids, a New Saturday Morning Preschool Block Programmed by Sprout®, Saturday, July 7". MarketWatch (Press release). March 28, 2012. Retrieved November 8, 2015. 
^ Jon Weisman (March 28, 2012). "NBC to launch Saturday kids block". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved November 8, 2015. 
^ Lindsay Rubino (March 28, 2012). "NBC, With Assist From Sprout, to Launch Saturday Morning Preschool Block". Multichannel News. NewBay Media. Retrieved November 8, 2015. 
^ Nellie Andreeva (March 28, 2012). "NBC Launches Preschool Saturday Block Programmed By Sprout". Deadline.com. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved November 8, 2015. 
^ "Telemundo anuncia nuevo bloque infantil "Mi Telemundo!"". Primera Hora. GFR Media LLC. October 24, 2012. Retrieved November 8, 2015. 
^ Jin Rutenberg (June 22, 2002). "Three Beauty Pageants Leaving CBS for NBC". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "NBC Buys Rights to Three Pageants". Los Angeles Times. Tribune Publishing. Bloomberg News. June 25, 2002. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Veronica Villafañe (January 29, 2015). "Miss Universe leaves Telemundo for Univision deal". Media Moves. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Armando Tinoco (January 28, 2015). "Miss Universe 2015 Moves To Univision As Telemundo Loses Rights To Air Beauty Pageant". Latin Times. IBT Media. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Frazier Moore (June 25, 2015). "Univision Dropping Miss USA Pageant Over Trump Comments". ABC News. The Walt Disney Company. Associated Press. 
^ Lisa Gutierrez (June 25, 2015). "Univision cuts ties with Miss Universe over Donald Trump's 'insulting remarks about Mexican immigrants'". Kansas City Star. The McClatchy Company. Associated Press. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "Production of Telemundo's Latin Music Award Extravaganza Gets Bigger and Better". Hispanic PR Wire. April 25, 2003. 
^ Carolina Moreno (August 31, 2012). "Tu Mundo Awards: Telenovela Stars Light Up The Blue Carpet At Telemundo's New Awards Show". The Huffington Post. AOL. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "Telemundo Media's First-Ever "Premios Tu Mundo" to Air Live Tonight At 8PM/ET". NBCUniversal (Press release). August 31, 2012. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Alex Ben Block (July 30, 2014). "Telemundo Will Produce a Spanish-Language American Music Awards in 2015". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Jessica Lucia Roiz (September 2, 2015). "Latin American Music Awards 2015: Telemundo Announces Hispanic Version Of AMAs To Debut This Fall". Latin Times. IBT Media. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ a b "Stations for Network - Telemundo". RabbitEars. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "Network Profile: Telemundo". Station Index. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "WDNI to Become First Local Spanish-Language Station in Indianapolis". TVSpy. Mediabistro Holdings. March 6, 2013. 
^ a b Cynthia Littleton (November 4, 2014). "Spanish-Language Cabler Mun2 to Relaunch as NBC Universo". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved December 25, 2014. 
^ "Company Town Annex". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. January 26, 1994. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Mary Sutter (February 2, 2000). "Telemundo buys CBS/Telenoticias". Daily Variety. p. 4. 
^ "Exitos TV Independent Programming 1st Quarter Report". Comcast (Press release). October 28, 2013. 
^ Diana Marszalek (December 1, 2014). "Telemundo Stations Debut Classic TV Diginet". TVNewsCheck. NewsCheck Media. Retrieved January 26, 2015. 
^ Erik Sass (March 7, 2011). "Comcast Launches Xfinity Spanish-Language VOD". MediaDailyNews. MediaPost Communications. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Todd Spangler (December 13, 2013). "NBCU's Telemundo Sets Streaming Deal for Telenovelas with DramaFever (Exclusive)". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Amanda Kondolojy (October 22, 2013). "Telemundo Now App Offers TV Everywhere". TV by the Numbers (Press release). Zap2It (Tribune Digital Ventures). Retrieved November 7, 2015 – via Telemundo. 
^ "Telemundo Media Kicks Off TV Everywhere Via App". Online Media Daily. MediaPost Communications. October 22, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "Telemundo Media Launches TV Everywhere". TVNewsCheck. NewsCheck Media. October 22, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ Richard Lawler (April 2, 2009). "Telemundo Goes HD". Engadget. AOL. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ McNary, Dave (13 February 2016). "SAG-AFTRA, Telemundo Unionization Battle Heats Up". Variety. Retrieved 13 February 2016. 
^ a b Handel, Jonathan (29 August 2016). "Telemundo Refuses to Air SAG-AFTRA Ad About Language Equity". Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 30 August 2016. 
^ Chapman, Michael (1 June 2016). "Bozell to Telemundo: Immediately Apologize to Trump and Fire All Involved in San Diego Staging Incident". CNS News. Retrieved 2 June 2016. 
^ Reisman, Sam. "Conservative Media Watchdog Accuses Telemundo of Staging the News — So Did They?". www.mediaite.com. Retrieved 3 June 2016. 
^ "Telemundo Files Claim to Counter Azteca's Suit". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Reuters. October 6, 2006. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 
^ "GE accuses Mexico's TV firms of Telemundo plot". Los Angeles Times. Times Mirror Company. Reuters. December 12, 2006. Retrieved November 7, 2015. 


External links[edit]

Official website
Crossover - Telemundo's bilingual website
Telemundo International
Telemundo (from the Museum of Broadcast Communications website)
Club De Noveleras (Bilingual)
lo mejor de lo mejor (Bilingual)





Telemundo's telenovelas











v
t
e


Telemundo's 2001–2002 telenovelas (USA)






Amantes del Desierto












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2002–2003 telenovelas (USA)






Vale Todo
Cara o Cruz
Daniela
La Venganza












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2003–2004 telenovelas (USA)






La Venganza
Ladrón de Corazones
Amor Descarado
Sofía Dame Tiempo
El Alma Herida
Ángel de la Guarda: Mi Dulce Compañía
Pasión de Gavilanes












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2004–2005 telenovelas (USA)






Amor Descarado
Pasión de Gavilanes
Prisionera
Gitanas
Los plateados
¡Anita, no te rajes!
La Mujer en el Espejo
Te Voy a Enseñar a Querer












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2005–2006 telenovelas (USA)






La Mujer en el Espejo
Te Voy a Enseñar a Querer
La Ley del Silencio
Amarte Así
El Cuerpo del Deseo
Corazón partido
Tierra de Pasiones
Amores de Mercado
La Viuda de Blanco












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2006-2007 telenovelas (USA)



7pm/6c



La Tormenta
La Viuda de Blanco
Dame Chocolate





8pm/7c



El Cuerpo del Deseo
Tierra de Pasiones
Marina
Madre Luna





9pm/8c



Amores de Mercado
Zorro
La Esclava Isaura
Victoria





10pm/9c



Amor Mío
Sin Vergüenza
Pecados Ajenos












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2007-2008 telenovelas (USA)



7pm/6c



La viuda de Blanco
Dame Chocolate





8pm/7c



Marina
Madre Luna
La traición
Doña Bárbara





9pm/8c



El Zorro, la espada y la rosa
La Esclava Isaura
Victoria
El Juramento
El Rostro de Analía





10pm/9c



Sin Verguenza
Pecados ajenos
Sin Senos no Hay Paraíso












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2008–2009 telenovelas (USA)



8pm/7c



La traición
Doña Bárbara
Más sabe el diablo





9pm/8c



Victoria
El Juramento
El Rostro de Analía
Niños Ricos, Pobres Padres





10pm/9c



Pecados ajenos
Sin Senos no Hay Paraíso
Victorinos












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2009–2010 telenovelas (USA)



8pm/7c



Doña Bárbara
Más Sabe el Diablo
El Clon
Aurora





9pm/8c



El Rostro de Analía
Niños Ricos, Pobres Padres
Perro Amor
El Fantasma de Elena





10pm/9c



Sin Senos no hay Paraíso
Victorinos
¿Dónde Está Elisa?
La Diosa Coronada
Alguien Te Mira












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2010-2011 telenovelas (USA)



8pm/7c



El Clon
Aurora
Mi Corazón Insiste
Una Maid en Manhattan





9pm/8c



Perro Amor
El Fantasma de Elena
Los Herederos Del Monte
Flor Salvaje





10pm/9c



¿Dónde Está Elisa?
La Diosa Coronada
Alguien Te Mira
La Reina del Sur
La Casa de al Lado












v
t
e


Telenovelas and series of Telemundo







1988–99



Angélica, mi vida (1988)
El magnate (1989)
Cadena braga (1991)
Marielena (1992)
Tres destinos (1993)
Guadalupe (1993)
El peñón del amaranto (1993)
Señora tentación (1994)
Aguamarina (1997)
Me muero por ti (1999)





2000–09



Cara o cruz (2001)
Amantes del desierto (2001)
Adrián está de visita (2001)
Daniela (2002)
Vale todo (2002)
La venganza (2002)
Sofía dame tiempo (2003)
Ladrón de corazones (2003)
Amor descarado (2003)
Ángel de la guarda, mi dulce compañía (2003)
Pasión de gavilanes (2003)
El alma herida (2003)
Prisionera (2004)
Gitanas (2004)
Te voy a enseñar a querer (2004)
Anita no te rajes (2004)
La mujer en el espejo (2004)
La ley del silencio (2005)
Los plateados (2005)
Amarte así, Frijolito (2005)
El cuerpo del deseo (2005)
La Tormenta (2005)
Corazón Partido (2005)
Tierra de pasiones (2006)
Dueña y señora (2006)
Amores de mercado (2006)
La viuda de Blanco (2006)
Marina (2006)
El Zorro, la espada y la rosa (2007)
Dame chocolate (2007)
Sin vergüenza (2007)
Madre Luna (2007)
Pecados ajenos (2007)
Victoria (2007)
La traición (2008)
Sin senos no hay paraíso (2008)
El juramento (2008)
Doña Bárbara (2008)
El rostro de Analía (2008)
Más sabe el diablo (2009)
Victorinos (2009)
Niños ricos, pobres padres (2009)
Bella calamidades (2009)





2010–19



Perro amor (2010)
El clon (2010)
¿Dónde está Elisa? (2010)
El fantasma de Elena (2010)
La Diosa Coronada (2010)
Alguien te mira (2010)
Aurora (2010)
Ojo por ojo (2010)
Los herederos del Monte (2011)
Mi corazón insiste en Lola Volcán (2011)
La casa de al lado (2011)
Amar de nuevo (2011)
Flor Salvaje (2011)
Una Maid en Manhattan (2011)
Relaciones peligrosas (2012)
Corazón valiente (2012)
Rosa diamante (2012)
El rostro de la venganza (2012)
La Patrona (2013)
Pasión prohibida (2013)
Dama y obrero (2013)
Marido en alquiler (2013)
Santa Diabla (2013)
La impostora (2014)
En otra piel (2014)
Camelia la Texana (2014)
Reina de corazones (2014)
Los miserables (2014)
Villa Paraíso (2014)
Tierra de reyes (2014)
Dueños del paraíso (2015)
Bajo el mismo cielo (2015)
Celia (2015)
La querida del Centauro (2016-17)
¿Quién es quién? (2015)
Eva la trailera (2016)
Silvana sin lana (2016)
La Doña (2016)
La Fan (2017)
Guerra de ídolos (2017)
Mariposa de Barrio (2017)





Current



La Reina del Sur (since 2011)
El Señor de los Cielos (since 2013)
Señora Acero (since 2014)
Sin senos sí hay paraíso (since 2016)
El Chema (since 2016)
Milagros de Navidad (since 2017)
Sangre de mi tierra (since 2017)





Upcoming



José José, el príncipe de la canción
Al otro lado del muro
Enemigo íntimo
Luis Miguel, la serie
El Ganador









Category










v
t
e


Telemundo's 2012–2013 telenovelas (USA)



8pm/7c



Una Maid en Manhattan
Rosa Diamante





9pm/8c



Flor Salvaje
Corazón Valiente





10pm/9c



Relaciones Peligrosas
Pablo Escobar
El Rostro de la Venganza












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2013–2014 telenovelas (USA)



8pm/7c



Rosa Diamante
Pasión Prohibida
Dama y Obrero
Marido en Alquiler





9pm/8c



Corazón Valiente
La Patrona
Marido en Alquiler
La Reina del Sur





10pm/9c



El Rostro de la Venganza
El Señor de los Cielos
Santa Diabla












v
t
e


Telemundo's 2014–2015 telenovelas (USA)



12pm/11c



Bella Calamidades
Avenida Brasil
Escrito nas Estrelas





8pm/7c



Marido en Alquiler
La Impostora
Reina de Corazones





9pm/8c



La Reina del Sur
En Otra Piel





10pm/9c



Santa Diabla
Camelia, la Texana
El Señor de los Cielos 2





Upcoming



Señora Acero
Los Miserables
Dueños del Paraíso

















v
t
e


NBCUniversal




A subsidiary of Comcast



Corporate
officials




Board of Directors



Steve Burke (CEO)
Brian L. Roberts
Jeffrey R. Immelt
Keith Sherin





Executives



Steve Capus
Dick Ebersol
Robert Greenblatt
Bonnie Hammer
Ted Harbert
Ronald Meyer








Universal Studios



Amblin Partners[nu 1]
Back Lot Music
Carnival Films
Chiller Films
DreamWorks Animation

DreamWorks Classics

Big Idea Entertainment
Bullwinkle StudiosJV
Harvey Entertainment


DreamWorks Channel
Oriental DreamWorks[nu 2]
DreamWorks New Media

AwesomenessTV[nu 3]

Big Frame






Fandango (70%)
Focus Features

Gramercy Pictures


Illumination Entertainment

Illumination Mac Guff


NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan
United International Pictures[nu 4]
Universal Animation Studios
Universal Playback
Universal Pictures Home Entertainment
Working Title Films





Universal Parks
& Resorts




United States



Universal Studios Hollywood

CityWalk


Universal Orlando Resort

Universal Studios Florida
Islands of Adventure
CityWalk







International



Universal Studios Japan
Universal Studios Singapore
Universal Studios Beijing








NBCU Cable
Entertainment



Universal Cable Productions
Craftsy (major stake)
Networks

Syfy
USA Network


Lifestyle Group

Bravo
E!
Oxygen
Universal Kids







NBCU Digital



Hulu[nu 5]
Movieclips





NBCU Telemundo
Enterprises



NBC Universo
Telemundo

Puerto Rico Studios
Telemundo TV Studios


Telemundo Deportesw/NBC Sports Group





NBC Sports Group







NBC Sports Ventures

Alli


Golf Channel
NBC Sports Digital

GolfNow


NBC Sports
NBCSN
Olympic Channel
part owner

MLB Network
NHL Network







NBC Sports
Regional Networks



Bay Area (45%)
Boston
California
Chicago (20%)
Northwest
Philadelphia
Washington
SNY (8%)








NBCUniversal
News Group







NBC News
NBCNews.com
The Weather Channel[nu 6]
MSNBC
Peacock Productions





CNBC global channels



CNBC
CNBC Africa (licensee)
CNBC Asia
CNBC Europe
CNBC Latin America
CNBC World





CNBC Europe branches



Class CNBC (20%)
CNBC Africa (licensee)
CNBC Arabiya
CNBC-e
CNBC Nordic





CNBC Asia branches



CNBC-TV18
CNBC Australia
CNBC Awaaz
CNBC Hong Kong
CNBC Pakistan
CNBC Singapore
Nikkei CNBC
SBS-CNBC








NBCUniversal
International
Networks



13th Street Universal

Australia
Benelux
France
Germany
Spain


Bravo New Zealand
Euronews[nu 7]
Syfy Universal

Asia
Australia
Benelux
France
Germany
Italy[nu 8]
Latin America
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovenia
Spain
United Kingdom


Diva Universal

Asia
Italy
Romania


Movies 24
Studio Universal

Latin America


Universal Channel

Asia
Australia
Germany
Greece
Japan
Poland
Turkey
United Kingdom


Style Network

Australia


E!

Asia
Australia
Europe







NBC Entertainment



NBC
DreamWorks Animation Television
Stamford Media Center
Universal Television





NBC Broadcasting







Affiliate Relations
NBCUniversal Television Distribution





NBCU Owned
TV Stations
O&Os




NBC Owned
TV Stations



KNBC
KNSD
KNTV
KXAS-TV
WBTS-LD
WCAU
WMAQ-TV
WNBC
WRC-TV
WTVJ
WVIT Other properties:
Cozi TV

K15CU-D


LXTV
New England Cable News





Telemundo
Station Group



KBLR
KDEN-TV
KEJT-LP
KHRR
KNSD-DT20
KNSO[nu 9]
KSTS
KTAZ
KTLM
KTMD
KVDA
KVEA
KXTX-TV
WKAQ-TV
WNEU
WNJU
WRDM-CD[nu 10]
WSCV
WSNS-TV
WWSI
WZDC-CD[nu 10] Other properties:
TeleXitos











Other assets:



EMKA, Ltd.
International Media Distribution
PictureBox Films





Former/Defunct
properties
and predecessors:



Castle Films
Chapman Entertainment
Chiller
CIC Video
Cloo
Comcast Network
Esquire Network
FilmDistrict
Filmation
G4
Good Machine
Gramercy Pictures
Harvey Films/Harvey Comics
ITC Entertainment
Interscope Communications
Miss Universe[nu 11]
Multimedia Entertainment
MCA Inc.
October Films
Kitty Films
Pacific Data Images
PolyGram Filmed Entertainment
Propaganda Films
Seagram Company Ltd.
Shift
Seeso
Total Television
United Productions of America
Universal HD









^ Co-owned with The Amblin Group, Participant Media, Reliance Entertainment, Entertainment One and Alibaba Pictures.
^ Co-owned with China Media Capital, Shanghai Media Group and Shanghai Alliance Investment.
^ Co-owned with Hearst Communications and Verizon Communications.
^ 50%, with Viacom's Paramount Pictures.
^ Co-owned with 21st Century Fox, The Walt Disney Company and Time Warner. NBCUniversal has no involvement with Hulu operations.
^ Co-owned with The Blackstone Group and Bain Capital.
^ Co-owned with Media Globe Networks and European public broadcasters.
^ Co-owned with Mediaset.
^ The station is owned by NBCUniversal, but is controlled by Serestar Communications.
^ a b Operated by NBCUniversal under a local marketing agreement.
^ Co-owned with The Trump Organization before September 2015 sale to WME/IMG.













v
t
e


NBC Sports Group



Current programs




Original



Fight Night 36
Football Night in America
Fore Inventors Only
Golf Central
Indy Car 36
Match of the Day
NHL 36
NBC SportsTalk
NFL Turning Point
NHL Live
NHL Overtime
Pro Football Talk
Sports Illustrated
Sunday Sports Report





Sports



College Football on NBC
College Hockey on NBC
Dew Action Sports Tour
Fight Night

Premier Boxing Champions


Formula One on NBC
IndyCar Series on NBC
Lucas Oil AMA Pro Motocross
NASCAR on NBC
Golf Channel on NBC
NFL on NBC

Football Night in America
NBC Sunday Night Football


NHL on NBC
Notre Dame Football on NBC
Olympics on NBC
Premier League
Red Bull Global Rallycross
USA Sevens
USA Rugby League
Tennis on NBC
Thoroughbred Racing on NBC
Tour de France





Other



Men in Blazers
The Dan Patrick Show








National channels



Golf Channel
NBCSN
NBC Sports Radio
Olympic Channel
minority stake

MLB Network
NHL Network
Universal Sports (defunct)







NBC Sports Regional Networks



Bay Area (45%)
Boston
California
Chicago (20%)
Northwest
Philadelphia
Washington
SNY (8%)





Occasional programming



NBC Olympics
NBC Sports
NBC-Telemundo Deportes





Occasional broadcasts



NBC
Bravo
CNBC
MSNBC
USA Network
(Spanish-language)

NBC Universo
Telemundo







Other properties



Alli Sports
NBC Sports Digital

GolfNow
NBC Sports Gold
NBC Sports Live Extra
Rotoworld Fantasy Sports
profootballtalk.com


Xfinity Live!





Former programs



AFL on NBC
Baseball Night in America
Bowling on NBC
CFL on NBC
College Basketball on NBC
Gillette Cavalcade of Sports
Hambletonian
The 'Lights
MLB Game of the Week
MLB on NBC
Major League Baseball: An Inside Look
MLS on NBC
NBA on NBC
NBA Showtime
NBC College Football Game of the Week
Sportsworld






Parent: NBCUniversal










v
t
e


Televisa



Key people




Current



Emilio Azcárraga Jean
Bernardo Gómez Martínez
Alfonso de Angoitia





Former



Emilio Azcárraga Vidaurreta (founder)
Emilio Azcárraga Milmo








Subsdiaries and divisions



Cablemás
Centro de Educación Artística
Pantelion Films (joint-venture with Lionsgate)
Editorial Televisa
Esmas.com
Fundación Televisa
Izzi Telecom
Noticieros Televisa
SKY México
Televisa Consumer Products
Televisa Deportes
Televisa Home Entertainment
Televisa Networks
Televisa Radio
Televisa Regional
Televisa USA





Television services




Broadcast



Las Estrellas
Canal 5
Gala TV
FOROtv





Cable



Bandamax
De Película
De Película Clásico
Distrito Comedia
Golden
Golden Edge
Golden Premier
Ritmoson Latino
Televisa Deportes Network
TeleHit
Telemundo Internacional (joint-venture with NBCUniversal)
Tiin
TLN Network
TL Novelas
Unicable
UFC Network








Soccer teams




Current



Club América





Former



Club Necaxa
Club San Luis








Other assets



Blim
CJ Grand Shopping (joint-venture with CJ Group)
Estadio Azteca
Teletón México
Televisa Cine
Televisa Interactive Media
Televisa Música
Televisa San Ángel





Defunct services



American Network
ECO Noticias
EMI Televisa Music








 Category












v
t
e


Spanish-language broadcast television networks in the United States



Major



Azteca América
Estrella TV
Telemundo
UniMás
Univision





Specialty



LATV (bilingual English/Spanish)
Mega TV
Cine Mexicano
Tele N
MiCasa Network
Mira TV
Multimedios
¡Sorpresa!
TeleXitos
TeLe-Romántica
Tr3́s





Defunct



América CV
Hispanic Television Network
Inmigrante TV
LAT TV
MundoMax
Soi TV
TuVisión
VasalloVision












v
t
e


City of Hialeah



Government



Police Department




Mayors



Martínez (1981-2005)
Robaina (2005-2011)
Hernández (2011-present)








Locations



Centuri Headquarters
Hialeah Park Race Track
Sedano's
Seminola neighborhood
Telemundo Headquarters
Westland Mall





Education



Flamingo
José Martí MAST
Hialeah EA
Hialeah High
Hialeah Middle
HML
Milam
Westland





Transportation



Hialeah Drive
Hialeah Expressway
Hialeah Market
Hialeah Seaboard Air Line Railway Station
Okeechobee
Tri-Rail and Metrorail Transfer Station





History



Timeline
2013 shooting
Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah
Mayoral elections

2011







Events




Hialeah Park
stakes races



Bahamas Stakes
Black Helen Handicap
Everglades Stakes
Flamingo Stakes
Hialeah Turf Cup Handicap
Hibiscus Stakes
McLennan Handicap
Widener Handicap















v
t
e


Sports television in the United States



Broadcast
divisions




English



CBS Sports
ESPN on ABC
Fox Sports
NBC Sports
Stadium
Turner Sports





Spanish



Azteca Deportes
Telemundo Deportes (Telemundo/Universo)
Univision Deportes








National
channels




English



beIN Sports
CBS Sports Network
ESPN

ESPN2


FS1

FS2


NBCSN

Olympic Channel







Spanish



beIN Sports en Español
ESPN Deportes
Fox Deportes
Univision Deportes Network








Specialty
channels




College



Big Ten Network
ESPNU
Fox College Sports
Pac-12 Network
SEC Network





Single sport



Cricket TicketO
ESPN College Extra
ESPN Goal Line & Bases LoadedP
Fox Soccer PlusP
GOL TV
Golf Channel
In DemandP
MAVTV
MLB Network
MLB Extra InningsO
MLB Strike ZoneP
MLS Direct KickO
NBA League PassO
NBA TV
NFL Network
NFL RedZoneP
NFL Sunday TicketO
NHL Network
NHL Center IceO
Tennis Channel
TVG

TVG2


Willow
Ride TV





Outdoors



The Cowboy Channel
Frost Great Outdoors
Outdoor Channel

Sportsman Channel
World Fishing Network


Pursuit Channel





Other



Eleven Sports Network
ESPN Classic
ESPNews
ESPN PPVP








Syndicators



ACC Network (Raycom Sports)
ESPN Events





Broadband



Fox Sports Go
Global Wrestling Network
MLB.tv
UFC Fight Pass
WatchESPN (ESPN3; ACC Network Extra)
WWE Network
WWNLive





Video on demand



The Ski Channel
Surf Channel












v
t
e


Regional sports television networks in the United States



AT&T SportsNet



Pittsburgh
Rocky Mountain
Southwest
Root Sports Northwest (part-ownership)





Fox Sports Networks



Arizona
Detroit
Florida / Sun
Midwest

Indiana
Kansas City


North
Ohio / SportsTime Ohio
Southeast / South

Carolinas
Tennessee


Southwest

Oklahoma
New Orleans


West / Prime Ticket

San Diego


Wisconsin
YES Network





NBC Sports Regional Networks
(Comcast)



Bay Area
Boston
California
Chicago
Northwest

Oregon Sports Network


Washington
Philadelphia





Spectrum Sports
(Charter)



Florida
Kansas City
Los Angeles

SportsNet/Deportes
SportsNet LA


SportsNet New York (part ownership)
Ohio
Wisconsin





Independents



Altitude Sports
Buckeye Cable Sports
BYUtv Sports
Cox Sports TV
FiOS1
Longhorn Network
Mid-Atlantic Sports
Midco Sports
MSG Network

Plus
Western NY


NESN
SportsNet NY
SWX Right Now















v
t
e


Defunct television sports networks in the United States



National



America One
American Sports Classics
American Sports Network
Back9Network
Baseball Network
Big 12 Network
CNN SI
ESPN 3D
Football Network
Fox Soccer
Lorimar Sports Network
Mizlou
NASCAR Hot Pass
NewSport
One World Sports
ONTV
SEC TV
Speed
SportsChannel America
Sports Network
Universal Sports Network





Regional



4SD
Carolinas SE
Cox Sports
Empire
Hawkvision
MountainWest
PASS Sports
Prime
PRISM
Royals Sports
SportsChannel LA
Sportsvision
Sports Time
Victory





Out-of-market



ESPN Full Court
ESPN GamePlan
Mega March Madness












O. Out-of-market sports packages
P. Premium channel













v
t
e


Telemundo programming (current and upcoming)



Dramas



El Señor de los Cielos (since 2013)
Señora Acero (since 2014)
Sin senos sí hay paraíso (since 2016)
Milagros de Navidad (since 2017)
Sangre de mi tierra (since 2017)





Talk and reality shows



12 Corazones (since 2005)
Al Rojo Vivo (since 2002)
Caso Cerrado (since 2001)
Videos Asombrosos (since 2008)





News and public affairs



Noticias Telemundo (since 1999)
Un Nuevo Día (since 2008)





Sports



Copa FIFA de la Confederaciones (since 2017)
Copa Mundial de la Femnina (since 2015)
Hockey Telemundo (since 2015)
Futbol de Premier League (since 2013)
Juegos Olimpicos por Telemundo (since 2004)





Music and variety programming



Nitido (since 2005)





Children's programming



LazyTown (since 2012)
Noodle and Doodle (since 2012)
Raggs (since 2012)





Award show



Billboard Latin Music Awards
Premios Tu Mundo
Latin American Music Awards





Upcoming



FIFA World Cup (2018)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telemundo&oldid=817737631"					Categories: Spanish-language television networks in the United StatesTelemundoNBCUniversalNBCUniversal networksCompanies based in Miami-Dade County, FloridaCompanies based in Hialeah, FloridaTelevision channels and stations established in 1954Hidden categories: Pages using web citations with no URLAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2013Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing potentially dated statements from October 2017