Telecommunications in Senegal include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.
Senegal has an excellent telecommunications infrastructure, which is now digital. Cable, telex, fax, and Internet services are available. There has been a boom of Internet-related activities and services and in cell phone usage. The last several years have witnessed spectacular growth of mobile telephone use from 1.5 million subscribers in 2005 to 13.3 million in 2012. In 2012 the country had roughly 338,200 landlines for its 13.0 million inhabitants. A number of cyber cafés are located in the capital, Dakar, and other cities.[1]



Contents


1 Regulation
2 Radio and television
3 Telephones
4 Internet

4.1 Internet censorship and surveillance
4.2 Scholarly communication

4.2.1 Open access




5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Regulation[edit]
Sonatel, Senegal's main telecommunications operator, was privatized in 1997 with France Télécom as the strategic partner. Sonatel continues to dominate the market. Liberalization of some services accompanied privatization. Two companies now provide cellular telephone services, and there is a competitive Internet services market.[citation needed]
An independent regulatory agency for the telecommunications sector, the Agency for Telecommunications and Postal Regulation (ARTP), was created in early 2002. Besides regulating providers of telecommunications services, the agency assigns and controls radio spectrum. The long-awaited telecommunications sector deregulation became effective in July 2004, with the release of a sectoral letter that outlined the IT policy for the coming years. Telecommunications entrepreneurs who had hoped for a sweeping deregulation received a regime of guided deregulation instead.[citation needed]
The Government wants Senegal to be a haven for teleprocessing services, with its advantageous geographic position, relatively good telecommunications infrastructure and relatively low wages. A number of joint venture call centers and the telemarketing businesses have sprung up, most of them servicing the French market.[1]
In 2007, sales generated by the telecommunications sector accounted for more than 7 percent of GDP.[citation needed]
Radio and television[edit]
See also: Television in Senegal

Radio stations:

Approximately 80 community, public, and private commercial radio stations (2012);[2]
State-run Radiodiffusion Télévision Sénégalaise (RTS) operates a national radio network with four different programs on about 60 regional FM stations;[3] many community and private-broadcast radio stations are available; transmissions of at least 2 international broadcasters are accessible on FM in Dakar (2007).[4]
8 AM, 20 FM, and one shortwave stations (2001).


Radios: 1.2 million (1997).[needs update]
Television stations:

State-run Radiodiffusion Television Senegalaise (RTS) operates five main stations at Dakar, Thies, Tambacouda, Ziguinchor, and Louga; there are also numerous relay stations.[3] A few private TV subscription channels rebroadcast foreign channels without providing any local news or programs (2007);[4]
One (1997).


Television sets: 361,000 (1997).[needs update]

Radio is the most important medium of mass information and source of news due to the high illiteracy rate.[2] The BBC World Service (105.6 MHz) and Radio France Internationale are available on FM in Dakar.[5]
Radiodiffusion Télévision Sénégalaise (RTS) and 2sTV are the two main TV channels.[citation needed]
The government maintains control of locally televised information and opinion through RTS. By law, the government holds a majority interest in RTS, and the president directly or indirectly controls selection of all members of the 12-person RTS executive staff. However, in addition to RTS, five privately owned television channels are operating.[2]
Selective government media assistance appears to favor those government and independent outlets more friendly to the administration. The government frequently uses subsidies, and in a few cases threats and intimidation, to pressure the media not to publicize certain issues. The law criminalizes libel, and libel laws are used to block or punish critical reporting and commentary. Occasional incidents of self-censorship by journalists occurred, particularly in government-controlled media.[2]
Senegal is a popular destination for amateur radio operators from Western and European points of origin who participate in "DXpeditions". A DXpedition is essentially a holiday planned for the purpose of making contacts with other amateur radio enthusiasts around the world. These short duration trips also help to promote interest in radio sports among the local residents who might otherwise not have the opportunity to experience radio communications for recreational and experimental purposes. More information may be obtained through the American Radio Relay League at www.arrl.org (K4YZ).[citation needed]
Telephones[edit]
See also: Telephone numbers in Senegal
There are currently four cellular companies: the former Alizé, now Orange owned by Sonatel; Tigo/Sentel, 75 percent owned by Millicom International Cellular; Hayo/CSU; and Expresso/Sudatel. Orange has roughly two thirds of the cellular market, but Tigo is rapidly gaining market share. In November 2007 a third mobile license was awarded to Sudan's Sudatel for $200 million. The license permits Sudatel to offer fixed line telephone and Internet service (for which Sonatel had a monopoly).[1][6] In 2012 a fourth license was awarded to CSU/Hayo, permitting them to offer mobile, fixed, wifi, and wimax services.




The SAT-3/WASC/SAFE cable system. #4 is Dakar, Senegal.






The Atlantis-2 cable system. #4 is Dakar, Senegal.



Calling code: +221,[4] international calls to most countries can be dialed directly.
International call prefix: 00[7]
Main lines:

338,200 lines in use, 110th in the world (2012);[4]
224,600 lines in use (2002).


Mobile cellular:

11.5 million lines, 73rd in the world (2012);[4]
3.2 million lines (2007).


Telephone system: good system overall with microwave radio relay, coaxial cable and fiber-optic cable in the trunk system; above-average urban system with a fiber-optic network; nearly two-thirds of all fixed-line connections are in Dakar where a call-center industry is emerging; expansion of fixed-line services in rural areas is needed; mobile-cellular service is expanding rapidly (2010).[4]
Communications cables: South Atlantic 3/West Africa Submarine Cable/SAFE (SAT-3/WASC/SAFE) fiber-optic cable provides connectivity to Europe and Asia, while the Atlantis-2 fiber-optic cable provides connectivity to South America.[4]
Satellite earth stations: One Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean).[4]

Internet[edit]
Internet service is widely available in Dakar and other towns either by private subscription or through Senegal's extensive network of "telecentres" and Internet cafés. The Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) broadband subscriber base is growing rapidly, though the penetration rate is less than 1 percent.[1]

Top-level domain: .sn[4]
Internet users:

2.5 million users, 84th in the world; 19.2% of the population, 145th in the world (2012).[8][9]
1.8 million users, 76th in the world (2009).[4]


Fixed broadband: 94,548 subscriptions, 103rd in the world; 0.7% of the population, 145th in the world (2012).[8][10]
Wireless broadband: 486,490 subscribers, 92nd in the world; 3.8% of the population, 117th in the world (2012).[11]
Internet hosts: 237 hosts, 197th in the world (2012).[4]
IPv4: 293,248 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 22.6 addresses per 1000 people.[12][13]
Internet service providers: 761 ISPs (2002).[14][citation needed]

Internet censorship and surveillance[edit]
There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet, or reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority. Individuals and groups engage in the peaceful expression of views via the Internet, including by e‑mail.[2]
The constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press; however, the government limits these rights in practice. Individuals can generally criticize the government publicly or privately without reprisal. The law criminalizes libel, and libel laws are used to block or punish critical reporting and commentary. The constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice.[2]
Scholarly communication[edit]
Open access[edit]






It has been suggested that this section be split out into another article titled Open access in Senegal. (Discuss) (September 2017)



Open access  to scholarly communication in Senegal is developing.[15][16] The Consortium des Bibliothèques de l'Enseignement Supérieur du Sénégal (academic library consortium) and the Association Sénégalaise des Bibliothécaires, Archivistes et Doacumentalistes (professional society) have signed the Budapest Open Access Initiative.[17]
The French Ministry of Foreign Affairs funded in 2004-2007 the creation of scholarly publishing platforms in Africa ("Système d’information scientifique et technique"),[18] which led to the 2006 launch of SIST Sénégal.[19][20] According to Unesco, the Bibliothèque SIST Sénégal is one of two open access repositories in Senegal, the other being Biens Culturels Africains at the Institut Fondamental d'Afrique Noire.[21]
See also[edit]

Media of Senegal
Radiodiffusion Télévision Sénégalaise, the Senegalese public broadcasting company.
Terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Senegal

References[edit]


^ a b c d Senegal Country Commercial Guide 2008. U.S. Commercial Service (2008).  This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. Archived 7 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c d e f "Senegal", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 18 April 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2014.
^ a b World Radio and Television Handbook 2010. Oxford, UK: WRTH Publications, Ltd. 2010. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Communications: Senegal", World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, 28 January 2014. Retrieved 3 February 2014.
^ "Senegal profile", BBC News, 23 March 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2014.
^ Communication from the Senegalese regulator (ARTP) to the ITU. Retrieved 1 October 2010. Archived 28 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Dialing Procedures (International Prefix, National (Trunk) Prefix and National (Significant) Number) (in Accordance with ITY-T Recommendation E.164 (11/2010)), Annex to ITU Operational Bulletin No. 994-15.XII.2011, International Telecommunication Union (ITU, Geneva), 15 December 2011. Retrieved 2 January 2014.
^ a b Calculated using penetration rate and population data from "Countries and Areas Ranked by Population: 2012", Population data, International Programs, U.S. Census Bureau, retrieved 26 June 2013
^ "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000-2012", International Telecommunications Union (Geneva), June 2013, retrieved 22 June 2013
^ "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013.
^ "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013.
^ Select Formats, Country IP Blocks. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Site is said to be updated daily.
^ Population, The World Factbook, United States Central Intelligence Agency. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Data are mostly for 1 July 2012.
^ Cheung, Gordon C. K. (2009-03-12). Intellectual Property Rights in China: Politics of Piracy, Trade and Protection. Routledge. ISBN 9781134217885. 
^ Diéyi Diouf (2008), Les revues sénégalaises en ligne: Quelques expériences concrètes (in French), Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa  
^ Peter Suber (ed.). "(Senegal)". Open Access Tracking Project. Harvard University. Retrieved 21 September 2017. News and comment from the worldwide movement for open access to research 
^ "Signatures". Budapest Open Access Initiative. Retrieved 21 September 2017. 
^ "SIST: Pour la science en Afrique" (PDF) (in English and French). Ministère des Affaires étrangères et européennes. 2007. ISBN 978-2-87614-641-9 – via Agritrop.  
^ "SIST Sénégal est en ligne". Sist-sciencesdev.net (in French). Archived from the original on 8 December 2007. Sist.sn 
^ Florence Piron; et al. (2017). "Le libre accès vu d'Afrique francophone subsaharienne" [Open access seen from francophone Sub-Saharan Africa]. Revue française des sciences de l’information et de la communication (in French) (11). ISSN 2263-0856 – via Revues.org. CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al. (link) 
^ "Senegal". Global Open Access Portal. Paris: Unesco. Retrieved 22 September 2017. 



 This article incorporates public domain material from the CIA World Factbook document "2014 edition".
 This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Department of State.

External links[edit]

NIC Senegal, registrar for the .sn domain.








v
t
e


Senegal articles



History



Regional history
Mali Empire
Precolonial kingdoms
Arab slave trade
French conquest
French West Africa
African slave trade
British invasion
Mali Federation
Senegambia
Border War
Bissau-Guinean Civil War involvement










Geography







Biosphere Reserves
Casamance
Cities
Islands
National parks
Rivers
Wildlife
World Heritage Sites








Politics







Administrative divisions
Casamance conflict
Constitution
Court of Cassation (judiciary)
Elections
Foreign relations
Human rights
Law enforcement
Military
Parliament
Political parties
President
Prime Minister








Economy







Agriculture
Energy
Franc (currency)
International rankings
Housing
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
Unions








Society







Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Health
Languages
Religion
Water supply and sanitation





Culture



Anthem
Cinema
Coat of arms
Cuisine
Flag
Literature
Media

Newspapers


Music
Public holidays
Sports












Outline
Index



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Telecommunications in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)
Western Sahara













v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Internet censorship and surveillance by country



Africa



Algeria
Angola
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo DR
Congo RO
Egypt
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritania
Morocco (Western Sahara)
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Argentina
Bahamas
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Greenland
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States (Puerto Rico)
Uruguay
Venezuela





Asia



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
East Timor
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Malaysia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
North Korea
Oman
Pakistan
Palestinian territories
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





Europe



Albania
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany (YouTube video blocking)
Georgia
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_Senegal&oldid=815502910"					Categories: Telecommunications in SenegalTelecommunications by countryInternet by countryInternet censorship by countryTelecommunications in AfricaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al.All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2014Wikipedia articles in need of updating from February 2014Articles to be split from September 2017All articles to be splitWikipedia articles incorporating text from the World FactbookWikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Department of StateUse dmy dates from September 2010