For other uses, see Telescope (disambiguation).




The 100 inch (2.54 m) Hooker reflecting telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory near Los Angeles, USA.


A telescope is an optical instrument that aids in the observation of remote objects by collecting electromagnetic radiation (such as visible light). The first known practical telescopes were invented in the Netherlands at the beginning of the 17th century, by using glass lenses. They found use in both terrestrial applications and astronomy.
Within a few decades, the reflecting telescope was invented, which used mirrors to collect and focus the light. In the 20th century, many new types of telescopes were invented, including radio telescopes in the 1930s and infrared telescopes in the 1960s. The word telescope now refers to a wide range of instruments capable of detecting different regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, and in some cases other types of detectors.
The word telescope (from the Ancient Greek τῆλε, tele "far" and σκοπεῖν, skopein "to look or see"; τηλεσκόπος, teleskopos "far-seeing") was coined in 1611 by the Greek mathematician Giovanni Demisiani for one of Galileo Galilei's instruments presented at a banquet at the Accademia dei Lincei.[1][2] In the Starry Messenger, Galileo had used the term perspicillum.



Contents


1 History
2 Types

2.1 Optical telescopes
2.2 Radio telescopes
2.3 X-ray telescopes
2.4 Gamma-ray telescopes
2.5 High-energy particle telescopes
2.6 Other types of telescopes


3 Types of mount
4 Atmospheric electromagnetic opacity
5 Telescopic image from different telescope types
6 By spectrum
7 Lists of telescopes
8 See also
9 References
10 Sources
11 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the telescope




The "onion" dome at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich housing a 28-inch refracting telescope with a remaining segment of William Herschel's 120-centimetre (47 in) diameter reflecting telescope (called the "40-foot telescope" due to its focal length) in the foreground.


The earliest existing record of a telescope was a 1608 patent submitted to the government in the Netherlands by Middelburg spectacle maker Hans Lippershey for a refracting telescope.[3] The actual inventor is unknown but word of it spread through Europe. Galileo heard about it and, in 1609, built his own version, and made his telescopic observations of celestial objects.[4][5]
The idea that the objective, or light-gathering element, could be a mirror instead of a lens was being investigated soon after the invention of the refracting telescope.[6] The potential advantages of using parabolic mirrors—reduction of spherical aberration and no chromatic aberration—led to many proposed designs and several attempts to build reflecting telescopes.[7] In 1668, Isaac Newton built the first practical reflecting telescope, of a design which now bears his name, the Newtonian reflector.
The invention of the achromatic lens in 1733 partially corrected color aberrations present in the simple lens and enabled the construction of shorter, more functional refracting telescopes. Reflecting telescopes, though not limited by the color problems seen in refractors, were hampered by the use of fast tarnishing speculum metal mirrors employed during the 18th and early 19th century—a problem alleviated by the introduction of silver coated glass mirrors in 1857,[8] and aluminized mirrors in 1932.[9] The maximum physical size limit for refracting telescopes is about 1 meter (40 inches), dictating that the vast majority of large optical researching telescopes built since the turn of the 20th century have been reflectors. The largest reflecting telescopes currently have objectives larger than 10 m (33 feet), and work is underway on several 30-40m designs.
The 20th century also saw the development of telescopes that worked in a wide range of wavelengths from radio to gamma-rays. The first purpose built radio telescope went into operation in 1937. Since then, a large variety of complex astronomical instruments have been developed.
Types[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The primary mirror assembly of James Webb Space Telescope under construction. This is a segmented mirror and its coated with Gold to reflect (orange-red) visible light, through near-infrared to the mid-infrared


The name "telescope" covers a wide range of instruments. Most detect electromagnetic radiation, but there are major differences in how astronomers must go about collecting light (electromagnetic radiation) in different frequency bands.
Telescopes may be classified by the wavelengths of light they detect:

X-ray telescopes, using shorter wavelengths than ultraviolet light
Ultraviolet telescopes, using shorter wavelengths than visible light
Optical telescopes, using visible light
Infrared telescopes, using longer wavelengths than visible light
Submillimetre telescopes, using longer wavelengths than infrared light
Fresnel Imager, an optical lens technology
X-ray optics, optics for certain X-ray wavelengths

As wavelengths become longer, it becomes easier to use antenna technology to interact with electromagnetic radiation (although it is possible to make very tiny antenna). The near-infrared can be collected much like visible light, however in the far-infrared and submillimetre range, telescopes can operate more like a radio telescope. For example, the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope observes from wavelengths from 3 μm (0.003 mm) to 2000 μm (2 mm), but uses a parabolic aluminum antenna.[10] On the other hand, the Spitzer Space Telescope, observing from about 3 μm (0.003 mm) to 180 μm (0.18 mm) uses a mirror (reflecting optics). Also using reflecting optics, the Hubble Space Telescope with Wide Field Camera 3 can observe in the frequency range from about 0.2 μm (0.0002 mm) to 1.7 μm (0.0017 mm) (from ultra-violet to infrared light).[11]
With photons of the shorter wavelengths, with the higher frequencies, glancing-incident optics, rather than fully reflecting optics are used. Telescopes such as TRACE and SOHO use special mirrors to reflect Extreme ultraviolet, producing higher resolution and brighter images than are otherwise possible. A larger aperture does not just mean that more light is collected, it also enables a finer angular resolution.
Telescopes may also be classified by location: ground telescope, space telescope, or flying telescope. They may also be classified by whether they are operated by professional astronomers or amateur astronomers. A vehicle or permanent campus containing one or more telescopes or other instruments is called an observatory.




Modern telescopes typically use CCDs instead of film for recording images. This is the sensor array in the Kepler spacecraft.




Light Comparison


Name
Wavelength
Frequency (Hz)
Photon Energy (eV)



Gamma ray
less than 0.01 nm
more than 10 EHZ
100 keV – 300+ GeV
X


X-Ray
0.01 to 10 nm
30 EHz – 30 PHZ
120 eV to 120 keV
X


Ultraviolet
10 nm – 400 nm
30 PHZ – 790 THz
3 eV to 124 eV



Visible
390 nm – 750 nm
790 THz – 405 THz
1.7 eV – 3.3 eV
X


Infrared
750 nm – 1 mm
405 THz – 300 GHz
1.24 meV – 1.7 eV
X


Microwave
1 mm – 1 meter
300 GHz – 300 MHz
1.24 meV – 1.24 µeV


Radio
1 mm – km
300 GHz – 3 Hz
1.24 meV – 12.4 feV
X



Optical telescopes[edit]




50 cm refracting telescope at Nice Observatory.


Main article: Optical telescope
An optical telescope gathers and focuses light mainly from the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum (although some work in the infrared and ultraviolet).[12] Optical telescopes increase the apparent angular size of distant objects as well as their apparent brightness. In order for the image to be observed, photographed, studied, and sent to a computer, telescopes work by employing one or more curved optical elements, usually made from glass lenses and/or mirrors, to gather light and other electromagnetic radiation to bring that light or radiation to a focal point. Optical telescopes are used for astronomy and in many non-astronomical instruments, including: theodolites (including transits), spotting scopes, monoculars, binoculars, camera lenses, and spyglasses. There are three main optical types:

The refracting telescope which uses lenses to form an image.
The reflecting telescope which uses an arrangement of mirrors to form an image.
The catadioptric telescope which uses mirrors combined with lenses to form an image.

Beyond these basic optical types there are many sub-types of varying optical design classified by the task they perform such as astrographs, comet seekers and solar telescopes.
Radio telescopes[edit]




The Very Large Array at Socorro, New Mexico, United States.


Main article: Radio telescope
Radio telescopes are directional radio antennas used for radio astronomy. The dishes are sometimes constructed of a conductive wire mesh whose openings are smaller than the wavelength being observed. Multi-element Radio telescopes are constructed from pairs or larger groups of these dishes to synthesize large 'virtual' apertures that are similar in size to the separation between the telescopes; this process is known as aperture synthesis. As of 2005, the current record array size is many times the width of the Earth—utilizing space-based Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) telescopes such as the Japanese HALCA (Highly Advanced Laboratory for Communications and Astronomy) VSOP (VLBI Space Observatory Program) satellite. Aperture synthesis is now also being applied to optical telescopes using optical interferometers (arrays of optical telescopes) and aperture masking interferometry at single reflecting telescopes. Radio telescopes are also used to collect microwave radiation, which is used to collect radiation when any visible light is obstructed or faint, such as from quasars. Some radio telescopes are used by programs such as SETI and the Arecibo Observatory to search for extraterrestrial life.
X-ray telescopes[edit]




Einstein Observatory was a space-based focusing optical X-ray telescope from 1978.[13]


Main article: X-ray telescope
X-ray telescopes can use X-ray optics, such as a Wolter telescopes composed of ring-shaped 'glancing' mirrors made of heavy metals that are able to reflect the rays just a few degrees. The mirrors are usually a section of a rotated parabola and a hyperbola, or ellipse. In 1952, Hans Wolter outlined 3 ways a telescope could be built using only this kind of mirror.[14][15] Examples of an observatory using this type of telescope are the Einstein Observatory, ROSAT, and the Chandra X-Ray Observatory. By 2010, Wolter focusing X-ray telescopes are possible up to 79 keV.[13]
Gamma-ray telescopes[edit]
Higher energy X-ray and Gamma-ray telescopes refrain from focusing completely and use coded aperture masks: the patterns of the shadow the mask creates can be reconstructed to form an image.
X-ray and Gamma-ray telescopes are usually on Earth-orbiting satellites or high-flying balloons since the Earth's atmosphere is opaque to this part of the electromagnetic spectrum. However, high energy X-rays and gamma-rays do not form an image in the same way as telescopes at visible wavelengths. An example of this type of telescope is the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope.
The detection of very high energy gamma rays, with shorter wavelength and higher frequency than regular gamma rays, requires further specialization. An example of this type of observatory is VERITAS. Very high energy gamma-rays are still photons, like visible light, whereas cosmic rays includes particles like electrons, protons, and heavier nuclei.
A discovery in 2012 may allow focusing gamma-ray telescopes.[16] At photon energies greater than 700 keV, the index of refraction starts to increase again.[16]
High-energy particle telescopes[edit]
High-energy astronomy requires specialized telescopes to make observations since most of these particles go through most metals and glasses.
In other types of high energy particle telescopes there is no image-forming optical system. Cosmic-ray telescopes usually consist of an array of different detector types spread out over a large area. A Neutrino telescope consists of a large mass of water or ice, surrounded by an array of sensitive light detectors known as photomultiplier tubes. Originating direction of the neutrinos is determined by reconstructing the path of secondary particles scattered by neutrino impacts, from their interaction with multiple detectors. Energetic neutral atom observatories like Interstellar Boundary Explorer detect particles traveling at certain energies.
Other types of telescopes[edit]




Equatorial-mounted Keplerian telescope


Astronomy is not limited to using electromagnetic radiation. Additional information can be obtained using other media. The detectors used to observe the Universe are analogous to telescopes. These are:

Gravitational-wave detector, the equivalent of a gravitational wave telescope, used for gravitational-wave astronomy.
Neutrino detector, the equivalent of a neutrino telescope, used for neutrino astronomy.

Types of mount[edit]
Main article: Telescope mount
A telescope mount is a mechanical structure which supports a telescope. Telescope mounts are designed to support the mass of the telescope and allow for accurate pointing of the instrument. Many sorts of mounts have been developed over the years, with the majority of effort being put into systems that can track the motion of the stars as the Earth rotates. The two main types of tracking mount are:

Altazimuth mount
Equatorial mount

Atmospheric electromagnetic opacity[edit]
See also: Airmass
Since the atmosphere is opaque for most of the electromagnetic spectrum, only a few bands can be observed from the Earth's surface. These bands are visible – near-infrared and a portion of the radio-wave part of the spectrum. For this reason there are no X-ray or far-infrared ground-based telescopes as these have to be observed from orbit. Even if a wavelength is observable from the ground, it might still be advantageous to place a telescope on a satellite due to astronomical seeing.





A diagram of the electromagnetic spectrum with the Earth's atmospheric transmittance (or opacity) and the types of telescopes used to image parts of the spectrum.



Telescopic image from different telescope types[edit]
Different types of telescope, operating in different wavelength bands, provide different information about the same object. Together they provide a more comprehensive understanding.





A 6′ wide view of the Crab nebula supernova remnant, viewed at different wavelengths of light by various telescopes



By spectrum[edit]
Telescopes that operate in the electromagnetic spectrum:


Name
Telescope
Astronomy
Wavelength


Radio
Radio telescope
Radio astronomy
(Radar astronomy)
more than 1 mm


Submillimetre
Submillimetre telescopes*
Submillimetre astronomy
0.1 mm – 1 mm


Far Infrared
–
Far-infrared astronomy
30 µm – 450 µm


Infrared
Infrared telescope
Infrared astronomy
700 nm – 1 mm


Visible
Visible spectrum telescopes
Visible-light astronomy
400 nm – 700 nm


Ultraviolet
Ultraviolet telescopes*
Ultraviolet astronomy
10 nm – 400 nm


X-ray
X-ray telescope
X-ray astronomy
0.01 nm – 10 nm


Gamma-ray
–
Gamma-ray astronomy
less than 0.01 nm


*Links to categories.
Lists of telescopes[edit]


List of optical telescopes
List of largest optical reflecting telescopes
List of largest optical refracting telescopes
List of largest optical telescopes historically
List of radio telescopes
List of solar telescopes
List of space observatories
List of telescope parts and construction
List of telescope types
Category:Telescopes
Category:Cosmic-ray telescopes
Category:Gamma-ray telescopes
Category:Gravitational wave telescopes
Category:High energy particle telescopes
Category:Infrared telescopes
Category:Submillimetre telescopes
Category:Ultraviolet telescopes
Category:X-ray telescopes


See also[edit]


Airmass
Amateur telescope making
Angular resolution
ASCOM open standards for computer control of telescopes
Bahtinov mask
Bioptic telescope
Carey mask
Dew shield
Dynameter
f-number
First light
GoTo telescope
Hartmann mask
Keyhole problem
Microscope
Remote Telescope Markup Language
Robotic telescope
Timeline of telescope technology
Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and observing technology


References[edit]


^ Sobel (2000, p.43), Drake (1978, p.196)
^ Rosen, Edward, The Naming of the Telescope (1947)
^ galileo.rice.edu The Galileo Project > Science > The Telescope by Al Van Helden: The Hague discussed the patent applications first of Hans Lipperhey of Middelburg, and then of Jacob Metius of Alkmaar... another citizen of Middelburg, Zacharias Janssen is sometimes associated with the invention
^ "NASA - Telescope History". www.nasa.gov. 
^ Loker, Aleck (20 November 2017). "Profiles in Colonial History". Aleck Loker – via Google Books. 
^ Watson, Fred (20 November 2017). "Stargazer: The Life and Times of the Telescope". Allen & Unwin – via Google Books. 
^ Attempts by Niccolò Zucchi and James Gregory and theoretical designs by Bonaventura Cavalieri, Marin Mersenne, and Gregory among others
^ "Jean-Bernard-Léon Foucault Biography (1819-1868)". www.madehow.com. 
^ "Home" (PDF). Cambridge University Press. 
^ ASTROLab du parc national du Mont-Mégantic. "The James-Clerk-Maxwell Observatory". Canada under the stars. Retrieved 2017-04-16. 
^ "Hubble's Instruments: WFC3 - Wide Field Camera 3". www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2017-04-16. 
^ Jones, Barrie W. (2 September 2008). The Search for Life Continued: Planets Around Other Stars. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 9780387765594. 
^ a b "NuStar: Instrumentation: Optics". 
^ Wolter, H. (1952), "Glancing Incidence Mirror Systems as Imaging Optics for X-rays", Annalen der Physik, 10: 94, Bibcode:1952AnP...445...94W, doi:10.1002/andp.19524450108. 
^ Wolter, H. (1952), "A Generalized Schwarschild Mirror Systems For Use at Glancing Incidence for X-ray Imaging", Annalen der Physik, 10 (4–5): 286, Bibcode:1952AnP...445..286W, doi:10.1002/andp.19524450410. 
^ a b Tim Wogan – Silicon 'prism' bends gamma rays (May 2012) – PhysicsWorld.com


Sources[edit]

Contemporary Astronomy – Second Edition, Jay M. Pasachoff, Saunders Colleges Publishing – 1981, ISBN 0-03-057861-2
Elliott, Robert S. (1966), Electromagnetics, McGraw-Hill 
Rashed, Roshdi; Morelon, Régis (1996), Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, 1 & 3, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-12410-7 
Wade, Nicholas J.; Finger, Stanley (2001), "The eye as an optical instrument: from camera obscura to Helmholtz's perspective", Perception, 30 (10): 1157–1177, doi:10.1068/p3210, PMID 11721819 
Sabra, A. I.; Hogendijk, J. P. (2003). The Enterprise of Science in Islam: New Perspectives. MIT Press. pp. 85–118. ISBN 0-262-19482-1. 

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Telescope





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Telescope.



Galileo to Gamma Cephei – The History of the Telescope
The Galileo Project – The Telescope by Al Van Helden 
"The First Telescopes". Part of an exhibit from Cosmic Journey: A History of Scientific Cosmology by the American Institute of Physics
 Taylor, Harold Dennis; Gill, David (1911). "Telescope". Encyclopædia Britannica. 26 (11th ed.). pp. 557–573. 
Outside the Optical: Other Kinds of Telescopes
Gray, Meghan; Merrifield, Michael (2009). "Telescope Diameter". Sixty Symbols. Brady Haran for the University of Nottingham. 




Authority control



NDL: 00560817











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telescope&oldid=818130033"					Categories: TelescopesAstronomical imagingAstronomical instrumentsScience and technology in the Dutch RepublicDutch inventions17th-century introductionsHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles needing additional references from July 2008All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference