



Topics



Communications
Culture
Demographics
Economy
Education
Foreign relations
Geography
Government
History
Military
Politics
Religion
Tourism
Transport

Uruguay



Telecommunications in Uruguay includes radio, television, telephones, and the Internet.



Contents


1 Radio and television
2 Telephones
3 Internet

3.1 ADSL
3.2 Cable Internet
3.3 Fiber to the home
3.4 Fixed wireless
3.5 Mobile wireless
3.6 Internet Service Providers
3.7 Internet censorship and surveillance


4 References
5 External links



Radio and television[edit]
See also: List of radio stations in Uruguay and Television in Uruguay
Uruguay has a mixture of privately owned and state-run broadcast media; more than 100 commercial radio stations and about 20 TV channels. Cable TV is readily available. Uruguay adopted the hybrid Japanese/Brazilian HDTV standard (ISDB-T) in December 2010.[citation needed]

International call sign prefixes for radio and television stations: CV and CX[citation needed]

Telephones[edit]
See also: Telephone numbers in Uruguay

Land lines: 1,059,309 lines in use, equivalent to 0.32 lines per capita (June 2014).[1]
Mobile cellular lines: 5,358,325 lines in use, equivalent to 1.59 lines per capita (June 2014).[1]
Domestic system: fully digitalized, most modern facilities concentrated in Montevideo; nationwide microwave radio relay network.
Calling code: 598.
Submarine cable systems: UNISUR submarine cable system provides direct connectivity to Brazil and Argentina.[citation needed]
Satellite earth stations: Two, Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean).[citation needed]

Internet[edit]

Internet users: 1.405 million (2012).[citation needed]
Internet hosts: 1.036 million (2009).[citation needed]
Average connection speed (Q4 2016): 8.2 Mbit/s (world average=7.0 Mbit/s)[2]
Top-level domain: .uy

In Uruguay, one can access the Internet mainly by using:

ADSL services, provided by the monopoly state-owned company (ANTEL).
Wireless ISPs, which have a tendency to be more expensive because of high taxation and radio spectrum license costs.
WiMax launched by Dedicado in 2012.
The "VERA Network" currently being installed by ANTEL, a FTTH network to the whole country, which covers most of Montevideo; and the rest of the 19 provinces' most important cities.
WiFi access provided at shopping malls, bus lines and most of commercial business.
EDGE and GPRS mobile Internet services offered by all mobile phone companies at very low flat rates.
3G mobile Internet, offered by all the mobile phone companies with data rates of up to 3 Mbit/s. The 3G prices are relatively low compared to the world, because of the lack of the country population and also lack of cultural technology immersion.
LTE 4G service with high speed connections, about 20 Mbit/s, recently launched by ANTEL and Claro (Telmex).

Access from Uruguay to the Internet at large is concentrated in a few providers, which puts the country in the "significant risk" category for total loss of Internet connectivity in the case of internal or external turmoil. As of December 2012, the only other South American countries in this situation are Bolivia and Paraguay.[3]
ADSL[edit]
ANTEL, a telco company owned by the government, is the only ISP to provide ADSL service since it enjoys a monopoly in the basic telephony area. Other ISP use other technologies, such as radio, to get to customers.
The following are the plans marketed to home users by Antel as of July 2017. All plans require having a corresponding voice phone service with Antel. All prices include VAT.[4]
Consumer data plans

Plano 2:       3072 kbit/s down and   512 kbit/s up for   850 UYU (29 U$S) a month
Plano 3:       5120 kbit/s down and   512 kbit/s up for   1130 UYU (38 U$S) a month
Plano 4:     10240 kbit/s down and   512 kbit/s up for   1530 UYU (52 U$S) a month

These plans have a bandwidth throttling data limit at 100 Gbyte, at which point their down and upload speeds get halved.
All consumer plans provide a dynamic IP address only.
Business data plans
Customers who need an ADSL connection free of bandwidth throttling and capping have to buy one of Antel's business plans, which are significantly more expensive (roughly 5x for a plan of comparable downspeed.)[5]

Emprendedor 1:      6 Mbit/s down and 2 Mbit/s up for   5951 UYU (202 U$S) a month
Emprendedor 2:      8 Mbit/s down and 2 Mbit/s up for   6308 UYU (214 U$S) a month
Emprendedor 3:    10 Mbit/s down and 2 Mbit/s up for   7265 UYU (246 U$S) a month
Emprendedor 4:    12 Mbit/s down and 2 Mbit/s up for   8223 UYU (279 U$S) a month

All business plans include 5 fixed IP addresses.
Cable Internet[edit]
Despite a fully developed cable network in all mid- and large-size cities, there is no Internet access through cable TV systems in Uruguay as it has been steadfastly opposed by government regulators.[6] Cuba is the only other country in the Americas missing this component of the Internet access ecosystem.[7]
Fiber to the home[edit]
On November 2010, ANTEL announced that it would start rolling out Fiber to the home (FTTH) in the second half of 2011.[8] As of April 2013, the Antel website claims to have connected over 389,000 homes to the Internet via fiber. There is no evidence that the government will allow private companies to offer their own fiber networks to the home. Thus, the Uruguayan state will likely continue to wield monopoly power on physical media Internet connections to the home for the foreseeable future.
As of October 2014 Antel offers the following fiber to the home plans:[4]
− * Vera   20/2 Mbit/s: up to   20 Mbit/s down and   2 Mbit/s up, monthly data capped at 150 Gbyte† for   690 UYU (29 U$S) a month
− * Vera   60/10 Mbit/s: up to   50 Mbit/s down and 10 Mbit/s up, monthly data capped at 200 Gbyte† for   990 UYU (41 U$S) a month
− * Vera   80/10 Mbit/s: up to   80 Mbit/s down and 10 Mbit/s up, monthly data capped at 250 Gbyte† for 1290 UYU (54 U$S) a month
− * Vera 120/12 Mbit/s: up to 120 Mbit/s down and 12 Mbit/s up, monthly data capped at 350 Gbyte† for 1590 UYU (66 U$S) a month

† When this cap is reached the connection is throttled back to 10% of its advertised speed for the rest of the month. Note that if a user were able to run the connection steadily at its advertised downlink speed he/she would reach the cap after a period between 5 and 16 hours and would get 10% of advertised speed for the rest of the month.

Fixed wireless[edit]
Most of Uruguay's landmass is too far away from cities to have wired Internet access. For customers in these rural and low density suburban areas, fixed wireless ISPs provide a service. Wireless Internet service has also provided city Internet users with some degree of choice in a country where private companies have not been allowed to offer wired alternatives (e.g. cable TV Internet, fiber to the home) to the state-operated ADSL service.[citation needed]
Dedicado is a local wireless ISP. It appeared before or about at the same time as Anteldata (about in 1999), but since ADSL was not available at the same time on every neighborhood, Dedicado had the majority of the permanent Internet connections. As of November 2007, ADSL is available in every neighborhood in Montevideo, and in most other cities, and Dedicado lost a big market share, both because being more expensive and giving bad service to their users. They started a big advertising campaign, but didn't pay attention to the technical details related to their number of users, so their quality of service decreased.[citation needed] As of 2012, their quality of service issues appear to be on the mend, but their pricing issues continue especially in the rural market where they have no credible competition and have steadily increased prices. Dedicado originally operated Ericsson fixed wireless equipment and later transitioned to Motorola Canopy and Cambium technology. In 2005, they started deploying WiMAX services. However, as of May 2010, the service is not offered nor advertised yet. There are other wireless ISPs, but Dedicado is the main one.[citation needed]
Telmex is another entrant in the Uruguayan fixed wireless space.[citation needed] As of early 2012, they were still a tentative player however, with limited coverage of the country and some technical shortcomings (e.g. no Skype connectivity).[citation needed]
In February 2012, Antel announced a push to provide fixed wireless Internet service to rural customers using their 3G cellular network.[9] As of November 2012, the service was being actively offered to customers of the company's Ruralcel fixed wireless telephone service. Customers who sign up get the equipment (a ZTE MF612/MF32 or Huawei B660 3G router) and monthly Internet service for free. While the network and router are capable of supporting multi-Mbit/s service, the free offering is throttled back to 256 kb down/64 kb upload speeds and capped at 1 Gbyte of monthly data transfer (except for a small number of customers grandfathered from a previous service). Once that data limit is reached, the customer has to recharge the service using a prepaid card at a rate of approximately US$10/Gbyte. There is an alternative monthly billing plan that offers 2 Mbit/s down and 512 Mbit/s up with a 5 Gbyte data cap for US$15, plus US$10 for each additional Gbyte (up to 5 Gbyte). There is no unlimited data plan, which limits this technology's ability to compete in the non-residential fixed wireless space against vendors like Dedicado.[citation needed]
Mobile wireless[edit]
Internet access via cell phone networks is probably the most vibrant and competitive Internet marketplace in Uruguay. All the Uruguayan cell phone companies (Antel, Claro, Movistar) offer data plans for their smartphone users as well as USB modems for personal computers. Ancel/Antel even offers a bundle of cellular Internet access and ADSL, an unusual but potentially attractive combination for home ADSL users who also want to have Internet access on the go. The speeds delivered by all companies within their areas of coverage keep getting faster, and the areas of coverage keep expanding (as of 2012 Ancel probably still has the edge in % of the country's land covered). Vendors are shifting from 3G to 4G, starting in the area around Montevideo. From a consumer's standpoint, the only discouraging trend in this market is the adoption of data volume caps by all vendors. As of August 2012, no vendor web-site offered an unlimited mobile Internet data plan (the closest was an "unlimited during nights and weekends" from Claro). This means these offerings are unlikely to cross sell into the fixed wireless Internet market where unlimited data plans tend to be the rule.[according to whom?][citation needed]
Internet Service Providers[edit]
The main Internet Service Providers (ISPs) in Uruguay are:[citation needed]

ANTEL (http://www.antel.com.uy)
Claro (http://www.claro.com.uy)
Dedicado (http://www.dedicado.com.uy)
Movistar (http://www.movistar.com.uy)
TelMex, also related to CTI Movil (http://www.telmex.com.uy)

Many of those services also have an installation cost, which is equal to one or two months of service.[citation needed]
Internet censorship and surveillance[edit]
There are no government restrictions on access to or usage of the Internet[10] or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight.[11]
Uruguayan law provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure these rights. The law also prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice.[11]
In August 2016 the President of URSEC (the Uruguayan government agency equivalent to the FCC in the US) stated that his agency was at the government's beck and call to block the IP address of the servers of Uber to keep its app from operating in Uruguay. If carried out this would constitute the first and only known instance of Great Firewall style blocked-IP censorship in Uruguay. In the same interview he stated that WhatsApp "transgresses the limits of communications".[12] In July 2017 the Uruguayan subsecretary of economy stated that the government was considering "blocking the signals" of online gaming sites, which in Internet terms would seem to refer to some kind of IP-based censorship.[13][14]
In November 2016 the Uruguayan Ministry of the Interior initiated legal action against a Facebook and Twitter site ("chorros_uy") that reports criminal activity across Uruguay, alleging that it "raises public alarm".[15] The Interamerican Press Society swiftly criticized the Ministry's attempt to censor the site as "contrary to democracy's norms".[16]
As of 2017 a surveillance software suite, called "Guardián", capable of spying internet traffic, email accounts, social networks and telephone calls is being used without proper authorization from the Judiciary.[17]
References[edit]
 This article incorporates public domain material from the CIA World Factbook website https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html.



^ a b URSEC (June 2014). "Datos Estadisticos (Spanish)" (PDF). Retrieved October 29, 2014. 
^ State of the Internet Connectivity Infographic
^ Could it happen in your country?
^ a b Anteldata website
^ Montevideo Comm
^ Cable TV operators to sue Uruguayan state to be allowed to offer Internet service (in Spanish)
^ Only Cuba and Uruguay don't offer Internet access via cable modem (in Spanish)
^ Antel FTTH Announcement (in Spanish)
^ Antel Rural Internet Announcement (in Spanish)
^ "Uruguay", Freedom in the World 2013, Freedom House, 11 January 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2014.
^ a b "Uruguay", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 21 March 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2014.
^ El presidente de la Ursec dijo que el organismo 'está a la orden' de que el gobierno solicite el bloqueo de la aplicación", El Pais TV. Retrieved 26 August 2016 (in Spanish)
^ FA pide destinar crecimiento extra del PIB a prioridades", El Pais. Retrieved 23 July 2017 (in Spanish)
^ Gobierno quiere gravar a las plataformas digitales pero no sabe cómo hacerlo", El Observador. Retrieved 23 July 2017 (in Spanish)
^ Interior denunció a la cuenta Chorros Uy por 'infundir temor', El Pais. Retrieved 11 November 2016 (in Spanish)
^ SIP condena las acciones legales del gobierno contra la cuenta ChorrosUy, El Pais. Retrieved 11 November 2016 (in Spanish)
^ Control sobre "El Guardián", El Pais. Retrieved 10 March 2017 (in Spanish)



External links[edit]

URSEC, Unidad Reguladora de Servicios de Comunicaciones (Regulatory Services Unit for Communications) (in Spanish).
UY NIC, Regostro de Dominios UY (Registrar of Domains for UY) (in Spanish).
A directory of Uruguayan blogs







v
t
e


Telecommunications in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Uruguay articles



History



Banda Oriental
Charrúa people
Spanish colonization
Viceroyalty (1776–1814)
British invasions (1806–1807)
Liga Federal (1815–1820)
Cisplatina (1821–1828)
Thirty-Three Orientals
Treaty of Montevideo (1828)
Civil War (1839–1851)
Uruguayan War (1864–1865)
Paraguayan War (1864–1870)
Revolution of the Lances (1870–1872)
Battle of Masoller (1904)
Batllism
Tupamaros
Dictatorship (1973–1985)
Expiry Law (1986)








Geography







Borders
Cities

Montevideo


Climate
Departments
Environment
Extreme points
Fauna
Flora
Geology
Islands
Municipalities
National parks
Rivers
Time

DST










Politics











President
Cabinet
Political parties
Elections
Foreign relations
General Assembly (parliament)





Legal system



Civil Code
Constitution
Judiciary
Law
Nationality law
Passport
Supreme Court





Legal issues



Abortion
Cannabis use
Human rights
Human trafficking
Law enforcement
LGBT rights
Prostitution








Military



Army
Navy
Air Force
History
Ranks








Economy







Agriculture
Banking
Central Bank
Currency (peso
history)
Energy

Electricity sector
Nuclear energy


International rankings
Science and technology
State companies
Stockbreeding
Taxation

Revenue stamps


Telecommunications

Internet domain
Telephone numbers


Tourism
Trade unions
Transport

Airlines
Airports
Harbors
Lighthouses
Rail
Routes
Vehicle registration plates










Society







Anthem
Coat of arms
Demographics
Emigration
Ethnic groups
Flag
Healthcare
Immigration
LGBT
People
Public holidays
Scouting
Water supply and sanitation
Women





Culture



Cinema
Cuisine
Education

Universities


Languages
Literature
Mate
Media

newspapers
radio
television


Museums
Music
Religion
Smoking
Sport












Outline
Index
Bibliography



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Internet censorship and surveillance by country



Africa



Algeria
Angola
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo DR
Congo RO
Egypt
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritania
Morocco (Western Sahara)
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Argentina
Bahamas
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Greenland
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States (Puerto Rico)
Uruguay
Venezuela





Asia



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
East Timor
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Malaysia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
North Korea
Oman
Pakistan
Palestinian territories
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





Europe



Albania
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany (YouTube video blocking)
Georgia
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_Uruguay&oldid=812177838"					Categories: Telecommunications in UruguayTelecommunications by countryInternet censorship by countryInternet by countryTelecommunications in South AmericaInternet in UruguayHidden categories: Articles with Spanish-language external linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2014Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2013Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the World Factbook