Telecommunications had an early beginning in Mauritius, with the first telephone line installed in 1883, seven years after the invention of the telephone. Over the years, the network and telephony improved. By the late 20th century, the rapid development and convergence of information and telecommunications technologies gave rise to an ICT industry on the island along with many incentives provided by the government. The government thus aims to make the ICT sector the 5th pillar of the Mauritian economy and Mauritius a Cyber Island.[1] Historically, the country is known for tourism, rather than its call centers and business process outsourcing.[2]



Contents


1 History
2 General statistics
3 Television
4 Internet

4.1 Internet censorship and surveillance


5 Notes and references
6 External links



History[edit]
In 1883, basic telephony was introduced in Mauritius, only seven years after the invention of the telephone. The first telephone line was set up between the Colony Governor's residence in Reduit and Government House in Port Louis.[3] The telephone network was maintained by the Electricity and Telephone Department till 1956. From that date, the telecommunications department took that responsibility.[4]
In 1893, Mauritius was linked to Zanzibar via a sub-marine telegraphic cable followed by Rodrigues in 1901.[4]
Before the independence of the country and till 1985, international communications were managed by Cable & Wireless, a private British company. From 1985, Overseas Telecommunications Services, which subsequently became Mauritius Telecom Limited took over.[4]
The Central Information Systems Division (CISD), formerly known as Data Processing Division (DPD), was created in 1971. The CISD nowadays is responsible for government payroll IT systems, government email, maintenance of all government/departmental websites and technical support.[5]
In 1987, a second standard B earth station and a domestic satellite network were installed with Rodrigues and the Outer Islands. That same year, a X.25 Packet Switched data exchange was also installed.[6]
In July 1988, the state-owned Department of Telecommunications was privatised to become the Mauritius Telecommunications Services (MTS). With privatisation, national and international activities were merged to form Mauritius Telecom Ltd.[6]
The 1988 Telecommunications Act established the legal framework to cater for telecom services in a state-owned monopoly.[6]
The National Computer Board (NCB) was also set up in 1988 by the National Board Act (No 43) to advise the Government on the formulation of national policies for the development of the IT sector and promote an IT culture in the country.[7]
In 1989, the Central Informatics Bureau (CIB) was created whose main functions were to plan and coordinate computerization within the Civil Service.[8]
The State Informatics Limited was also set up in 1989 initially to help in the computerization of the Civil Service.[6]
in 1992, the Prime Minister of Mauritius said that he was firmly opposed to opening the hertzian waves to foreign television, and that his government "would not accord this liberty to foreigners".[9]
By 1997, the Ministry of Information and Telecommunications was created to formulate and implement policies regarding the development of the ICT sector. The CISD and CIB became departments within this new ministry.[6]
However, following the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) at the WTO, the 1988 Telecommunications Act was replaced with by the Telecommunications Act of 1998 which provided the legal framework to enable the emergence of a free and democratised telecommunications market on the island. This act also created the Mauritius Telecommunications Authority (MTA) as a regulatory body for the telecommunications sector.[6]
With the development of Information and Communications Technologies, the Telecommunications Act of 1998 was replaced by the Information and Communication Technologies Act of 2001. The MTA was subsequently replaced by the Information and Communication Technologies Authority (ICTA).[6] In 2007, the Information and Communication Technologies Authority directed internet service providers to block access to Facebook.[10] In 2009, the Information and Communication Technologies Authority rejected an application from Outremer Telecom for a cellular telephony licence.[11] In 2014, the Commercial Division of the Supreme Court ordered Data Communication Ltd to pay to the Information and Communication Technologies Authority the sum of Rs 20,672,135.80 inclusive of surcharges for late payment, with costs.[12]
General statistics[edit]






This article was imported from the CIA World Factbook and may require rewriting and/or reformatting to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Please discuss this issue on the talk page. Editing help is available.



Telephones - main lines in use: 372,200 (2014)
Telephones - mobile cellular: 1,652,000 (2014)
Telephone system: small system with good service
domestic: primarily microwave radio relay trunk system
international: country code - 230; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean); new microwave link to Reunion; HF radiotelephone links to several countries; fiber optic submarine cable (SAT-3/WASC/SAFE) provides connectivity to Europe and Asia
Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 9, shortwave 0 (2002)
Radios: 420,000 (1997)
Television broadcast stations: 2 (plus several repeaters) (1997)
Televisions: 258,000 (1997)
Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 14 (2014)
Internet users: 735,400 (2014) [13]
Country code (Top level domain): MU
Television[edit]
Television broadcast stations: Only one state-controlled station, Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation, as the government refuses to issue licences to domestic broadcasters.[14]
Internet[edit]
Mauritius has several operators like Mauritius Telecom, Nomad, Mahanagar Telephone Mauritius Limited (MTML) & Emtel. Each operator uses a different technology to provide Internet access. Nomad makes use of WiMAX, MTML uses CDMA2000 and Emtel uses HSDPA (3.5G). The monopoly is retained by Mauritius Telecom (MT) which provides dial-up & ADSL services over existing telephone lines.
Internet censorship and surveillance[edit]
In 2007, the government took down Facebook for a day.[15] There is a National Cyber Security Strategy for the government to set up a comprehensive framework to monitor Internet traffic which might be harmful to the nation and society.[16] in 2016, a couple was arrested after sharing a post about the Minister of Housing and Lands on Facebook.[17] In September 2016, the Internet filtering and Public Key Infrastructure servers operated by the Information and Communication Technologies Authority were seized by the National Security Service.[18]
Notes and references[edit]



^ "Development of ICT in Mauritius". Development of ICT in Mauritius. Ministry of Information and Communication Technology. Retrieved 3 September 2011. 
^ Yarney, John. "Business process outsourcing slow for Mauritius". Networkworld.com. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 
^ "ICT SEctor in Mauritius" (PDF). Icta.mu. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 
^ a b c Nagapen, Amédée (2010). Histoire de la Colonie: Isle de France - Ile Maurice (1721-1968). Editions de L'Océan Indien. p. 120. ISBN 978-99903-0-619-4. 
^ "Central Information Systems Division - About Us". Gov.mu. Retrieved 3 September 2011. 
^ a b c d e f g "The ICT Sector in Mauritius - An Overview" (PDF). The ICT Sector in Mauritius - An Overview. Information & Communication Technologies Authority. Retrieved 3 September 2011. 
^ "About the National Computer Board". About the National Computer Board. National Computer Board. Retrieved 3 September 2011. 
^ "About Central Informatics Bureau (CIB)". About Central Informatics Bureau (CIB). Central Informatics Bureau. Retrieved 3 September 2011. 
^ "Africa Intelligence: exclusive news on Africa". Africa Intelligence. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 
^ "Trilock Dwarka : pourquoi l?ICTA a bloqué «Facebook»". Lexpress.mu. 13 November 2007. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 
^ Lepoigneur, Florian (28 August 2016). "Éclairage : Mais à quoi donc sert l'ICTA ?". Lexpress.mu. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 
^ [1][dead link]
^ "Monitoring African Sovereign Risk" (PDF). KPMG. Retrieved 16 March 2015. 
^ Pierre, Patrick St (8 May 2016). "Télé privée: l'argent brouille le signal". Lexpress.mu. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 
^ Croft, Iain. "BBC - World Service - World Have Your Say: PRINCE AND FREE SPEECH". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 
^ "National Cyber Security Strategy" (PDF). Mtci.govmu.org. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 
^ "Deux internautes arrêtés à la suite d'une plainte de Soodhun". Lexpress.mu. 4 February 2016. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 
^ "Polémique : des serveurs saisis à l'Icta destinés aux écoutes ?". Defmedia.info. 13 September 2016. Retrieved 2017-08-27. 



External links[edit]

ICT sector in Mauritius
Information and Communication Technologies Authority (ICT Authority) - The Authority is the national regulator for the ICT sector and Postal Services in Mauritius





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Mauritius articles






History
Geography
Wildlife





Subdivisions




Outer islands







Agaléga
Cargados Carajos (St. Brandon)
Rodrigues








Islets of Mauritius





Fishing banks



Hawkins
Nazareth
Saya de Malha
Soudan








Districts



Flacq
Grand Port
Moka
Pamplemousses
Plaines Wilhems
Port Louis
Rivière du Rempart
Rivière Noire
Savanne





Claims



Chagos Archipelago
Tromelin











Politics







Cabinet
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
Military
National Assembly
Political parties
Supreme Court








Economy







Companies
Rupee (currency)
Telecommunications
Transport
International rankings








Society







Demographics

Creole
Franco-Mauritian
Indo-Mauritian
Sino-Mauritian


Education





Culture



Creole language
Mauritians
Media

Newspapers
Radio


Music
Religion

Hinduism
Christianity
Islam


Sport

Football
Rugby union














Outline
Index



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Telecommunications in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)
Western Sahara













v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Optical fiber
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


 Economy of Mauritius




Currency: Mauritian rupee



Communications



Banking
Communications
History of Trade
Transportation





Industries:



Agriculture
Tourism
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telecommunications_in_Mauritius&oldid=797425003"					Categories: Communications in MauritiusTelecommunications in MauritiusInternet by countryInternet in MauritiusTelecommunications by countryTelecommunications in AfricaHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Use dmy dates from July 2012CIA World Factbook cleanup