"Air TV" redirects here. For the anime, see Air (visual novel).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Over the Air antenna


Terrestrial television or broadcast television is a type of television broadcasting in which the television signal is transmitted by radio waves from the terrestrial (Earth based) transmitter of a television station to a TV receiver having an antenna. The term is more common in Europe, while in North America it is referred to as broadcast television or sometimes over-the-air television (OTA). The term "terrestrial" is used to distinguish this type from the newer technologies of satellite television (direct broadcast satellite or DBS television), in which the television signal is transmitted to the receiver from an overhead satellite, and cable television, in which the signal is carried to the receiver through a cable.
Terrestrial television was the first technology used for television broadcasting, with the first long-distance public television broadcast from Washington, D.C., on 7 April 1927. The BBC began broadcasting in 1929 and had a regular schedule of television programmes in 1930. However, these early experimental systems had insufficient picture quality to attract the public, due to their mechanical scan technology, and television didn't become widespread until after World War II with the advent of electronic scan technology. The television broadcasting business followed the model of radio networks, with local television stations in cities and towns affiliated with television networks, either commercial (in USA) or government-controlled (in Europe), which provided content. Television broadcasts were in black and white until the transition to color television in the 1950s and 60s.[1]
There was no other method of television delivery until the 1950s with the beginnings of cable television and community antenna television (CATV). CATV was, initially, only a re-broadcast of over-the-air signals. With the widespread adoption of cable across the United States in the 1970s and 1980s, viewing of terrestrial television broadcasts has been in decline; in 2013, it was estimated that about 7% of US households used an antenna.[2][3] A slight increase in use began after the 2009 final conversion to digital terrestrial television broadcasts, which offer HDTV image quality as an alternative to CATV for cord cutters.[citation needed]




Rooftop television antennas like these are required to receive terrestrial television in fringe reception areas far from the television station.





Contents


1 Europe
2 North America
3 Asia
4 Digital terrestrial television
5 Competition for radio spectrum
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Europe[edit]
Following the ST61 conference, UHF frequencies were first used in the UK in 1964 with the introduction of BBC2. In UK, VHF channels were kept on the old 405-line system, while UHF was used solely for 625-line broadcasts (which later used PAL colour). Television broadcasting in the 405-line system continued after the introduction of four analogue programmes in the UHF bands until the last 405-line transmitters were switched off on January 6, 1985. VHF Band III was used in other countries around Europe for PAL broadcasts until planned phase out and switchover to digital television.
The success of analogue terrestrial television across Europe varied from country to country. Although each country had rights to a certain number of frequencies by virtue of the ST61 plan, not all of them were brought into service.
North America[edit]
In 1941, the first NTSC standard was introduced by the National Television System Committee. This standard defined a transmission scheme for a black and white picture with 525 lines of vertical resolution at 60 fields per second. In the early 1950s, this standard was superseded by a backwards-compatible standard for color television. The NTSC standard was used in the Americas as well as Japan until the introduction of digital television.[4]
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the Advanced Television Systems Committee developed the ATSC standard for digital high definition terrestrial transmission. This standard was eventually adopted by many North American countries, including the United States, Canada, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico.[5] [6]
North American terrestrial broadcast television operates on analog channels 2 through 6 (VHF-low band, 54 to 88 MHz, known as band I in Europe), 7 through 13 (VHF-high band, 174 to 216 MHz, known as band III elsewhere), and 14 through 51 (UHF television band, 470 to 698 MHz, elsewhere bands IV and V). Unlike with analog transmission, ATSC channel numbers do not correspond to radio frequencies. Instead, a virtual channel is defined as part of the ATSC stream metadata so that a station can transmit on any frequency but still show the same channel number.[7] Additionally, broadcast translators and signal boosters can be used to rebroadcast a terrestrial television signal using an otherwise unused channel to cover areas with marginal reception. (see North American broadcast television frequencies for frequency allocation charts)[8]
Analog television channels 2 through 6, 7 through 13, and 14 through 51 are only used for LPTV translator stations in the U.S. Channels 52 through 69 are still used by some existing stations, but these channels must be vacated if telecommunications companies notify the stations to vacate that signal spectrum.
Asia[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (November 2010)



Terrestrial television broadcast in Asia started as early as 1939 in Japan through a series of experiments done by NHK Broadcasting Institute of Technology. However, these experiments were interrupted by the beginning of the World War II in the Pacific. On February 1, 1953, NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corporation) began broadcasting. On August 28, 1953, Nippon TV (Nippon Television Network Corporation), the first commercial television broadcaster in Asia was launched. Meanwhile, in the Philippines, Alto Broadcasting System (now ABS-CBN), the first commercial television broadcaster in Southeast Asia, launched its first commercial terrestrial television station DZAQ-TV on October 23, 1953, with the help of Radio Corporation of America (RCA).
Digital terrestrial television[edit]
Main article: Digital terrestrial television






This section needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (December 2014)



By the mid-1990s, the interest in digital television across Europe was such the CEPT convened the "Chester '97" conference to agree means by which digital television could be inserted into the ST61 frequency plan.
The introduction of digital television in the late 1990s and early years of the 21st century led the ITU to call a Regional Radiocommunication Conference to abrogate the ST61 plan and to put a new plan for digital broadcasting only in its place.
In December 2005, the European Union decided to cease all analog audio and analog video television transmissions by 2012 and switch all terrestrial television broadcasting to digital audio and digital video (all EU countries have agreed on using DVB-T). The Netherlands completed the transition in December 2006, and some EU member states decided to complete their switchover as early as 2008 (Sweden), and (Denmark) in 2009. While the UK began the switch in late 2007, it was not completed until 24 October 2012. Norway ceased all analogue television transmissions on December 1, 2009.[9] Two member states (not specified in the announcement) have expressed concerns that they might not be able to proceed to the switchover by 2012 due to technical limitations; the rest of the EU member states had stopped analog television transmissions by the end 2012.
Many countries are developing and evaluating digital terrestrial television systems.
Australia has adopted the DVB-T standard and the government's industry regulator, the Australian Communications and Media Authority, has mandated that all analogue transmissions will cease by 2012. Mandated digital conversion commenced early in 2009 with a graduated program. The first centre to experience analog switch-off will be the remote Victorian regional town of Mildura, in 2010. The government will supply underprivileged houses across the nation with free digital set-top DTV converter boxes in order to minimise any conversion disruption. Australia's major free-to-air television networks have all been granted digital transmission licences and are each required to broadcast at least one high-definition and one standard-definition channel into all of their markets.
In North America a specification laid out by the ATSC has become the standard for digital terrestrial television. In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) set the final deadline for the switch-off of analog service for June 12, 2009. All television receivers must now include a digital tuner. In Canada, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC), set August 31, 2011, as the date that over-the-air analog transmission service ceased in metropolitan areas and provincial capitals. [10] [11] In Mexico, the Federal Telecommunications Institute (IFT) set the final deadline for the end of Analog Television for December 31, 2015.
Competition for radio spectrum[edit]






This article's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date information. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (December 2010)



In late 2009, US competition for the limited available radio spectrum led to debate over the possible re-allocation of frequencies currently occupied by television, and the FCC began asking for comments on how to increase the bandwidth available for wireless broadband. Some have proposed mixing the two together, on different channels that are already open (like White Spaces) while others have proposed "repacking" some stations and forcing them off certain channels, just a few years after the same thing was done (without compensation to the broadcasters) in the DTV transition in the United States.
Some US commentators have proposed the closing down of over-the-air TV broadcasting, on the grounds that available spectrum might be better used, and requiring viewers to shift to satellite or cable reception. This would eliminate mobile TV, which has been delayed several years by the FCC's decision to choose ATSC and its proprietary 8VSB modulation, instead of the worldwide COFDM standard used for all other digital terrestrial broadcasting around the world. Compared to Europe and Asia, this has hamstrung mobile TV in the US, because ATSC cannot be received while in motion (or often even while stationary) without ATSC-M/H as terrestrial DVB-T or ISDB-T can even without DVB-H or 1seg.
The National Association of Broadcasters has organized to fight such proposals, and public comments are also being taken by the FCC through mid-December 2009, in preparation for a plan to be released in mid-February 2010.
See also[edit]


Television portal



List of United States over-the-air television networks
Pay television
Broadcast television systems
Lists of television channels for lists by country and language.
Television channel frequencies
DVB-T
ATSC tuner
Television antenna

References[edit]



^ "The Color Revolution: Television In The Sixties". TVObscurities. 2005-02-15. Retrieved 2017-09-04. 
^ "CEA Study Says Seven Percent of TV Households Use Antennas", '"TVTechnology, 30 July 2013
^ "Nielsen: Broadcast Reliance Grew in 2012", TVTechnology, 14 January 2013
^ Mick Hurbis-Cherrier (2007). "NTSC Broadcast Standards" (PDF). Retrieved 2017-09-04. 
^ "About ATSC". Advanced Television Systems Committee. Retrieved 2017-09-04. 
^ "ATSC Standards". Advanced Television Systems Committee. Retrieved 2017-09-04. 
^ ATSC Standard: Program and System Information Protocol for Terrestrial Broadcast and Cable (PDF), Advanced Television Systems Committee, retrieved 2017-09-04 
^ "FCC regulations CFR 47 Part 74 Subpart L: FM Broadcast Translator Stations and FM Broadcast Booster Stations". Edocket.access.gpo.gov. Retrieved 2017-09-04. 
^ "DVB - Digital Video Broadcasting - Norway". Digital Video Broadcasting Project. 
^ "The Commission establishes a new approach for Canadian conventional television" (Press release). Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission. 2007-05-17. Retrieved 2007-05-17. 
^ "Broadcasting Public Notice CRTC 2007-53". Sections 50 to 80. Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission. 2007-05-17. Retrieved 2007-05-17. 



External links[edit]

TVRadioWorld TV stations directory
W9WI.com (Terrestrial repeater and TV hobbyist information)
TV Coverage maps and Signal Analysis







v
t
e


Analog television broadcasting topics



Systems



180-line
405-line ( System A )
441-line
525-line ( System J , System M )
625-line ( System B , System C , System D , System G , System H , System I , System K , System L , System N )
819-line ( System E , System F )





Color systems



NTSC
PAL
PAL-M
PAL-S
PALplus
SECAM





Video



Back porch and front porch
Black level
Blanking level
Chrominance
Chrominance subcarrier
Colorburst
Color killer
Color TV
Composite video
Frame (video)
Horizontal scan rate
Horizontal blanking interval
Luma
Nominal analogue blanking
Overscan
Raster scan
Safe area
Television lines
Vertical blanking interval
White clipper





Sound



Multichannel television sound
NICAM
Sound-in-Syncs
Zweikanalton





Modulation



Frequency modulation
Quadrature amplitude modulation
Vestigial sideband modulation (VSB)





Transmission



Amplifiers
Antenna (radio)
Broadcast transmitter/Transmitter station
Cavity amplifier
Differential gain
Differential phase
Diplexer
Dipole antenna
Dummy load
Frequency mixer
Intercarrier method
Intermediate frequency
Output power of an analog TV transmitter
Pre-emphasis
Residual carrier
Split sound system
Superheterodyne transmitter
Television receive-only
Direct-broadcast satellite television
Television transmitter
Terrestrial television
Transposer





Frequencies & Bands



Frequency offset
Microwave transmission
Television channel frequencies
UHF
VHF





Propagation



Beam tilt
Distortion
Earth bulge
Field strength in free space
Knife-edge effect
Noise (electronics)
Null fill
Path loss
Radiation pattern
Skew
Television interference





Testing



Distortionmeter
Field strength meter
Vectorscope
VIT signals
Zero reference pulse





Artifacts



Dot crawl
Ghosting
Hanover bars
Sparklies












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Terrestrial_television&oldid=804606508"					Categories: Television technologyTelevision terminologyHistory of televisionHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2010All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2017Articles to be expanded from November 2010All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesWikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2014All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingArticles with obsolete information from December 2010