"Fabric" redirects here. For other uses, see Fabric (disambiguation) and Textile (disambiguation).




Textile market on the sidewalks of Karachi, Pakistan






Simple textile (magnified)






Fabric shop in canal town Mukalla, Yemen






Late antique textile, Egyptian, now in the Dumbarton Oaks collection






Mrs. Condé Nast wearing a silk Fortuny tea gown






Traditional table cloth, Maramureș, Romania


A textile[1] is a flexible material consisting of a network of natural or artificial fibres (yarn or thread). Yarn is produced by spinning raw fibres of wool, flax, cotton, hemp, or other materials to produce long strands.[2] Textiles are formed by weaving, knitting, crocheting, knotting, or felting.
The related words fabric[3] and cloth[4] are often used in textile assembly trades (such as tailoring and dressmaking) as synonyms for textile. However, there are subtle differences in these terms in specialized usage. A textile is any material made of interlacing fibres, including carpeting and geotextiles. A fabric is a material made through weaving, knitting, spreading, crocheting, or bonding that may be used in production of further goods (garments, etc.). Cloth may be used synonymously with fabric but is often a piece of fabric that has been processed.




Alpaca textiles at the Otavalo Artisan Market in the Andes Mountains, Ecuador





Contents


1 Etymology
2 History
3 Uses
4 Sources and types

4.1 Animal
4.2 Plant
4.3 Mineral
4.4 Synthetic


5 Production methods
6 Treatments
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading



Etymology[edit]
The word 'textile' is from Latin, from the adjective textilis, meaning 'woven', from textus, the past participle of the verb texere, 'to weave'.[5]
The word 'fabric' also derives from Latin, most recently from the Middle French fabrique, or 'building, thing made', and earlier as the Latin fabrica 'workshop; an art, trade; a skilful production, structure, fabric', which is from the Latin faber, or 'artisan who works in hard materials', from PIE dhabh-, meaning 'to fit together'.[6]
The word 'cloth' derives from the Old English clað, meaning a cloth, woven or felted material to wrap around one, from Proto-Germanic kalithaz (compare O.Frisian 'klath', Middle Dutch 'cleet', Dutch 'kleed', Middle High German 'kleit', and German 'kleid', all meaning "garment").[7]
History[edit]
Main article: History of clothing and textiles
The discovery of dyed flax fibres in a cave in the Republic of Georgia dated to 34,000 BCE suggests textile-like materials were made even in prehistoric times.[8][9]




Textile machinery at the Cambrian Factory, Llanwrtyd, Wales in the 1940s


The production of textiles is a craft whose speed and scale of production has been altered almost beyond recognition by industrialization and the introduction of modern manufacturing techniques. However, for the main types of textiles, plain weave, twill, or satin weave, there is little difference between the ancient and modern methods.
Uses[edit]
Textiles have an assortment of uses, the most common of which are for clothing and for containers such as bags and baskets. In the household they are used in carpeting, upholstered furnishings, window shades, towels, coverings for tables, beds, and other flat surfaces, and in art. In the workplace they are used in industrial and scientific processes such as filtering. Miscellaneous uses include flags, backpacks, tents, nets, handkerchiefs, cleaning rags, transportation devices such as balloons, kites, sails, and parachutes; textiles are also used to provide strengthening in composite materials such as fibreglass and industrial geotextiles. Textiles are used in many traditional crafts such as sewing, quilting and embroidery.
Textiles for industrial purposes, and chosen for characteristics other than their appearance, are commonly referred to as technical textiles. Technical textiles include textile structures for automotive applications, medical textiles (e.g. implants), geotextiles (reinforcement of embankments), agrotextiles (textiles for crop protection), protective clothing (e.g. against heat and radiation for fire fighter clothing, against molten metals for welders, stab protection, and bullet proof vests). In all these applications stringent performance requirements must be met. Woven of threads coated with zinc oxide nanowires, laboratory fabric has been shown capable of "self-powering nanosystems" using vibrations created by everyday actions like wind or body movements.[10][11]
Sources and types[edit]
Textiles are made from many materials, with four main sources: animal (wool, silk), plant (cotton, flax, jute), mineral (asbestos, glass fibre), and synthetic (nylon, polyester, acrylic). The first three are natural. In the 20th century, they were supplemented by artificial fibres made from petroleum.
Textiles are made in various strengths and degrees of durability, from the finest microfibre made of strands thinner than one denier to the sturdiest canvas. Textile manufacturing terminology has a wealth of descriptive terms, from light gauze-like gossamer to heavy grosgrain cloth and beyond.
Animal[edit]
Animal textiles are commonly made from hair, fur, skin or silk (in the silkworms case).
Wool refers to the hair of the domestic goat or sheep, which is distinguished from other types of animal hair in that the individual strands are coated with scales and tightly crimped, and the wool as a whole is coated with a wax mixture known as lanolin (sometimes called wool grease), which is waterproof and dirtproof[citation needed]. Woollen refers to a bulkier yarn produced from carded, non-parallel fibre, while worsted refers to a finer yarn spun from longer fibres which have been combed to be parallel. Wool is commonly used for warm clothing. Cashmere, the hair of the Indian cashmere goat, and mohair, the hair of the North African angora goat, are types of wool known for their softness.
Other animal textiles which are made from hair or fur are alpaca wool, vicuña wool, llama wool, and camel hair, generally used in the production of coats, jackets, ponchos, blankets, and other warm coverings. Angora refers to the long, thick, soft hair of the angora rabbit. Qiviut is the fine inner wool of the muskox.
Wadmal is a coarse cloth made of wool, produced in Scandinavia, mostly 1000~1500 CE.
Silk is an animal textile made from the fibres of the cocoon of the Chinese silkworm which is spun into a smooth fabric prized for its softness. There are two main types of the silk: 'mulberry silk' produced by the Bombyx Mori, and 'wild silk' such as Tussah silk. Silkworm larvae produce the first type if cultivated in habitats with fresh mulberry leaves for consumption, while Tussah silk is produced by silkworms feeding purely on oak leaves. Around four-fifths of the world's silk production consists of cultivated silk.[12]
Plant[edit]
Grass, rush, hemp, and sisal are all used in making rope. In the first two, the entire plant is used for this purpose, while in the last two, only fibres from the plant are utilized. Coir (coconut fibre) is used in making twine, and also in floormats, doormats, brushes, mattresses, floor tiles, and sacking.
Straw and bamboo are both used to make hats. Straw, a dried form of grass, is also used for stuffing, as is kapok.
Fibres from pulpwood trees, cotton, rice, hemp, and nettle are used in making paper.
Cotton, flax, jute, hemp, modal and even bamboo fibre are all used in clothing. Piña (pineapple fibre) and ramie are also fibres used in clothing, generally with a blend of other fibres such as cotton. Nettles have also been used to make a fibre and fabric very similar to hemp or flax. The use of milkweed stalk fibre has also been reported, but it tends to be somewhat weaker than other fibres like hemp or flax.
The inner bark of the lacebark tree is a fine netting that has been used to make clothing and accessories as well as utilitarian articles such as rope.
Acetate is used to increase the shininess of certain fabrics such as silks, velvets, and taffetas.
Seaweed is used in the production of textiles: a water-soluble fibre known as alginate is produced and is used as a holding fibre; when the cloth is finished, the alginate is dissolved, leaving an open area.
Lyocell is a synthetic fabric derived from wood pulp. It is often described as a synthetic silk equivalent; it is a tough fabric that is often blended with other fabrics – cotton, for example.
Fibres from the stalks of plants, such as hemp, flax, and nettles, are also known as 'bast' fibres.
Mineral[edit]
Asbestos and basalt fibre are used for vinyl tiles, sheeting and adhesives, "transite" panels and siding, acoustical ceilings, stage curtains, and fire blankets.
Glass fibre is used in the production of ironing board and mattress covers, ropes and cables, reinforcement fibre for composite materials, insect netting, flame-retardant and protective fabric, soundproof, fireproof, and insulating fibres. Glass fibres are woven and coated with Teflon to produce beta cloth, a virtually fireproof fabric which replaced nylon in the outer layer of United States space suits since 1968.
Metal fibre, metal foil, and metal wire have a variety of uses, including the production of cloth-of-gold and jewellery. Hardware cloth (US term only) is a coarse woven mesh of steel wire, used in construction. It is much like standard window screening, but heavier and with a more open weave.
Minerals and natural and synthetic fabrics may be combined, as in emery cloth, a layer of emery abrasive glued to a cloth backing. Also, "sand cloth" is a U.S. term for fine wire mesh with abrasive glued to it, employed like emery cloth or coarse sandpaper.
Synthetic[edit]




A variety of contemporary fabrics. From the left: evenweave cotton, velvet, printed cotton, calico, felt, satin, silk, hessian, polycotton






Woven tartan of Clan Campbell, Scotland






Embroidered skirts by the Alfaro-Nùñez family of Cochas, Peru, using traditional Peruvian embroidery methods[13]


Synthetic textiles are used primarily in the production of clothing, as well as the manufacture of geotextiles.
Polyester fibre is used in all types of clothing, either alone or blended with fibres such as cotton.
Aramid fibre (e.g. Twaron) is used for flame-retardant clothing, cut-protection, and armour.
Acrylic is a fibre used to imitate wools,[14] including cashmere, and is often used in replacement of them.
Nylon is a fibre used to imitate silk; it is used in the production of pantyhose. Thicker nylon fibres are used in rope and outdoor clothing.
Spandex (trade name Lycra) is a polyurethane product that can be made tight-fitting without impeding movement. It is used to make activewear, bras, and swimsuits.
Olefin fibre is a fibre used in activewear, linings, and warm clothing. Olefins are hydrophobic, allowing them to dry quickly. A sintered felt of olefin fibres is sold under the trade name Tyvek.
Ingeo is a polylactide fibre blended with other fibres such as cotton and used in clothing. It is more hydrophilic than most other synthetics, allowing it to wick away perspiration.
Lurex is a metallic fibre used in clothing embellishment.
Milk proteins have also been used to create synthetic fabric. Milk or casein fibre cloth was developed during World War I in Germany, and further developed in Italy and America during the 1930s.[15] Milk fibre fabric is not very durable and wrinkles easily, but has a pH similar to human skin and possesses anti-bacterial properties. It is marketed as a biodegradable, renewable synthetic fibre.[16]
Carbon fibre is mostly used in composite materials, together with resin, such as carbon fibre reinforced plastic. The fibres are made from polymer fibres through carbonization.




A. C. Lawrence Leather Co. c. 1910 Peabody, Massachusetts, US


Production methods[edit]
Main articles: Textile manufacturing and Textile industry


Top five exporters of textiles—2013
($ billion)


China
274


India
40


Italy
36


Germany
35


Bangladesh
28


Source:[17]


Weaving is a textile production method which involves interlacing a set of longer threads (called the warp) with a set of crossing threads (called the weft). This is done on a frame or machine known as a loom, of which there are a number of types. Some weaving is still done by hand, but the vast majority is mechanized.
Knitting, looping, and crocheting involve interlacing loops of yarn, which are formed either on a knitting needle, needle, or on a crochet hook, together in a line. The processes are different in that knitting has several active loops at one time, on the knitting needle waiting to interlock with another loop, while Looping and crocheting never have more than one active loop on the needle. Knitting can be performed by machine, but crochet can only be performed by hand.[18]
Spread Tow is a production method where the yarn are spread into thin tapes, and then the tapes are woven as warp and weft. This method is mostly used for composite materials; spread tow fabrics can be made in carbon, aramide, etc.
Braiding or plaiting involves twisting threads together into cloth. Knotting involves tying threads together and is used in making macrame.
Lace is made by interlocking threads together independently, using a backing and any of the methods described above, to create a fine fabric with open holes in the work. Lace can be made by either hand or machine.
Carpets, rugs, velvet, velour, and velveteen are made by interlacing a secondary yarn through woven cloth, creating a tufted layer known as a nap or pile.
Felting involves pressing a mat of fibres together, and working them together until they become tangled. A liquid, such as soapy water, is usually added to lubricate the fibres, and to open up the microscopic scales on strands of wool.
Nonwoven textiles are manufactured by the bonding of fibres to make fabric. Bonding may be thermal or mechanical, or adhesives can be used.
Bark cloth is made by pounding bark until it is soft and flat.
Treatments[edit]
Textiles are often dyed, with fabrics available in almost every colour. The dyeing process often requires several dozen gallons of water for each pound of clothing.[19] Coloured designs in textiles can be created by weaving together fibres of different colours (tartan or Uzbek Ikat), adding coloured stitches to finished fabric (embroidery), creating patterns by resist dyeing methods, tying off areas of cloth and dyeing the rest (tie-dyeing), or drawing wax designs on cloth and dyeing in between them (batik), or using various printing processes on finished fabric. Woodblock printing, still used in India and elsewhere today, is the oldest of these dating back to at least 220 CE in China. Textiles are also sometimes bleached, making the textile pale or white.




Brilliantly dyed traditional woven textiles of Guatemala, and woman weaving on a backstrap loom


Textiles are sometimes finished by chemical processes to change their characteristics. In the 19th century and early 20th century starching was commonly used to make clothing more resistant to stains and wrinkles.
Eisengarn, meaning "iron yarn" in English, is a light-reflecting, strong material invented in Germany in the 19th century. It is made by soaking cotton threads in a starch and paraffin wax solution. The threads are then stretched and polished by steel rollers and brushes. The end result of the process is a lustrous, tear-resistant yarn which is extremely hardwearing.[20][21]
Since the 1990s, with advances in technologies such as permanent press process, finishing agents have been used to strengthen fabrics and make them wrinkle free.[22] More recently, nanomaterials research has led to additional advancements, with companies such as Nano-Tex and NanoHorizons developing permanent treatments based on metallic nanoparticles for making textiles more resistant to things such as water, stains, wrinkles, and pathogens such as bacteria and fungi.[23]
More so today than ever before, textiles receive a range of treatments before they reach the end-user. From formaldehyde finishes (to improve crease-resistance) to biocidic finishes and from flame retardants to dyeing of many types of fabric, the possibilities are almost endless. However, many of these finishes may also have detrimental effects on the end user. A number of disperse, acid and reactive dyes (for example) have been shown to be allergenic to sensitive individuals.[24] Further to this, specific dyes within this group have also been shown to induce purpuric contact dermatitis.[25]
Although formaldehyde levels in clothing are unlikely to be at levels high enough to cause an allergic reaction,[26] due to the presence of such a chemical, quality control and testing are of utmost importance. Flame retardants (mainly in the brominated form) are also of concern where the environment, and their potential toxicity, are concerned.[27] Testing for these additives is possible at a number of commercial laboratories, it is also possible to have textiles tested for according to the Oeko-tex certification standard which contains limits levels for the use of certain chemicals in textiles products.
See also[edit]


Bangladesh University of Textiles
Bangladesh textile industry
Bettsometer
List of textile fibres
Maya textiles
Fibre art
Quipu
Realia (library science)
Smart textiles
Textile arts
Textile manufacturing (terminology)
Textile museum
Textile preservation
Textile printing
Textile recycling
Textile Research Centre, Leiden, the Netherlands
Textiles of Lampung / Mexico / Oaxaca
Timeline of clothing and textiles technology
Units of textile measurement
List of fabric names


References[edit]


^ "Textile". Merriam-Webster. Archived from the original on 2011-11-09. Retrieved 2012-05-25. 
^ "An Introduction to Textile Terms" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 23, 2006. Retrieved August 6, 2006. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2017-10-19. Retrieved 2017-10-18. 
^ "Cloth". Merriam-Webster. Archived from the original on 2012-06-06. Retrieved 2012-05-25. 
^ "Textile". The Free Dictionary By Farlex. Retrieved 2012-05-25. 
^ Harper, Douglas. "fabric". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2012-12-11. 
^ Harper, Douglas. "cloth". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2012-12-11. 
^ Balter, M. (2009). "Clothes Make the (Hu) Man". Science. 325 (5946): 1329. doi:10.1126/science.325_1329a. PMID 19745126. 
^ Kvavadze, E.; Bar-Yosef, O.; Belfer-Cohen, A.; Boaretto, E.; Jakeli, N.; Matskevich, Z.; Meshveliani, T. (2009). "30,000-Year-Old Wild Flax Fibers". Science. 325 (5946): 1359. doi:10.1126/science.1175404. PMID 19745144.  Supporting Online Material Archived 2009-11-27 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Keim, Brandon (February 13, 2008). "Piezoelectric Nanowires Turn Fabric Into Power Source". Wired News. CondéNet. Archived from the original on February 15, 2008. Retrieved 2008-02-13. 
^ Yong Qin, Xudong Wang & Zhong Lin Wang (October 10, 2007). "Letter/abstract: Microfibre–nanowire hybrid structure for energy scavenging". Nature. Nature Publishing Group. 451 (7180): 809–813. doi:10.1038/nature06601. PMID 18273015. Archived from the original on February 15, 2008. Retrieved 2008-02-13.  cited in "Editor's summary: Nanomaterial: power dresser". Nature. Nature Publishing Group. February 14, 2008. Archived from the original on February 15, 2008. Retrieved 2008-02-13. 
^ Trevisan, Adrian. "Cocoon Silk: A Natural Silk Architecture". Sense of Nature. Archived from the original on 2012-05-07. 
^ Art-Gourds.com Archived 2008-10-13 at the Wayback Machine. Traditional Peruvian embroidery production methods
^ Hammerskog, Paula; Wincent, Eva (2009). Swedish Knits: Classic and Modern Designs in the Scandinavian Tradition. Skyhorse Publishing Inc. ISBN 9781602397248. Archived from the original on 2017-11-23. 
^ Euroflax Industries Ltd. "Euroflaxx Industries (Import of Textiles)" Archived 2010-01-13 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Fonte, Diwata (August 23, 2005). "Milk-fabric clothing raises a few eyebrows". The Orange County Register. Archived from the original on May 1, 2015. Retrieved 2009-10-21. 
^ "India overtakes Germany and Italy, is new world No. 2 in textile exports". Archived from the original on 2015-02-15. Retrieved 2015-02-03. 
^ Rowe, Ann Pollard (1997). Looping and Knitting. Washington, D.C.: The Textile Museum. p. 2. 
^ Green Inc. Blog "Cutting Water Use in the Textile Industry." Archived 2009-07-24 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. July 21, 2009. July 28, 2009.
^ Industriegeschichte aus dem Bergischen land (in German). (Accessed: 27 November 2016)
^ WDR digit project. Eisengarnfabrikation in Barmen. Archived 2016-11-28 at the Wayback Machine. (Video (16 min) in German). (Accessed: 27 November 2016).
^ "What makes fabric "wrinkle-free"? Is it the weave or a special type of fiber?". Ask.yahoo.com. 2001-03-15. Archived from the original on 2012-01-17. Retrieved 2011-12-04. 
^ "The Materials Science and Engineering of Clothing". Tms.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-21. Retrieved 2011-12-04. 
^ Lazarov, A (2004). "Textile dermatitis in patients with contact sensitization in Israel: A 4-year prospective study". Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology. 18 (5): 531–7. doi:10.1111/j.1468-3083.2004.00967.x. PMID 15324387. 
^ Lazarov, A; Cordoba, M; Plosk, N; Abraham, D (2003). "Atypical and unusual clinical manifestations of contact dermatitis to clothing (textile contact dermatitis): Case presentation and review of the literature". Dermatology online journal. 9 (3): 1. PMID 12952748. 
^ Scheman, AJ; Carroll, PA; Brown, KH; Osburn, AH (1998). "Formaldehyde-related textile allergy: An update". Contact dermatitis. 38 (6): 332–6. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0536.1998.tb05769.x. PMID 9687033. 
^ Alaee, M; Arias, P; Sjödin, A; Bergman, A (2003). "An overview of commercially used brominated flame retardants, their applications, their use patterns in different countries/regions and possible modes of release" (PDF). Environment International. 29 (6): 683–9. doi:10.1016/S0160-4120(03)00121-1. PMID 12850087. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-28. 


Further reading[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Textile





Look up cloth in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Textiles and Fabrics.



Fisher, Nora. Rio Grande Textiles (Paperbound ed.). Museum of New Mexico Press. [year needed] Introduction by Teresa Archuleta-Sagel. 196 pages with 125 black and white as well as colour plates. Fisher is Curator Emirta, Textiles & Costumes of the Museum of International Folk Art.
Good, Irene (2006). "Textiles as a Medium of Exchange in Third Millennium B.C.E. Western Asia". In Mair, Victor H. Contact and Exchange in the Ancient World. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press. pp. 191–214. ISBN 978-0-8248-2884-4. 
Arai, Masanao (Textile Industry Research Institute of Gunma). "From Kitsch to Art Moderne: Popular Textiles for Women in the First Half of Twentieth-Century Japan" (Archive). Textile Society of America Symposium Proceedings. Textile Society of America, January 1, 1998.







v
t
e


Textile arts



Fundamentals



Applique
Beadwork
Crochet
Dyeing
Embroidery
Fabric
Felting
Fiber
Knitting
Lace
Macramé
Nålebinding
Needlework
Patchwork
Passementerie
Plying
Quilting
Rope
Rug making
Sewing
Stitch
Textile printing
Weaving
Yarn










History of ...



Byzantine silk
Clothing and textiles
Silk
Quilting
Silk in the Indian subcontinent
Textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods
Textiles in the Industrial Revolution
Modern Industrial Textile Production
Timeline of textile technology





Regional and ethnic



African
Andean
Australian Aboriginal
Hmong
Indigenous peoples of the Americas
Korean
Māori
Mapuche
Maya
Mexican
Navajo
Oaxacan





Related



Blocking
Fiber art
Mathematics and fiber arts
Manufacturing
Preservation
Recycling
Textile industry
Textile museums
Units of measurement
Wearable fiber art





Glossaries



Dyeing terms
Sewing terms
Textile terms












v
t
e


Fabric



Woven



Aertex
Airdura
Airguard
Barathea
Barkcloth
Batiste
Bedford cord
Bengaline
Beta cloth
Bombazine
Brilliantine
Broadcloth
Buckram
Bunting
Burlap
C change
Calico
Cambric
Canvas
Chambray
Capilene
Cedar bark
Challis
Char cloth
Charmeuse
Charvet
Cheesecloth
Chiffon
Chino
Chintz
Cloqué
Cloth of gold
Cordura
Corduroy
Duck
Coutil
Crape
Crêpe
Cretonne
Dazzle
Denim
Dimity
Donegal tweed
Dornix
Dowlas
Drill
Drugget
Eolienne
Flannel
Foulard
Fustian
Gabardine
Gauze
Gazar
Georgette
Ghalamkar
Gingham
Grenadine
Grenfell Cloth
Grosgrain
Habutai
Haircloth
Harris Tweed
Herringbone
Himroo
Hodden
Irish linen
Jamdani
Kerseymere
Khādī
Khaki drill
Kente cloth
Lamé
Lawn
Linsey-woolsey
Loden
Longcloth
Mackinaw
Madapolam
Madras
Moleskin
Muslin
Nainsook
Nankeen
Ninon
Oilskin
Organdy
Organza
Osnaburg
Ottoman
Oxford
Paduasoy
Percale
Pongee
Poplin
Rakematiz
Rayadillo
Rep
Rinzu
Ripstop
Russell cord
Saga Nishiki
Samite
Sateen
Satin
Saye
Scarlet
Seersucker
Sendal
Serge
Scrim
Shot silk
Stuff
Taffeta
Tais
Toile
Tucuyo
Tweed
Twill
Ultrasuede
Vegetable flannel
Ventile
Vinyl coated polyester
Viyella
Voile
Wadmal
Wigan
Whipcord
Zephyr
Zorbeez












Figured woven



Brocade
Camlet
Damask
Lampas
Songket





Pile woven



Baize
Chenille
Corduroy
Crimplene
Fustian
Mockado
Moquette
Plush
Polar fleece
Terrycloth
Velours du Kasaï
Velvet
Velveteen
Zibeline





Nonwoven



Felt
Cedar bark





Knitted



Boiled wool
Coolmax
Machine knitting
Milliskin
Jersey
Velour





Netted



Bobbinet
Carbon fiber
Lace
Mesh
Needlerun net
Ninon
Tulle





Technical



Ballistic nylon
Ban-Lon
Conductive
Darlexx
E-textiles
Gannex
Gore-Tex
Silnylon
Spandex
Stub-tex
SympaTex
Windstopper





Patterns



Argyle
Bizarre silk
Chiné
Herringbone
Houndstooth
Paisley
Pin stripes
Polka dot
Shweshwe
Tartan (plaid)
Tattersall





Textile fibers



Acrylic
Alpaca
Angora
Cashmere
Coir
Cotton
Eisengarn
Hemp
Jute
Kevlar
Linen
Mohair
Nylon
Microfiber
Olefin
Pashmina
Polyester
Piña
Ramie
Rayon
Sea silk
Silk
Sisal
Spandex
Spider silk
Wool






Finishing and
printing




Androsia
Batik
Beetling
Bingata
Bògòlanfini
Burnout
Calendering
Decatising
Devoré
Finishing
Fulling
Heatsetting
Mercerization
Moire
Nap
Rogan printing
Rōketsuzome
Roller printing
Sanforization
Tenterhook
Textile printing
Warp printing
Waxed cotton
Woodblock printing
Indienne





Fabric mills



Carlo Barbera
Cerruti
Dormeuil
Drago
Ermenegildo Zegna
E. Thomas
Holland & Sherry
Larusmiani
Loro Piana
Reda
Scabal
Vitale Barberis Canonico





Related



Dyeing
Fiber
History of textiles
History of silk
Knitting
Pandy
Shrinkage
Swatches and strike-offs
Synthetic fabric
Terminology
Manufacturing
Preservation
Weaving
Yarn












v
t
e


Sewing



Techniques



Basting
Cut
Darning
Ease
Embellishment
Fabric tube turning
Floating canvas
Gather
Godet
Gusset
Heirloom sewing
Shirring





Stitches



List of sewing stitches
Backstitch
Bar tack
Blanket
Blind stitch
Buttonhole
Catch stitch
Chain stitch
Cross-stitch
Embroidery stitch
Hemstitch
Lockstitch
Overlock
Pad stitch
Pick stitch
Rantering
Running
Sashiko
Stoating
Tack
Topstitch
Zigzag





Seams



Felled seam
Seam allowance
Style line








Notions
Trims






Bias tape
Collar stays
Elastic
Grommet / Eyelet
Interfacing
Passementerie
Piping
Ruffle
Rickrack
Self-fabric
Soutache
Trim
Twill tape
Wrights





Closures



Buckle
Button
Buttonhole
Frog
Hook-and-eye
Hook and loop fastener
Shank
Snap
Zipper





Materials



Bias
Yarn / Thread
Selvage
Textiles / Fabrics





Tools



Bobbin
Dress form
Needlecase
Needle threader
Pattern notcher
Pin
Pincushion
Pinking shears
Scissors
Seam ripper
Sewing needle
Stitching awl
Tailor's ham
Tape measure
Thimble
Tracing paper
Tracing wheel








Trades
Suppliers






Cloth merchant
Draper
Dressmaker
Haberdasher
Mercer
Sewing occupations
Tailor






Sewing machine
manufacturers




List of sewing machine brands and companies
Barthélemy Thimonnier
Bernina International
Brother Industries
Elias Howe
Elna
Feiyue
Frister & Rossmann
Janome
Jones Sewing Machine Company
Juki
Merrow
New Home
Pfaff
Sewmor
Singer
Tapemaster
Viking / Husqvarna
White





Pattern manufacturers



Butterick
Burda
Clothkits
McCall's
Simplicity








Glossary of sewing terms









Authority control



GND: 4135786-3
NDL: 00568929











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Textile&oldid=817366818"					Categories: TextilesClothing industryHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse British English Oxford spelling from September 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2009Articles needing the year an event occurred from December 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers