

The Telephone Cases





Supreme Court of the United States



Argued January 24–28, 31, February 1–4, 7–8, 1887
Decided March 19, 1888


Full case name
Dolbear v. American Bell Telephone Company; Molecular Telephone Company v. American Bell Telephone Company; American Bell Telephone Company v. Molecular Telephone Company; Clay Commercial Telephone Company v. American Bell Telephone Company; People's Telephone Company v. American Bell Telephone Company; Overland Telephone Company v. American Bell Telephone Company


Citations
126 U.S. 1 (more)


Holding


The Bell Company patent was valid and that the Molecular case was reversed.


Court membership




Chief Justice
Morrison Waite
Associate Justices
Samuel F. Miller · Stephen J. Field
Joseph P. Bradley · John M. Harlan
T. Stanley Matthews · Horace Gray
Samuel Blatchford · Lucius Q.C. Lamar II




Case opinions


Majority
Waite, joined by Miller, Matthews, Blatchford


Dissent
Bradley, joined by Field, Harlan


Gray and Lamar took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.


The Telephone Cases were a series of U.S. court cases in the 1870s and 1880s related to the invention of the telephone, which culminated in the 1888 decision of the United States Supreme Court upholding the priority of the patents belonging to Alexander Graham Bell. Those telephone patents were relied on by the American Bell Telephone Company and the Bell System—although they had also acquired critical microphone patents from Emile Berliner.
The objector (or plaintiff) in the notable Supreme Court case was initially the Western Union telegraph company, which was at the time a far larger and better financed competitor than American Bell Telephone. Western Union advocated several more recent patent claims of Daniel Drawbaugh, Elisha Gray, Antonio Meucci and Philip Reis in a bid to invalidate Alexander Graham Bell's master and subsidiary telephone patents dating back to March 1876. Had Western Union succeeded it would have immediately destroyed the Bell Telephone Company and then Western Union stood to become the world's largest telecommunications monopoly in Bell's place.
The U.S. Supreme Court came within one vote of overturning the Bell patent, thanks to the eloquence of lawyer Lysander Hill for the Peoples Telephone Company.[1] In a lower court, the Peoples Telephone Company stock rose briefly during the early proceedings, but dropped after their claimant Daniel Drawbaugh took the stand and drawled: "I don’t remember how I came to it. I had been experimenting in that direction. I don’t remember of getting at it by accident either. I don’t remember of anyone talking to me of it".[1]
In this case the court affirmed several other lower court cases: Dolbear et al. v American Bell Tel. Co., 15 Fed. Rep 448, 17 Fed. Rep. 604, Molecular Te. Co. et al. v American Bell Tel. Co. 32 Fed. Rep 214, People's Tel. Co. et al. v American Bell Tel. Co., 22 Fed. Rep. 309 and 25 Fed. Rep. 725. Well reversing American Bell Tel Co. et al. v Molecular Tel. Co et al. 32 Fed Rep. 214.
Bell’s second fundamental patent expired on January 30, 1894, at which time the gates were then opened to independent telephone companies to compete with the Bell System. In all, the American Bell Telephone Company and its successor, AT&T, litigated 587 court challenges to its patents including five that went to the U.S. Supreme Court, and aside from two minor contract lawsuits, never lost a single one that was concluded with a final stage judgment.[1][2]



Contents


1 Size
2 Notable cases
3 See also
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links



Size[edit]
The Court's decision in the Telephone Cases is notable for the size of the opinions delivered; together, they occupy the entire 126th volume of the United States Reports.
Notable cases[edit]
Among the notable court cases involving the Bell Telephone Company, later renamed to the American Bell Telephone Company, were those related to challenges by Elisha Gray, a principal in Western Electric, as depicted in the Elisha Gray and Alexander Bell telephone controversy.
Additionally the Bell Company became embroiled in a number of challenges from those companies associated with Antonio Meucci, as shown in the Canadian Parliamentary Motion on Alexander Graham Bell, itself a response to the United States HRes. 269 on Antonio Meucci.
See also[edit]

Alexander Graham Bell
Bell Telephone Company
Bell Telephone Memorial, a major monument dedicated to the invention of the telephone
Canadian Parliamentary Motion on Alexander Graham Bell
Elisha Gray and Alexander Bell telephone controversy
Gardiner Greene Hubbard, first president of the Bell Telephone Company
History of the telephone
Timeline of the telephone
Western Union

References[edit]

Notes




^ a b c Billings, A. Bell and the Early Independents, Telephone Engineer and Management, March 15, 1985, pp87-89,
^ Australasian Telephone Collecting Society. Who Really Invented The Telephone?, ATCS, Moorebank, NSW, Australia. Retrieved from www.telephonecollecting.org website on April 22, 2011.




Bibliography



Brooks, John. Telephone: The First Hundred Years, Harper & Row, 1976, ISBN 0-06-010540-2, ISBN 978-0-06-010540-2.
Bruce, Robert V. Bell: Alexander Bell and the Conquest of Solitude. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1990. ISBN 0-8014-9691-8.


Further reading[edit]

Beauchamp, Christopher. Who Invented the Telephone?: Lawyers, Patents, and the Judgments of History, Technology and Culture, Vol. 51, No. 4, October 2010, pp. 854–878, DOI: 10.1353/tech.2010.0038.

External links[edit]

Volume 126, Supreme Court Judgment 126 U.S. 1 Dolbear v. American Bell etc at Open Jurist
Volume 126, Supreme Court Judgment 126 U.S. 1 Dolbear v. American Bell etc at Justia
Legat, V. 1862. Reproducing sounds on extra galvanic way [cited March 26, 2006]. Available Litigation Series – Telephone Interferences: Edison Exhibits contained within:

Legat, Wilhelm von (1862) Litigation Series – Telephone Interferences: Edison Exhibits, which covers: (Reis, Philip) Telephone; Sound and Acoustics; Thomas Edison National Historical Park, [TI2459; TAEM 11:635]. Quote:








"The Edison National Historical Park (ENHP) archives has seven bound volumes and one pamphlet of Patent Office proceedings relating to conflicting claims over who invented the telephone. Four of these volumes contain the record of a group of interferences entitled Cases A through L and Case No. 1. The disputant parties were Thomas Edison, Alexander Graham Bell, Elisha Gray, A. E. Dolbear, J. W. McDonough, George B. Richmond, William L. Voelker, J. H. Irwin, and Francis Blake, Jr. Although Edison's preliminary statements were filed in September 1878, testimony was not taken until 1880. This record was printed in 1881. The second volume contains Edison's exhibits, including photo-lithographs of laboratory drawings, patents and patent applications, and newspaper and journal articles. The drawings have exhibit numbers corresponding to a page/volume numbering scheme used by Edison and his patent attorney Lemuel W. Serrell in 1880 when Edison's technical notes and drawings were numbered and examined for possible inclusion as exhibits in these interferences. Many of the documents in this numbered series were not selected as exhibits; they remain in the archives at the Edison National Historical Park...."











v
t
e


Alexander Graham Bell



Life and
family



Alexander Graham Bell
Alexander Melville Bell
Beinn Bhreagh, Nova Scotia
Bell House (Virginia)
Bras d'Or Lake
Canadian Parliamentary Motion on Alexander Graham Bell
Chichester Bell
David Fairchild
Graham Fairchild
Edwin S. Grosvenor
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Gilbert Hovey Grosvenor
Gilbert Melville Grosvenor
Hubbard Bell Grossman Pillot Memorial
Kendall Myers
Mabel Gardiner Hubbard
Mabel H. Grosvenor
Melville Bell Grosvenor
Second International Congress on Education of the Deaf
Telephone Cases





People



Anthony Pollok
Charles Williams Jr.
Glenn Curtiss
Marcellus Bailey
Thomas Cowherd
Thomas Selfridge
Thomas A. Watson
Walter Seymour Allward





Works



AEA Cygnet
AEA June Bug
AEA Red Wing
AEA Silver Dart
AEA White Wing
Aerial Experiment Association
Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Bell Boatyard
Bell Oionus I
Bell System
Bell Telephone Company
Canadian Aerodrome Baddeck No. 1 and No. 2
Canadian Aerodrome Company
Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech
Dictation machine
Edison Gower-Bell Telephone Company of Europe, Ltd.
Elisha Gray and Alexander Bell telephone controversy
Graphophone
HD-4
Hubbard Monoplane
Life Extension Institute
National Geographic Society
National Telephone Company
New England Telephone and Telegraph Company
Oriental Telephone Company
Phonograph cylinder
Photophone
Visible Speech
Volta Laboratory and Bureau





Tributes



Alexander Graham Bell National Historic Site
Alexander Graham Bell School (Illinois)
Alexander Graham Bell honors and tributes
Bell Homestead National Historic Site
Bell Telephone Memorial
Graham Bell Island
HMCS Bras d'Or
IEEE Alexander Graham Bell Medal
Pioneers, a Volunteer Network
Story of Alexander Graham Bell












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Optical fiber
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Telephone_Cases&oldid=800003182"					Categories: Alexander Graham BellBell SystemBusiness rivalriesDiscovery and invention controversiesHistory of the telephoneUnited States Supreme Court cases1888 in United States case lawWestern UnionUnited States Supreme Court cases of the Waite CourtHidden categories: Use mdy dates from May 2012Flagged U.S. Supreme Court articles