For other uses, see Guardian (disambiguation).

The Guardian





The Guardian front page on 6 June 2014



Type
Daily newspaper


Format
Broadsheet (1821-2005)
Berliner (2005-2018)
Tabloid (2018-)


Owner(s)
Guardian Media Group


Founder(s)
John Edward Taylor


Publisher
Guardian Media Group


Editor
Katharine Viner


Opinion editor
Mark Henry


Founded
5 May 1821; 196 years ago (1821-05-05) (as The Manchester Guardian)


Political alignment
Centre-left


Language
English


Headquarters
Kings Place, London


Country
United Kingdom


Circulation
153,163 (as of December 2016)[1]


Sister newspapers
The Observer
The Guardian Weekly


ISSN
0261-3077


OCLC number
60623878


Website
TheGuardian.com





Media of the United Kingdom
List of newspapers





The Guardian is a British daily newspaper, known from 1821 until 1959 as the Manchester Guardian. Along with its sister papers The Observer and the Guardian Weekly, The Guardian is part of the Guardian Media Group, owned by the Scott Trust. The Trust was created in 1936 "to secure the financial and editorial independence of the Guardian in perpetuity and to safeguard the journalistic freedom and liberal values of the Guardian free from commercial or political interference." The Scott Trust became a limited company in 2008, with a constitution to maintain the same protections for the Guardian. Profits are reinvested in journalism rather than to benefit an owner or shareholders.[2]
The paper's readership is generally on the mainstream left of British political opinion.[3][4] The newspaper's reputation as a platform for liberal and left-wing editorial has led to the use of the "Guardian reader" and "Guardianista" as often (but not always) pejorative epithets for those of left-leaning or politically correct tendencies.[5][6]
The Guardian is edited by Katharine Viner, who succeeded Alan Rusbridger in 2015.[7][8] In 2016, The Guardian's print edition had an average daily circulation of roughly 162,000 copies in the country, behind The Daily Telegraph and The Times.[1] The newspaper has an online UK edition as well as two international websites, Guardian Australia (founded in 2013) and Guardian US (founded in 2011). The newspaper's online edition was the fifth most widely read in the world in October 2014, with over 42.6 million readers.[9] Its combined print and online editions reach nearly 9 million British readers.[10]
Notable scoops include the 2011 News International phone hacking scandal, in particular the hacking of murdered English teenager Milly Dowler's phone.[11] The investigation led to the closure of the UK's biggest selling Sunday newspaper, and one of the highest circulation newspapers in the world, the News of the World.[12] The newspaper also released news of the secret collection of Verizon telephone records held by US President Barack Obama's administration in June 2013,[13] and subsequently revealed the existence of the PRISM surveillance program after it was leaked to the paper by NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden.[14] In 2016, it led the investigation into the Panama Papers, exposing the then British Prime Minister David Cameron's links to offshore bank accounts.
The Guardian has been named Newspaper of the Year four times at the annual British Press Awards, the most recent in 2014 for reporting on government surveillance.[15] The paper is still occasionally referred to by its nickname of The Grauniad, given originally for the purported frequency of its typographical errors.[16]



Contents


1 History

1.1 1821 to 1972

1.1.1 Early years
1.1.2 C. P. Scott
1.1.3 Spanish Civil War
1.1.4 Post-war


1.2 1972 to 2000

1.2.1 Northern Ireland conflict
1.2.2 Sarah Tisdall
1.2.3 First Gulf War
1.2.4 Alleged penetration by Russian intelligence
1.2.5 Jonathan Aitken
1.2.6 Kosovo War


1.3 Since 2000

1.3.1 Accusations of anti-Semitism and bias in coverage of Israel
1.3.2 Clark County
1.3.3 Guardian America
1.3.4 Gagged from reporting Parliament
1.3.5 Edward Snowden leaks and intervention by the UK government




2 Ownership and finances

2.1 "Membership" subscription scheme


3 Political stance and editorial opinion
4 Controversy
5 Circulation and format

5.1 Publication history
5.2 Moving to the Berliner paper format

5.2.1 Reception


5.3 Tabloid format from 2018


6 Regular content and features

6.1 G2 and other supplements
6.2 Regular cartoon strips


7 Online media
8 GuardianFilms
9 References in popular culture
10 Awards

10.1 Received
10.2 Given
10.3 Best books lists


11 Editors
12 Notable regular contributors (past and present)
13 Guardian News & Media Archive
14 See also
15 Notes and references
16 Further reading
17 External links



History[edit]
1821 to 1972[edit]
Early years[edit]




Manchester Guardian Prospectus, 1821


The Manchester Guardian was founded in Manchester in 1821 by cotton merchant John Edward Taylor with backing from the Little Circle, a group of non-conformist businessmen.[17] They launched their paper after the police closure of the more radical Manchester Observer, a paper that had championed the cause of the Peterloo Massacre protesters.[18] Taylor had been hostile to the radical reformers, writing: "They have appealed not to the reason but the passions and the suffering of their abused and credulous fellow-countrymen, from whose ill-requited industry they extort for themselves the means of a plentiful and comfortable existence. They do not toil, neither do they spin, but they live better than those that do."[19] When the government closed down the Manchester Observer, the mill-owners' champions had the upper hand.[20]
The influential journalist Jeremiah Garnett joined Taylor during the establishment of the paper, and all of the Little Circle wrote articles for the new paper.[21]
The prospectus announcing the new publication proclaimed that it would "zealously enforce the principles of civil and religious Liberty […] warmly advocate the cause of Reform […] endeavour to assist in the diffusion of just principles of Political Economy and […] support, without reference to the party from which they emanate, all serviceable measures".[22] In 1825 the paper merged with the British Volunteer and was known as The Manchester Guardian and British Volunteer until 1828.[23]
The working-class Manchester and Salford Advertiser called the Manchester Guardian "the foul prostitute and dirty parasite of the worst portion of the mill-owners".[24] The Manchester Guardian was generally hostile to labour's claims. Of the 1832 Ten Hours Bill, the paper doubted whether in view of the foreign competition "the passing of a law positively enacting a gradual destruction of the cotton manufacture in this kingdom would be a much less rational procedure."[25] The Manchester Guardian dismissed strikes as the work of outside agitators: "[…] if an accommodation can be effected, the occupation of the agents of the Union is gone. They live on strife […]"[26]
The Manchester Guardian was highly critical of Abraham Lincoln's conduct during the American Civil War, writing on the news that Abraham Lincoln had been assassinated: "Of his rule, we can never speak except as a series of acts abhorrent to every true notion of constitutional right and human liberty […]"[27]
C. P. Scott[edit]
C. P. Scott made the newspaper nationally recognised. He was editor for 57 years from 1872, and became its owner when he bought the paper from the estate of Taylor's son in 1907. Under Scott, the paper's moderate editorial line became more radical, supporting William Gladstone when the Liberals split in 1886, and opposing the Second Boer War against popular opinion.[28] Scott supported the movement for women's suffrage, but was critical of any tactics by the Suffragettes that involved direct action:[29] "The really ludicrous position is that Mr Lloyd George is fighting to enfranchise seven million women and the militants are smashing unoffending people's windows and breaking up benevolent societies' meetings in a desperate effort to prevent him." Scott thought the Suffragettes' "courage and devotion" was "worthy of a better cause and saner leadership".[30] It has been argued that Scott's criticism reflected a widespread disdain, at the time, for those women who "transgressed the gender expectations of Edwardian society".[29]
Scott commissioned J. M. Synge and his friend Jack Yeats to produce articles and drawings documenting the social conditions of the west of Ireland (pre-First World War), and these pieces were published in 1911 in the collection Travels in Wicklow, West Kerry and Connemara.[31]
Scott's friendship with Chaim Weizmann played a role in the Balfour Declaration of 1917, and in 1948 The Manchester Guardian was a supporter of the new State of Israel.
In June 1936 ownership of the paper passed to the Scott Trust (named after the last owner, John Russell Scott, who was the first chairman of the Trust). This move ensured the paper's independence.[citation needed]
Spanish Civil War[edit]
Traditionally affiliated with the centrist to centre-left Liberal Party, and with a northern, non-conformist circulation base, the paper earned a national reputation and the respect of the left during the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939). George Orwell writes in Homage to Catalonia: "Of our larger papers, the Manchester Guardian is the only one that leaves me with an increased respect for its honesty". With the pro-Liberal News Chronicle, the Labour-supporting Daily Herald, the Communist Party's Daily Worker and several Sunday and weekly papers, it supported the Republican government against General Francisco Franco's insurgent nationalists.
Post-war[edit]
The paper so loathed Labour's left-wing champion Aneurin Bevan "and the hate-gospellers of his entourage" that it called for Attlee's post-war Labour government to be voted out of office.[32] The newspaper opposed the creation of the National Health Service as it feared the state provision of healthcare would "eliminate selective elimination" and lead to an increase of congenitally deformed and feckless people.[33]
The Manchester Guardian strongly opposed military intervention during the 1956 Suez Crisis: "The Anglo-French ultimatum to Egypt is an act of folly, without justification in any terms but brief expediency. It pours petrol on a growing fire. There is no knowing what kind of explosion will follow."[34][35]
1972 to 2000[edit]
Northern Ireland conflict[edit]
When 13 civil rights demonstrators in Northern Ireland were killed by British soldiers on 30 January 1972 (known as Bloody Sunday), The Guardian said that "Neither side can escape condemnation."[36] Of the protesters, they wrote, "The organizers of the demonstration, Miss Bernadette Devlin among them, deliberately challenged the ban on marches. They knew that stone throwing and sniping could not be prevented, and that the IRA might use the crowd as a shield."[36] Of the army, they wrote, "there seems little doubt that random shots were fired into the crowd, that aim was taken at individuals who were neither bombers nor weapons carriers and that excessive force was used".[36]
Many Irish people believed that the Widgery Tribunal's ruling on the killings was a whitewash,[37] a view that was later supported with the publication of the Saville inquiry in 2010,[38] but in 1972 The Guardian declared that "Widgery's report is not one-sided" (20 April 1972).[39] At the time the paper also supported internment without trial in Northern Ireland: "Internment without trial is hateful, repressive and undemocratic. In the existing Irish situation, most regrettably, it is also inevitable... .To remove the ringleaders, in the hope that the atmosphere might calm down, is a step to which there is no obvious alternative."[40] Before then, The Guardian had called for British troops to be sent to the region: British soldiers could "present a more disinterested face of law and order,"[41] but only on condition that "Britain takes charge."[42]
Sarah Tisdall[edit]
In 1983 the paper was at the centre of a controversy surrounding documents regarding the stationing of cruise missiles in Britain that were leaked to The Guardian by civil servant Sarah Tisdall. The paper eventually complied with a court order to hand over the documents to the authorities, which resulted in a six-month prison sentence for Tisdall,[43] though she served only four. "I still blame myself," said Peter Preston, who was the editor of The Guardian at the time, but he went on to argue that the paper had no choice because it "believed in the rule of law".[44]
First Gulf War[edit]
In the lead-up to the first Gulf War, between 1990 and 1991, The Guardian expressed doubts about military action against Iraq: "Frustration in the Gulf leads temptingly to the invocation of task forces and tactical bombing, but the military option is no option at all. The emergence yesterday of a potential hostage problem of vast dimensions only emphasised that this is far too complex a crisis for gunboat diplomacy. Loose talk of 'carpet bombing' Baghdad should be put back in the bottle of theoretical but unacceptable scenarios."[45]




First Gulf War Plaque, Stafford War Memorial


But on the eve of the war, the paper rallied to the war cause: "The simple cause, at the end, is just. An evil regime in Iraq instituted an evil and brutal invasion. Our soldiers and airmen are there, at UN behest, to set that evil to rights. Their duties are clear. ... Let the momentum, and the resolution, be swift."[46] After the event, journalist Maggie O'Kane conceded that she and her colleagues had been a mouthpiece for war propaganda: "... we, the media, were harnessed like 2,000 beach donkeys and led through the sand to see what the British and US military wanted us to see in this nice clean war".[47]
Alleged penetration by Russian intelligence[edit]
In 1994, KGB defector Oleg Gordievsky identified Guardian literary editor Richard Gott as "an agent of influence". While Gott denied that he received cash, he admitted he had had lunch at the Soviet Embassy and had taken benefits from the KGB on overseas visits. Gott resigned from his post.[48]
Gordievsky commented on the newspaper: "The KGB loved The Guardian. It was deemed highly susceptible to penetration."[49]
Jonathan Aitken[edit]
In 1995, both the Granada Television programme World In Action and The Guardian were sued for libel by the then cabinet minister Jonathan Aitken, for their allegation that Harrods owner Mohamed Al Fayed had paid for Aitken and his wife to stay at the Hôtel Ritz in Paris, which would have amounted to accepting a bribe on Aitken's part. Aitken publicly stated that he would fight with "the simple sword of truth and the trusty shield of British fair play".[50] The court case proceeded, and in 1997 The Guardian produced evidence that Aitken's claim of his wife paying for the hotel stay was untrue.[51] In 1999, Aitken was jailed for perjury and perverting the course of justice.[52]
Kosovo War[edit]
The paper supported NATO's military intervention in the Kosovo War in 1998–1999. Though the United Nations Security Council did not support the action, The Guardian stated that "the only honourable course for Europe and America is to use military force".[53] Mary Kaldor's piece was headlined "Bombs away! But to save civilians, we must get in some soldiers too."[54]
Since 2000[edit]




The Guardian senior news writer Esther Addley interviewing Ecuadorian foreign minister Ricardo Patiño for an article relating to Julian Assange in 2014.


In the early 2000s, The Guardian challenged the Act of Settlement 1701 and the Treason Felony Act 1848.[55][56] In October 2004, The Guardian published a humorous column by Charlie Brooker in its entertainment guide, which appeared to call for the assassination of George W. Bush.[57] This caused some controversy and the paper was forced to issue an apology and remove the article from its website.[58][59] Following the 7 July 2005 London bombings, The Guardian published an article on its comment pages by Dilpazier Aslam, a 27-year-old British Muslim and journalism trainee from Yorkshire.[60] Aslam was a member of Hizb ut-Tahrir, an Islamist group, and had published a number of articles on their website. According to the paper, it did not know that Aslam was a member of Hizb ut-Tahrir when he applied to become a trainee, though several staff members were informed of this once he started at the paper.[61] The Home Office has claimed the group's "ultimate aim is the establishment of an Islamic state (Caliphate), according to Hizb ut-Tahrir via non-violent means". The Guardian asked Aslam to resign his membership of the group and, when he did not do so, terminated his employment.[62] In early 2009, the paper started a tax investigation into a number of major UK companies,[63] including publishing a database of the tax paid by the FTSE 100 companies.[64] Internal documents relating to Barclays Bank's tax avoidance were removed from The Guardian website after Barclays obtained a gagging order.[65] The paper played a pivotal role in exposing the depth of the News of the World phone hacking affair. The Economist's Intelligent Life magazine opined that...


“
As Watergate is to the Washington Post, and thalidomide to the Sunday Times, so phone-hacking will surely be to the Guardian: a defining moment in its history.[66]
”


Accusations of anti-Semitism and bias in coverage of Israel[edit]
In recent decades The Guardian has been accused of biased criticism of Israeli government policy[67] and of bias against the Palestinians.[68] In December 2003, columnist Julie Burchill cited "striking bias against the state of Israel" as one of the reasons she left the paper for The Times.[69] A leaked report from the European Monitoring Centre on Racism cited The Economist's claim that for "many British Jews," the British media's reporting on Israel "is spiced with a tone of animosity, 'as to smell of anti-Semitism' ... This is above all the case with the Guardian and The Independent". The EU said the report, dated February 2003, was not published because it was insubstantial in its current state and lacking sufficient evidence.[70][71]
Responding to these accusations, a Guardian editorial in 2002 condemned anti-Semitism and defended the paper's right to criticise the policies and actions of the Israeli government, arguing that those who view such criticism as inherently anti-Jewish are mistaken.[72] Harriet Sherwood, then The Guardian's foreign editor, later its Jerusalem correspondent, has also denied that The Guardian has an anti-Israel bias, saying that the paper aims to cover all viewpoints in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict.[73]
On 6 November 2011, Chris Elliott, the Guardian's readers' editor, wrote that "Guardian reporters, writers and editors must be more vigilant about the language they use when writing about Jews or Israel," citing recent cases where The Guardian received complaints regarding language chosen to describe Jews or Israel. Elliott noted that, over nine months, he upheld complaints regarding language in certain articles that were seen as anti-Semitic, revising the language and footnoting this change.[74]
The Guardian's style guide section referred to Tel Aviv as the capital of Israel in 2012.[75][76] The Guardian later clarified: "In 1980, the Israeli Knesset enacted a law designating the city of Jerusalem, including East Jerusalem, as the country's capital. In response, the UN security council issued resolution 478, censuring the "change in character and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem" and calling on all member states with diplomatic missions in the city to withdraw. The UN has reaffirmed this position on several occasions, and almost every country now has its embassy in Tel Aviv. While it was therefore right to issue a correction to make clear Israel's designation of Jerusalem as its capital is not recognised by the international community, we accept that it is wrong to state that Tel Aviv – the country's financial and diplomatic centre – is the capital. The style guide has been amended accordingly." [77]
On 11 August 2014 the print edition of The Guardian published a pro-Israeli advocacy advert during the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict featuring Elie Wiesel, headed by the words "Jews rejected child sacrifice 3,500 years ago. Now it's Hamas' turn." The Times had decided against running the ad, although it had already appeared in major American newspapers.[78] One week later, Chris Elliott expressed the opinion that the newspaper should have rejected the language used in the advert and should have negotiated with the advertiser on this matter.[79]
Clark County[edit]
In August 2004, for the US presidential election, the daily G2 supplement launched an experimental letter-writing campaign in Clark County, Ohio, an average-sized county in a swing state. The editor of the G2 supplement Ian Katz bought a voter list from the county for $25 and asked readers to write to people listed as undecided in the election, giving them an impression of the international view and the importance of voting against President George W. Bush.[80] The paper scrapped "Operation Clark County" on 21 October 2004 after first publishing a column of responses—nearly all of them outraged—to the campaign under the headline "Dear Limey assholes."[81] Some commentators suggested that the public's dislike of the campaign contributed to Bush's victory in Clark County.[82]
Guardian America[edit]
In 2007, the paper launched Guardian America, an attempt to capitalise on its large online readership in the United States, which at the time stood at more than 5.9 million. The company hired former American Prospect editor, New York magazine columnist and New York Review of Books writer Michael Tomasky to head the project and hire a staff of American reporters and web editors. The site featured news from The Guardian that was relevant to an American audience: coverage of US news and the Middle East, for example.[83]
Tomasky stepped down from his position as editor of Guardian America in February 2009, ceding editing and planning duties to other US and London staff. He retained his position as a columnist and blogger, taking the title editor-at-large.[84]
In October 2009, the company abandoned the Guardian America homepage, instead directing users to a US news index page on the main Guardian website.[85] The following month, the company laid off six American employees, including a reporter, a multimedia producer and four web editors. The move came as Guardian News and Media opted to reconsider its US strategy amid a huge effort to cut costs across the company.[86] In subsequent years, however, The Guardian has hired various commentators on US affairs including Ana Marie Cox, Michael Wolff, Naomi Wolf, Glenn Greenwald and George W. Bush's former speechwriter Josh Treviño.[87] Treviño's first blog post was an apology for a controversial tweet posted in June 2011 over the second Gaza flotilla, the controversy which had been revived by the appointment.[88]
Guardian US launched in September 2011, led by editor-in-chief Janine Gibson, which replaced the previous Guardian America service.[89] After a period during which Katharine Viner served as the US editor-in-chief before taking charge of Guardian News and Media as a whole, Viner's former deputy, Lee Glendinning, was appointed to succeed her as head of the American operation at the beginning of June 2015.[90]
Gagged from reporting Parliament[edit]
In October 2009, The Guardian reported that it was forbidden to report on a parliamentary matter – a question recorded in a Commons order paper, to be answered by a minister later that week.[91] The paper noted that it was being "forbidden from telling its readers why the paper is prevented—for the first time in memory—from reporting parliament. Legal obstacles, which cannot be identified, involve proceedings, which cannot be mentioned, on behalf of a client who must remain secret. The only fact the Guardian can report is that the case involves the London solicitors Carter-Ruck." The paper further claimed that this case appears "to call into question privileges guaranteeing free speech established under the 1688 Bill of Rights".[92] The only parliamentary question mentioning Carter-Ruck in the relevant period was by Paul Farrelly MP, in reference to legal action by Barclays and Trafigura.[93][94] The part of the question referencing Carter-Ruck relates to the latter company's September 2009 gagging order on the publication of a 2006 internal report[95] into the 2006 Côte d'Ivoire toxic waste dump scandal, which involved a class action case that the company only settled in September 2009 after The Guardian published some of the commodity trader's internal emails.[96] The reporting injunction was lifted the next day, as Carter-Ruck withdrew it before The Guardian could challenge it in the High Court.[97] Alan Rusbridger credited the rapid back-down of Carter-Ruck to Twitter,[98] as did a BBC article.[99]
Edward Snowden leaks and intervention by the UK government[edit]
In June 2013, the newspaper broke news of the secret collection of Verizon telephone records held by Barack Obama's administration[13] and subsequently revealed the existence of the PRISM surveillance program after it was leaked to the paper by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden.[14] The newspaper was subsequently contacted by the British government's Cabinet Secretary, Sir Jeremy Heywood, under instruction from Prime Minister David Cameron and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, who ordered that the hard drives containing the information be destroyed.[100] The Guardian's offices were then visited in July by agents from the UK's GCHQ, who supervised the destruction of the hard drives containing information acquired from Snowden.[101] In June 2014 The Register reported that the information the government sought to suppress by destroying the hard drives related to the location of a "beyond top secret" internet monitoring base in Seeb, Oman, and the close involvement of BT and Cable & Wireless in intercepting internet communications.[102] Julian Assange criticized the newspaper for not publishing the entirety of the content when it had the chance.[103]
Ownership and finances[edit]
The Guardian is part of the Guardian Media Group (GMG) of newspapers, radio stations and print media including; The Observer Sunday newspaper, The Guardian Weekly international newspaper, and new media—Guardian Abroad website, and guardian.co.uk. All the aforementioned were owned by The Scott Trust, a charitable foundation existing between 1936 and 2008, which aimed to ensure the paper's editorial independence in perpetuity, maintaining its financial health to ensure it did not become vulnerable to take overs by for-profit media groups. At the beginning of October 2008, the Scott Trust's assets were transferred to a new limited company, The Scott Trust Limited, with the intention being that the original trust would be wound up.[104] Dame Liz Forgan, chair of the Scott Trust, reassured staff that the purposes of the new company remained the same as under the previous arrangements.




The Guardian's headquarters in London


The Guardian's ownership by the Scott Trust is probably a factor in its being the only British national daily to conduct (since 2003) an annual social, ethical and environmental audit in which it examines, under the scrutiny of an independent external auditor, its own behaviour as a company.[105] It is also the only British national daily newspaper to employ an internal ombudsman (called the "readers' editor") to handle complaints and corrections.
The Guardian and its parent groups participate in Project Syndicate, established by George Soros, and intervened in 1995 to save the Mail & Guardian in South Africa. However, Guardian Media Group sold the majority of its shares of the Mail & Guardian in 2002.[citation needed]
The Guardian has been consistently loss-making. The National Newspaper division of GMG, which also includes The Observer, reported operating losses of £49.9m in 2006, up from £18.6m in 2005.[106] The paper was therefore heavily dependent on cross-subsidisation from profitable companies within the group.
The continual losses made by the National Newspaper division of the Guardian Media Group caused it to dispose of its Regional Media division by selling titles to competitor Trinity Mirror in March 2010. This included the flagship Manchester Evening News, and severed the historic link between that paper and The Guardian. The sale was in order to safeguard the future of The Guardian newspaper as is the intended purpose of the Scott Trust.[107]
In June 2011 Guardian News and Media revealed increased annual losses of £33m and announced that it was looking to focus on its online edition for news coverage, leaving the print edition to contain more comments and features. It was also speculated that The Guardian might become the first British national daily paper to be fully online.[108][109]
For the three years up to June 2012, the paper lost £100,000 a day, which prompted Intelligent Life to question whether The Guardian could survive.[110]
Between 2007 and 2014 The Guardian Media Group sold all their side businesses, of regional papers and online portals for classifieds and consolidated, into The Guardian as sole product. The sales let them acquire a capital stock of £838.3m as of July 2014, supposed to guarantee the independence of The Guardian in perpetuity. In the first year, the paper made more losses than predicted, and in January 2016 the publishers announced, that The Guardian will cut 20 per cent of staff and costs within the next three years.[111]
"Membership" subscription scheme[edit]
In 2014, The Guardian launched a membership scheme.[112] The scheme aims to reduce the financial losses incurred by The Guardian without introducing a paywall, thus maintaining open access to the website. Website readers can pay a monthly subscription, with three tiers available.[113]
Political stance and editorial opinion[edit]
Founded by textile traders and merchants, The Guardian had a reputation as "an organ of the middle class",[114] or in the words of C. P. Scott's son Ted, "a paper that will remain bourgeois to the last".[115] Associated at first with the Little Circle and hence with classical liberalism as expressed by the Whigs and later by the Liberal Party, its political orientation underwent a decisive change after World War II, leading to a gradual alignment with Labour and the political left in general.
The Scott Trust describes one of its "core purposes" to be "to secure the financial and editorial independence of the Guardian in perpetuity: as a quality national newspaper without party affiliation; remaining faithful to its liberal tradition".[116][117] The paper's readership is generally on the mainstream left of British political opinion: a MORI poll taken between April and June 2000 showed that 80 per cent of Guardian readers were Labour Party voters;[3] according to another MORI poll taken in 2005, 48 per cent of Guardian readers were Labour voters and 34 per cent Liberal Democrat voters.[4] The newspaper's reputation as a platform for liberal and left-wing opinions has led to the use of the epithets "Guardian reader" and "Guardianista" for people holding such views, or as a negative stereotype of such people as middle class, earnest and politically correct.[118][6]
Although the paper is often considered to be "linked inextricably" to the Labour Party,[117] three of The Guardian's four leader writers joined the more centrist Social Democratic Party on its foundation in 1981. The paper was enthusiastic in its support for Tony Blair in his successful bid to lead the Labour Party,[119] and to be elected Prime Minister.[120] On 19 January 2003, two months before the 2003 invasion of Iraq, The Guardian reported: "Military intervention in the Middle East holds many dangers. But if we want a lasting peace it may be the only option. […] War with Iraq may yet not come, but, conscious of the potentially terrifying responsibility resting with the British Government, we find ourselves supporting the current commitment to a possible use of force."[121]
Then Guardian features editor Ian Katz asserted in 2004 that "it is no secret we are a centre-left newspaper".[122] In 2008, Guardian columnist Jackie Ashley said that editorial contributors were a mix of "right-of-centre libertarians, greens, Blairites, Brownites, Labourite but less enthusiastic Brownites, etc," and that the newspaper was "clearly left of centre and vaguely progressive". She also said that "you can be absolutely certain that come the next general election, The Guardian's stance will not be dictated by the editor, still less any foreign proprietor (it helps that there isn't one) but will be the result of vigorous debate within the paper".[123] The paper's comment and opinion pages, though often written by centre-left contributors such as Polly Toynbee, have allowed some space for right-of-centre voices such as Sir Max Hastings and Michael Gove. Since an editorial in 2000, The Guardian has favoured abolition of the British monarchy.[124] "I write for the Guardian," said Max Hastings in 2005,[125] "because it is read by the new establishment," reflecting the paper's then-growing influence.
In the run-up to the 2010 general election, following a meeting of the editorial staff,[126] the paper declared its support for the Liberal Democrats, due in particular, to the party's stance on electoral reform. The paper suggested tactical voting to prevent a Conservative victory, given Britain's first-past-the-post electoral system.[127] At the 2015 election, the paper switched its support to the Labour Party. The paper argued that Britain needed a new direction and Labour "speaks with more urgency than its rivals on social justice, standing up to predatory capitalism, on investment for growth, on reforming and strengthening the public realm, Britain's place in Europe and international development".[128]
Assistant Editor Michael White, in discussing media self-censorship in March 2011, says: "I have always sensed liberal, middle class ill-ease in going after stories about immigration, legal or otherwise, about welfare fraud or the less attractive tribal habits of the working class, which is more easily ignored altogether. Toffs, including royal ones, Christians, especially popes, governments of Israel, and US Republicans are more straightforward targets."[129]
In a 2013 interview for NPR, the Guardian's Latin America correspondent Rory Carroll stated that many editors at The Guardian believed and continue to believe that they should support Hugo Chávez "because he was a standard-bearer for the left".[130]
In the 2015 Labour Party leadership election, The Guardian supported Yvette Cooper and was critical of left-winger Jeremy Corbyn, the successful candidate.[131] Although the majority of political columnists in The Guardian were against Corbyn winning, Owen Jones, Seumas Milne and George Monbiot wrote supportive articles about him.[132]
Controversy[edit]
Journalist Glenn Greenwald of The Intercept, a former contributor to The Guardian, has accused The Guardian of falsifying the words of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange in a report about the interview he gave to Italian newspaper La Repubblica. Greenwald wrote: "This article is about how those [Guardian's] false claims — fabrications, really — were spread all over the internet by journalists, causing hundreds of thousands of people (if not millions) to consume false news."[133] The Guardian later retracted its article about Assange.

After publishing a story on 13 January 2017 claiming that WhatsApp had a "backdoor [that] allows snooping on messages", more than 70 professional cryptographers signed on to an open letter calling for The Guardian to retract the article. Security researchers also criticized the story, including Moxie Marlinspike who called it "false".[134][135][136] The article and the follow-up articles affirming The Guardian's position remain on the site, largely unchanged.[137]
Circulation and format[edit]
The Guardian had a certified average daily circulation of 204,222 copies in December 2012 — a drop of 11.25 per cent on January 2012 — as compared to sales of 547,465 for The Daily Telegraph, 396,041 for The Times, and 78,082 for The Independent.[138] In March 2013, its average daily circulation had fallen to 193,586, according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations.[139] Circulation has continued to decline and stood at 161,091 in December 2016, a decline of 2.98 per cent year-on-year.[1]
Publication history[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The Guardian's Newsroom visitor centre and archive (No 60), with an old sign with the name The Manchester Guardian


The first edition was published on 5 May 1821,[140] at which time The Guardian was a weekly, published on Saturdays and costing 7d; the stamp duty on newspapers (4d per sheet) forced the price up so high that it was uneconomic to publish more frequently. When the stamp duty was cut in 1836, The Guardian added a Wednesday edition and with the abolition of the tax in 1855 it became a daily paper costing 2d.
In 1952, the paper took the step of printing news on the front page, replacing the adverts that had hitherto filled that space. Then-editor A. P. Wadsworth wrote: "It is not a thing I like myself, but it seems to be accepted by all the newspaper pundits that it is preferable to be in fashion."
In 1959, the paper dropped "Manchester" from its title, becoming simply The Guardian, and in 1964 it moved to London, losing some of its regional agenda but continuing to be heavily subsidised by sales of the more downmarket but more profitable Manchester Evening News. The financial position remained extremely poor into the 1970s; at one time it was in merger talks with The Times. The paper consolidated its centre-left stance during the 1970s and 1980s. It was both shocked and revitalised by the launch of The Independent in 1986 which competed for a similar readership and provoked the entire broadsheet industry into a fight for circulation.




Front page of The Guardian from 2001, showing the old design of the paper when in broadsheet format. This design was used from 1988-2005


On 12 February 1988, The Guardian had a significant redesign; as well as improving the quality of its printers' ink, it also changed its masthead to a juxtaposition of an italic Garamond "The", with a bold Helvetica "Guardian", that remained in use until the 2005 redesign.
In 1992, The Guardian relaunched its features section as G2, a tabloid-format supplement. This innovation was widely copied by the other "quality" broadsheets and ultimately led to the rise of "compact" papers and The Guardian's move to the Berliner format. In 1993 the paper declined to participate in the broadsheet price war started by Rupert Murdoch's The Times. In June 1993, The Guardian bought The Observer from Lonrho, thus gaining a serious Sunday sister newspaper with similar political views.
Its international weekly edition is now titled The Guardian Weekly, though it retained the title Manchester Guardian Weekly for some years after the home edition had moved to London. It includes sections from a number of other internationally significant newspapers of a somewhat left-of-centre inclination, including Le Monde and The Washington Post. The Guardian Weekly was also linked to a website for expatriates, Guardian Abroad, which was launched in 2007 but had been taken offline by 2012.
Moving to the Berliner paper format[edit]
The Guardian is printed in full colour,[141] and was the first newspaper in the UK to use the Berliner format for its main section, while producing sections and supplements in a range of page sizes including tabloid, approximately A4, and pocket-size (approximately A5).
In 2004, The Guardian announced plans to change to a Berliner or "midi" format, similar to that used by Die Tageszeitung in Germany, Le Monde in France and many other European papers. At 470×315 mm, this is slightly larger than a traditional tabloid. Planned for the autumn of 2005, this change followed moves by The Independent and The Times to start publishing in tabloid (or compact) format. On Thursday, 1 September 2005, The Guardian announced that it would launch the new format on Monday 12 September 2005.[142] Sister Sunday newspaper The Observer also changed to this new format on 8 January 2006.
The advantage The Guardian saw in the Berliner format was that, though it is only a little wider than a tabloid, and is equally easy to read on public transport, its greater height gives more flexibility in page design. The new presses mean that printing can go across the strip down the middle of the centre page, known as the "gutter", allowing the paper to print striking double-page pictures. The new presses also made it the first UK national paper to print in full colour on every page.
The format switch was accompanied by a comprehensive redesign of the paper's look. On Friday, 9 September 2005, the newspaper unveiled its newly designed front page, which débuted on Monday 12 September 2005. Designed by Mark Porter, the new look includes a new masthead for the newspaper, its first since 1988. A typeface family designed by Paul Barnes and Christian Schwartz was created for the new design. With just over 200 fonts, it is "one of the most ambitious custom type programs ever commissioned by a newspaper".[143][144] Especially notable is Guardian Egyptian, a highly legible slab serif that is used in various weights for both text and headlines and is central to the redesign.
The switch cost Guardian Newspapers £80 million and involved setting up new printing presses in east London and Manchester. This was necessary because, before The Guardian's move, no printing presses in Britain could produce newspapers in the Berliner format. There were additional complications, as one of the paper's presses was part-owned by Telegraph Newspapers and Express Newspapers, contracted to use the plant until 2009. Another press was shared with the Guardian Media Group's north-western tabloid local papers, which did not wish to switch to the Berliner format.
Reception[edit]
The new format was generally well received by Guardian readers, who were encouraged to provide feedback on the changes. The only controversy was over the dropping of the Doonesbury cartoon strip. The paper reported thousands of calls and emails complaining about its loss; within 24 hours the decision was reversed and the strip was reinstated the following week. G2 supplement editor Ian Katz, who was responsible for dropping it, apologised in the editors' blog saying, "I'm sorry, once again, that I made you—and the hundreds of fellow fans who have called our helpline or mailed our comments' address—so cross."[145] However, some readers were dissatisfied as the earlier deadline needed for the all-colour sports section meant coverage of late-finishing evening football matches became less satisfactory in the editions supplied to some parts of the country.
The investment was rewarded with a circulation rise. In December 2005, the average daily sale stood at 380,693, nearly 6 per cent higher than the figure for December 2004.[146] (However, as of December 2012, circulation had dropped to 204,222.)[147] In 2006, the US-based Society for News Design chose The Guardian and Polish daily Rzeczpospolita as the world's best-designed newspapers—from among 389 entries from 44 countries.[148]
Tabloid format from 2018[edit]
In June 2017, Guardian Media Group (GMG) announced that The Guardian and The Observer will relaunch in tabloid format from early 2018. The Guardian confirmed that the launch date for the new format will be on 15 January 2018.
GMG also signed a contract with Trinity Mirror – the publisher of the Daily Mirror, Sunday Mirror, and Sunday People – to outsource printing of The Guardian and The Observer.
The move to outsource is expected to generate millions of pounds in savings annually.[149][150]
Regular content and features[edit]
Each weekday The Guardian comes with the G2 supplement containing feature articles, columns, television and radio listings, and a quick crossword. Since the change to the Berliner format, there is a separate daily Sports section. Other regular supplements during the week are shown below.
Before the redesign in 2005, the main news section was in the large broadsheet format, but the supplements were all in the half-sized tabloid format, with the exception of the glossy Weekend section, which was a 290×245 mm magazine, and The Guide, which was in a small 225×145 mm format.
With the change of the main section to the Berliner format, the specialist sections are now printed as Berliner, as is a now-daily Sports section, but G2 has moved to a "magazine-sized" demi-Berliner format. A Thursday Technology section and daily science coverage in the news section replaced Life and Online. Weekend and The Guide are still in the same small formats as before the change.
On Monday to Thursday prior to the recession, the supplements carried substantial quantities of recruitment advertising, as well as editorial on their specialised topics. However, this has diminished since the onset of recession[citation needed], to the point that the supplements have been seriously contracted or no longer appear as independent sections. The formerly sixty-page-thick Society supplement (Wednesday) is now no more and has been absorbed into the main part of the paper.
G2 and other supplements[edit]






This section needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (March 2016)



The following sections are in G2 every day from Monday to Friday: Arts, TV and Radio, Puzzles.

Monday

In G2:

Charlie Brooker's column
Ask Hadley: fashion advice from Hadley Freeman

MediaGuardian:

Media Monkey: gossip from the media sector


Tuesday

EducationGuardian

Wednesday

In G2:

The Digested Read, by John Crace

SocietyGuardian (covers the British public sector and related issues)

Thursday

In G2:

Private Lives
Notes & Queries (readers' answers to reader's questions on almost any topic)

Formerly TechnologyGuardian (print version ceased to appear from 17 December 2009)[151]

The "Free Our Data" campaign


Friday

In G2:

Lost in Showbiz by Marina Hyde

Film & Music supplement

Saturday

The Guide (a weekly listings magazine)

Infomania (humorous statistical data on a topical personality or institution)

Weekend (supplement)

Tim Dowling (eponymous diary column)
This Column Will Change Your Life by Oliver Burkeman
Yotam Ottolenghi (chef's recipes)
Fiona Beckett on Wine, Fiona Beckett
Ask Alys, Alys Fowler
Motoring: on the road, Zoe Williams
Why I love..., Bim Adewunmi
Recipes from Thomasina Miers
Marina O'Loughlin on restaurants
Sali Hughes on beauty
Jess Cartner-Morley on fashion
Hadley Freeman weekend column

Cook

Kitchen in Rome, Rachel Roddy

Review (covers literature, cinema, the arts)
Travel
Family
Sport
Regular cartoon strips[edit]

If... by Steve Bell
Doonesbury
Loomus, by Steven Appleby (Saturday, in the Family section)
Clare in the Community (Wednesday, in the Society section)
Home-Clubber (Saturday, in the Guide section)

Editorial cartoonists Martin Rowson and Steve Bell have received hate mail for their treatment of topics that some deem controversial.[152]
Online media[edit]
Main article: theguardian.com
The Guardian and its Sunday sibling The Observer publish all their news online, with free access both to current news and an archive of three million stories. A third of the site's hits are for items over a month old.[153] As of May 2013, it was the most popular UK newspaper website with 8.2m unique visitors per month, just ahead of Mail Online with 7.6m unique monthly visitors.[154] In April 2011, MediaWeek reported that The Guardian was the fifth most popular newspaper site in the world.[155]
The Comment is Free section features columns by the paper's journalists and regular commentators, as well as articles from guest writers, including readers' comments and responses below. The section includes all the opinion pieces published in the paper itself, as well as many others that only appear online. Censorship is exercised by Moderators who can ban posts – with no right of appeal – by those who they feel have overstepped the mark. The Guardian has taken what they call a very "open" stance in delivering news, and have launched an open platform for their content. This allows external developers to easily use Guardian content in external applications, and even to feed third-party content back into the Guardian network.[156] The Guardian also had a number of talkboards that were noted for their mix of political discussion and whimsy until they were closed on Friday, 25 February 2011 after they had settled a libel action brought after months of harassment of a conservative party activist.[157][158] They were spoofed in The Guardian's own regular humorous Chatroom column in G2. The spoof column purported to be excerpts from a chatroom on permachat.co.uk, a real URL that pointed to The Guardian's talkboards.
In August 2013, a webshow titled Thinkfluencer[159] was launched by Guardian Multimedia in association with Arte.
The paper has also launched a dating website, Soulmates,[160] and is experimenting with new media, having previously offered a free twelve part weekly podcast series by Ricky Gervais.[161] In January 2006, Gervais' show topped the iTunes podcast chart having been downloaded by two million listeners worldwide,[162] and was scheduled to be listed in the 2007 Guinness Book of Records as the most downloaded podcast.[163]
GuardianFilms[edit]
In 2003, The Guardian started the film production company GuardianFilms, headed by journalist Maggie O'Kane. Much of the company's output is documentary made for television– and it has included Salam Pax's Baghdad Blogger for BBC Two's daily flagship Newsnight, some of which have been shown in compilations by CNN International, Sex On The Streets and Spiked, both made for the UK's Channel 4 television.[164]
"GuardianFilms was born in a sleeping bag in the Burmese rainforest," wrote O'Kane in 2003.[165] "I was a foreign correspondent for the paper, and it had taken me weeks of negotiations, dealing with shady contacts and a lot of walking to reach the cigar-smoking Karen twins– the boy soldiers who were leading attacks against the country's ruling junta. After I had reached them and written a cover story for the newspaper's G2 section, I got a call from the BBC's documentary department, which was researching a film on child soldiers. Could I give them all my contacts?
"The plight of the Karen people, who were forced into slave labour in the rainforest to build pipelines for oil companies (some of them British), was a tale of human suffering that needed to be told by any branch of the media that was interested. I handed over all the names and numbers I had, as well as details of the secret route through Thailand to get into Burma. Good girl. Afterwards– and not for the first time– it seemed to me that we at The Guardian should be using our resources ourselves. Instead of providing contact numbers for any independent TV company prepared to get on the phone to a journalist, we should make our own films."
According to GuardianFilms's own webpage, its international work has focused on training talented local journalists based on the premise that "the era of a traditional London or Washington based foreign correspondent or fireman is coming to an end and the world urgently needs a more searching, challenging journalism brought to us by people who speak the language and can secure access far beyond the 'Green Zone Journalist' limits of the traditional correspondent". It says it is especially focused on reporting the Muslim world in a more challenging manner, and has trained a number of journalists in Iraq, Afghanistan and Zimbabwe.[166]
GuardianFilms has received several broadcasting awards. In addition to two Amnesty International Media Awards in 2004 and 2005, The Baghdad Blogger: Salam Pax won a Royal Television Society Award in 2005. Baghdad: A Doctor's Story won an Emmy Award for Best International Current Affairs film in 2007.[167] In 2008, photojournalist Sean Smith's Inside the Surge won the Royal Television Society award for best international news film – the first time a newspaper has won such an award.[168][169] The same year, The Guardian's Katine website was awarded for its outstanding new media output at the One World Media awards. Again in 2008, GuardianFilms' undercover video report revealing vote rigging by Robert Mugabe's Zanu PF party during the 2007 Zimbabwe election won best news programme of the year at the Broadcast Awards.[167][170]
References in popular culture[edit]
The paper's nickname The Grauniad (sometimes abbreviated as "Graun") originated with the satirical magazine Private Eye.[171] This anagram played on The Guardian's early reputation for frequent typographical errors, including misspelling its own name as The Gaurdian.[172]
The very first issue of the newspaper contained a number of errors, perhaps the most notable being a notification that there would soon be some goods sold at atction instead of auction. Fewer typographical errors are seen in the paper since the end of hot-metal typesetting.[173] One Guardian writer, Keith Devlin, suggested that the high number of observed misprints was due more to the quality of the readership than the misprints' greater frequency.[174] The fact that the newspaper was printed in Manchester until 1961 and the early, more error-prone, prints were sent to London by train may have contributed to this image as well.[175][176] When John Cole was appointed news editor by Alastair Hetherington in 1963, he sharpened the paper's comparatively "amateurish" setup.[177]
Awards[edit]
Received[edit]
The Guardian has been awarded the National Newspaper of the Year in 1998, 2005,[178] 2010[179] and 2013[15] by the British Press Awards, and Front Page of the Year in 2002 ("A declaration of war", 12 September 2001).[178][180] It was also co-winner of the World's Best-designed Newspaper as awarded by the Society for News Design (2006).
Guardian journalists have won a range of British Press Awards, including:[178]

Reporter of the Year (Nick Davies, 1999; Paul Lewis, 2009; Rob Evans & Paul Lewis, 2013);
Foreign Reporter of the Year (James Meek, 2003; Ghaith Abdul-Ahad, 2007);
Scoop of the Year (Millie Dowler phone hacked, 2011)
Young Journalist of the Year (Emma Brockes, 2000; Patrick Kingsley, 2013);
Columnist of the Year (Polly Toynbee, 2006; Charlie Brooker, 2008);
Critic of the Year (Marina O'Loughlin, 2015);
Feature Writer of the Year (Emma Brockes, 2001; Tanya Gold, 2009; Amelia Gentleman, 2010);[179]
Cartoonist of the Year (Steve Bell, 2002);
Political Journalist of the Year (Patrick Wintour, 2006; Andrew Sparrow, 2010);[179]
Science & Health Journalist of the Year (Sarah Bosely, 2015);
Business & Finance Journalist of the Year (Ian Griffiths, 2004; Simon Goodley, 2014);
Interviewer of the Year (Decca Aitkenhead, 2008);
Sports Reporter of the Year (David Lacey, 2002);
Sports Photographer of the Year (Tom Jenkins, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2015);
Website of the Year (guardian.com/uk, 1999, 2001, 2007, 2008, 2015);
Digital Journalist of the Year (Dan Milmo, 2001; Sean Smith, 2007; Dave Hill, 2008)
Supplement of the Year (Guardian's Guides to..., 2006; Weekend Magazine, 2015)
Special Supplement of the Year (World Cup 2010 Guide, 2010)

Other awards include:

Bevins Prize for investigative journalism (Paul Lewis, 2010);
Martha Gellhorn Prize for Journalism (Nick Davies, 1999; Chris McGreal, 2003; Ghaith Abdul-Ahad, 2005; Ian Cobain, 2009).

The guardian.co.uk website won the Best Newspaper category three years running in 2005, 2006 and 2007 Webby Awards, beating (in 2005) The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Wall Street Journal and Variety.[181] It has been the winner for six years in a row of the British Press Awards for Best Electronic Daily Newspaper.[182] The site won an Eppy award from the US-based magazine Editor & Publisher in 2000 for the best-designed newspaper online service.[183] The website is known for its commentary on sporting events, particularly its over-by-over cricket commentary.[citation needed]
In 2007 the newspaper was ranked first in a study on transparency that analysed 25 mainstream English-language media vehicles, which was conducted by the International Center for Media and the Public Agenda of the University of Maryland.[184] It scored 3.8 out of a possible 4.0.
The Guardian and The Washington Post shared the 2014 Pulitzer Prize for public service reporting for their coverage of the NSA's and GCHQ's worldwide electronic surveillance program and the document leaks by whistleblower Edward Snowden.[185]
Given[edit]
The Guardian is the sponsor of two major literary awards: The Guardian First Book Award, established in 1999 as a successor to the Guardian Fiction Award, which had run since 1965, and the Guardian Children's Fiction Prize, founded in 1967. In recent years the newspaper has also sponsored the Hay Festival in Hay-on-Wye.
The annual Guardian Student Media Awards, founded in 1999, recognise excellence in journalism and design of British university and college student newspapers, magazines and websites.
In memory of Paul Foot, who died in 2004, The Guardian and Private Eye jointly set up the Paul Foot Award, with an annual £10,000 prize fund, for investigative or campaigning journalism.[186]
Best books lists[edit]

The Guardian's 100 best novels is a list of the best English-language novels as selected by Robert McCrum.
The Guardian's 100 greatest non-fiction book list has come out in 2011[187][188] and in 2017, as selected by Robert McCrum.[189]

Editors[edit]

John Edward Taylor (1821–44)
Jeremiah Garnett (1844–61) (jointly with Russell Scott Taylor in 1847–1848)
Edward Taylor (1861–72)
Charles Prestwich Scott (1872–1929)
Ted Scott (1929–32)
William Percival Crozier (1932–44)
Alfred Powell Wadsworth (1944–56)
Alastair Hetherington (1956–75)
Peter Preston (1975–95)
Alan Rusbridger (1995–2015)
Katharine Viner (2015–present)

Notable regular contributors (past and present)[edit]




Columnists and journalists


David Aaronovitch
James Agate
Ian Aitken
Decca Aitkenhead
Brian Aldiss
Tariq Ali
Araucaria
John Arlott
Mark Arnold-Forster
Jackie Ashley
Dilpazier Aslam
Harriet Baber
Nancy Banks-Smith
Leonard Barden
Laura Barton
Catherine Bennett
Marcel Berlins
Michael Billington
Heston Blumenthal
Sidney Blumenthal
Boutros Boutros-Ghali
Frankie Boyle
Mark Boyle
Lloyd Bradley
Russell Brand
Emma Brockes
Charlie Brooker
Guy Browning
Alex Brummer
Inayat Bunglawala
Madeleine Bunting
Julie Burchill
Simon Callow
James Cameron
Duncan Campbell
Neville Cardus
Damian Carrington
Alexander Chancellor
Felicity Cloake
Kira Cochrane
Mark Cocker
Alistair Cooke
G. D. H. Cole
John Cole
Rosalind Coward
Gavyn Davies
Robin Denselow
Beth Ditto
Tim Dowling
Terry Eagleton
Larry Elliott
Matthew Engel
Edzard Ernst
Harold Evans
Evelyn Flinders
Paul Foot
Liz Forgan
Brian J. Ford
Dawn Foster
Michael Frayn
Jonathan Freedland
Hadley Freeman




Timothy Garton Ash
Tanya Gold
Ben Goldacre
Victor Gollancz
Richard Gott
A. C. Grayling
Roy Greenslade
Germaine Greer
A. Harry Griffin
Ben Hammersley
Clifford Harper
Patrick Haseldine
Max Hastings
Roy Hattersley
David Hencke
Georgina Henry
Isabel Hilton
L. T. Hobhouse
J. A. Hobson
Tom Hodgkinson
Will Hodgkinson
Simon Hoggart
Stewart Holden
Clare Hollingworth
Will Hutton
Marina Hyde
C. L. R. James
Erwin James (pseudonym)
Waldemar Januszczak
Simon Jenkins
Stanley Johnson
Owen Jones
Alex Kapranos
Saeed Kamali Dehghan
Victor Keegan
Martin Kelner
Emma Kennedy
Maev Kennedy
Martin Kettle
Arthur Koestler
Aleks Krotoski
Mark Lawson
David Leigh
Rod Liddle
Sue Limb (as Dulcie Domum)
Maureen Lipman
Joris Luyendijk
John Maddox
Derek Malcolm
Johnjoe McFadden
Dan McDougall
Neil McIntosh
David McKie
Gareth McLean
Anna Minton
George Monbiot
C. E. Montague
Suzanne Moore
Malcolm Muggeridge




James Naughtie
Richard Norton-Taylor
Maggie O'Kane
Susie Orbach[190]
Greg Palast
David Pallister
Michael Parkinson
'Salam Pax'
Jim Perrin
Melanie Phillips
Helen Pidd
John Pilger
Anna Politkovskaya
Peter Preston
Tim Radford
Arthur Ransome
Adam Raphael
Andrew Rawnsley
Brian Redhead
James H Reeve
Gillian Reynolds
Jon Ronson
Mike Selvey
Norman Shrapnel
Frank Sidebottom
Michael Simkins
Posy Simmonds
Howard Spring
Jean Stead
David Steel
Jonathan Steele
Mary Stott
Allegra Stratton
John Sutherland
R. H. Tawney
A. J. P. Taylor
Simon Tisdall
Arnold Toynbee
Polly Toynbee
Jill Tweedie
Bibi van der Zee
F. A. Voigt
Ed Vulliamy
Hank Wangford
Jonathan Watts
Brian Whitaker
Michael White
Ann Widdecombe
Zoe Williams
Ted Wragg
Hugo Young
Gary Younge
Xue Xinran
Tony Zappone
Slavoj Žižek
Victor Zorza[191]




Cartoonists


David Austin
Steve Bell
Joe Berger
Berger & Wyse
Berke Breathed
Biff
Peter Clarke
Les Gibbard
John Kent
Jamie Lenman
David Low
Martin Rowson
Posy Simmonds
Garry Trudeau


Satirists


Jeremy Hardy
Armando Iannucci
Terry Jones
Craig Brown as "Bel Littlejohn"
John O'Farrell
Mark Steel


Experts


Tim Atkin
Matthew Fort
Malcolm Gluck
Tim Hayward
Jack Schofield


Photographers and picture editors


Herbert Walter Doughty (The Manchester Guardian's first photographer, July 1908)
Eamonn McCabe
Sean Smith




Guardian News & Media Archive[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The Guardian and its sister newspaper The Observer opened The Newsroom, an archive and visitor centre in London, in 2002. The centre preserved and promoted the histories and values of the newspapers through its archive, educational programmes and exhibitions. The Newsroom's activities were all transferred to Kings Place in 2008.[192] Now known as the Guardian News & Media Archive, the archive preserves and promotes the histories and values of The Guardian and The Observer newspapers by collecting and making accessible material that provides an accurate and comprehensive history of the papers. The archive holds official records of The Guardian and The Observer and also seeks to acquire material from individuals who have been associated with the papers. As well as corporate records, the archive holds correspondence, diaries, notebooks, original cartoons and photographs belonging to staff of the papers.[193] This material may be consulted by members of the public by prior appointment. There is also an extensive Manchester Guardian archive at the University of Manchester's John Rylands University Library and there is a collaboration programme between the two archives. The British Library also has a large archive of The Manchester Guardian, available in online, hard copy, microform, and CD-ROM in their British Library Newspapers collection.
In November 2007 The Guardian and The Observer made their archives available over the internet via DigitalArchive. The current extent of the archives available are 1821 to 2000 for The Guardian and 1791 to 2000 for The Observer: these archives will eventually run up to 2003.
The Newsroom's other components were also transferred to Kings Place in 2008. The Guardian's Education Centre provides a range of educational programmes for students and adults. The Guardian's exhibition space was also moved to Kings Place, and has a rolling programme of exhibitions that investigate and reflect upon aspects of news and newspapers and the role of journalism. This programme often draws on the archive collections held in the GNM Archive.
See also[edit]

Guardian Monthly

Notes and references[edit]


^ a b c "Print ABCs: Metro overtakes Sun in UK weekday distribution, but Murdoch title still Britain's best-selling paper". Press Gazette. Retrieved 11 July 2017. 
^ The Guardian News and Media Limited (26 July 2015). "The Scott Trust: values and history". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 December 2015. 
^ a b International Socialism Spring 2003, ISBN 1-898876-97-5
^ a b "Ipsos MORI". Ipsos MORI. Archived from the original on 23 May 2009. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Department of the Official Report (Hansard), House of Commons, Westminster (19 November 2001). "Hansard 374:54 19 November 2001". Publications.parliament.uk. Retrieved 28 July 2009. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ a b "What the papers say". BBC News. 17 October 2005. 
^ "Guardian appoints Katharine Viner as editor-in-chief | Media". The Guardian. 20 March 2015. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Rusbridger, Alan. "'Farewell, readers': Alan Rusbridger on leaving the Guardian after two decades at the helm". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ "The Guardian overtakes New York Times in comScore traffic figures". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 September 2015. 
^ Halliday, Josh (12 September 2012). "The Guardian reaches nearly 9 million readers across print and online". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 October 2013. 
^ "Can the Guardian survive?". Intelligent Life. July–August 2012. 
^ Woolf, Nicky (3 July 2012). "Could the newspaper that broke the hacking scandal be the next to close?". GQ.com. Archived from the original on 6 July 2012. 
^ a b Hosenball, Mark (6 June 2013). "Obama administration defends massive phone record collection". Reuters. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ a b "Edward Snowden: the whistleblower behind the NSA surveillance revelations | US news". The Guardian. 9 June 2013. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ a b Rawlinson, Kevin (2 April 2014). "Guardian wins newspaper and website of the year at British press awards". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 June 2014. 
^ "Mind your language". The Guardian. 23 August 2009. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 23 December 2016. 
^ Wainwright, Martin (13 August 2007). "Battle for the memory of Peterloo: Campaigners demand fitting tribute". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 26 March 2008. 
^ Editorial (4 May 2011). "The Manchester Guardian, born 5 May 1821: 190 years – work in progress". The Guardian. 
^ Manchester Gazette, 7 August 1819, quoted in Ayerst, David (1971). 'Guardian' : biography of a newspaper. London: Collins. p. 20. ISBN 0-00-211329-5. 
^ Harrison, Stanley (1974). Poor men's guardians : a record of the struggles for a democratic newspaper press, 1763–1973. London: Lawrence and Wishart. p. 53. ISBN 0-85315-308-6. 
^  Garnett, Richard (1890). "Garnett, Jeremiah". In Stephen, Leslie; Lee, Sidney. Dictionary of National Biography. 21. London: Smith, Elder & Co. citing: [Manchester Guardian, 28 September 1870; Manchester Free Lance, 1 October 1870 ; Prentice's Historical Sketches and Personal Recollections of Manchester; personal knowledge.] 
^ "The Scott Trust: History". Guardian Media Group. Archived from the original on 23 July 2008. Retrieved 26 March 2008. 
^ "The Manchester guardian and British volunteer – JH Libraries". Catalyst.library.jhu.edu. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ 21 May 1836
^ "Editorial". The Manchester Guardian. 28 January 1832. 
^ "Editorial". The Manchester Guardian. 26 February 1873. 
^ "Editorial". The Manchester Guardian. 27 April 1865. 
^ Hampton, Mark (2011). "The Press, Patriotism, and Public Discussion: C. P. Scott, the "Manchester Guardian", and the Boer War, 1899–1902". The Historical Journal. 44 (1): 177–197. 
^ a b Purvis, June (13 November 2007). "Unladylike behaviour". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 28 July 2009. 
^ quoted in David Ayerst, The Guardian, 1971, p 353
^ Arnold, Bruce (27 November 2012). "To the waters and the wild". Irish Independent. Dublin: Independent News & Media. Retrieved 4 June 2014. 
^ Leader (22 October 1951). "Time for change?". The Manchester Guardian. 
^ Kynaston, David (2007). Austerity Britain 1945–1951. London: Bloomsbury. p. 285. ISBN 978-0-7475-9923-4. 
^ Rusbridger Alan (10 July 2006). "Courage under fire". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 March 2014. . Three years from 1956 and the Manchester Guardian soon became the Guardian, introduced by Scott C.C.P
^ Smith, Simon C. (2016-04-08). Reassessing Suez 1956: New Perspectives on the Crisis and Its Aftermath. Routledge. ISBN 9781317070696. 
^ a b c Leader (1 February 1972). "The division deepens". The Guardian. London. 
^ "19 April 1972: 'Bloody Sunday' report excuses Army". On this day 1950–2005. BBC. 2008. Retrieved 28 July 2009. 
^ Bowcott, Owen (16 June 2010). "Bloody Sunday inquiry: 'We always knew the dead were innocent'". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 August 2013. 
^ Leader (20 April 1972). "To make history repeat itself". The Guardian. London. 
^ The Guardian, leader, 10 August 1971
^ The Guardian, leader, 15 August 1969
^ The Guardian, leader, 4 August 1969
^ Paul Routledge (16 January 1994). "Profile: Hunter of the truth: Lord justice Scott: With the Government rattled, Paul Routledge looks at the man John Major now has to face | Voices". The Independent. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Preston, Peter (5 September 2005). "A source of great regret". The Guardian. London. 
^ Leader (6 August 1990). "Choosing the best option". The Guardian. London. 
^ Leader (17 January 1991). "Suddenly the sky turns orange". The Guardian. 
^ "Bloodless words bloody war: In a Guardian/Channel 4 investigation across three continents, Maggie O'Kane follows the trail of lies, cover-ups and carnage that were the truth behind the 'clean' war in the Gulf." Guardian [London, England] 16 December 1995: 12. General Reference Center GOLD. Web. 12 December 2011.
^ Williams, Rhys (9 December 1994). "'Guardian' journalist recruited by the KGB". The Independent. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ "CBSi". FindArticles. Archived from the original on 24 June 2012. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "'The simple sword of truth'". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 11 April 1995. Retrieved 25 May 2010. 
^ Harding, Luke; Pallister, David (21 June 1997). "He lied and lied and lied". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "Aitken pleads guilty to perjury". BBC News. 19 January 1999. 
^ The Guardian, leader, 23 March 1999
^ Kaldor, Mary (25 March 1999). "Bombs away! But to save civilians we must get in some soldiers too". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ Dyer, Clare (6 December 2000). "A challenge to the crown: now is the time for change". The Guardian. London. 
^ Watt, Nicholas (7 December 2000). "Broad welcome for debate on monarchy". The Guardian. London. 
^ CNS News, 25 October 2004. ""Left-Wing UK Paper Pulls Bush Assassination Column"". Archived from the original on 5 December 2004. Retrieved 10 August 2006. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "Screen Burn, The Guide". The Guardian. London. 24 October 2004. 
^ "Full text of deleted article". Antinomian.com. 23 October 2004. Retrieved 28 July 2009. 
^ Aslam, Dilpazier (13 July 2005). "We rock the boat". The Guardian. London. 
^ "Background: the Guardian and Dilpazier Aslam". MediaGuardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 22 July 2005. 
^ Busfield, Steve (22 July 2005). "Dilpazier Aslam leaves Guardian". MediaGuardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "Tax Gap". Guardian. UK. 6 February 2009. Retrieved 28 July 2009. 
^ "Big business: what they make, what they pay". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 2 February 2009. Retrieved 25 May 2010. 
^ Jones, Sam; Leigh, David (19 March 2009). "Guardian loses legal challenge over Barclays documents gagging order". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "Can The Guardian survive?". Intelligent Life. July–August 2012. 
^ "ANTI-ZIONIST AND ANTISEMITIC DISCOURSE ON THE GUARDIAN'S COMMENT IS FREE WEBSITE". Archived from the original on 13 July 2010. Retrieved 18 May 2016. 
^ http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/guardian-accused-pro-israel-bias-after-carrying-child-sacrifice-ad-rejected-times/
^ Burchill, Julie (29 November 2003). "Good, bad and ugly". The Guardian. London. 
^ MacAskill, Ewen (4 December 2003). "Leaked report shows rise in anti-semitism". The Guardian. London. 
^ "Anti-Semitism in the EU: United Kingdom". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "Leader: A new anti-semitism?". The Guardian. London. 26 January 2002. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ "News coverage". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 25 May 2010. 
^ Elliott, Chris (6 November 2011). "The readers' editor on ... averting accusations of antisemitism". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 October 2012. 
^ "The Guardian seeks to revise history". Arutz Sheva. Retrieved 16 October 2014. 
^ Corrections and clarifications column editor (22 April 2012). "Corrections and clarifications | News". The Guardian. Retrieved 6 March 2016. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Corrections & Clarifications Editor (7 August 2012). "Corrections and clarifications". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 July 2015. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Meredith Carey (7 August 2014). "The Guardian Accepts Elie Wiesel's Rejected London Times Advertisement – Observer". Observer. Retrieved 24 March 2016. 
^ Elliott, Chris (18 August 2014). "The readers' editor on... the decision to run This World's advertisement". theguardian.com. Retrieved 22 August 2014. 
^ Clark County. epubli. 
^ "Dear Limey assholes". The Guardian. London. 18 October 2004. Retrieved 13 May 2008. 
^ Bowers, Andy (4 November 2004). "A crazy British plot to help Kerry". Slate.com. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Leon Neyfakh (5 September 2007). "Guardian Reclaims America". Observer. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Kiss, Jemima (18 February 2009). "Michael Tomasky joins political journal Democracy". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "GNM Axing GuardianAmerica.com, Shuffling Execs In Restructure". Archived from the original on 24 June 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2013. 
^ "Guardian News And Media Laying Off Six Employees In U.S". Archived from the original on 24 June 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2013. 
^ Guardian US (15 August 2012). "adds Josh Treviño to growing US team | Guardian US press office". The Guardian. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "My 2011 Gaza flotilla tweet: a clarification". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 October 2014. 
^ "Guardian News & Media press release: Guardian unveils US url". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 July 2013. 
^ Jasper Jackson (1 June 2015). "Lee Glendinning appointed as editor of Guardian US | Media". The Guardian. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Table Office, House of Commons (12 November 2009). "Order Paper Part 2". Publications.parliament.uk. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Leigh, David (12 October 2009). "Guardian gagged from reporting parliament". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "Page cannot be found". UK Parliament. Retrieved 24 March 2016. 
^ Ponsford, Dominic (13 October 2009). "Guardian gagged from reporting Parliament". Press Gazette. London: Progressive Media International. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013. 
^ "Minton report: Trafigura toxic dumping along the Ivory Coast broke EU regulations, 14 Sep 2006". WikiLeaks. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Leigh, David (16 September 2009). "How UK oil company Trafigura tried to cover up African pollution disaster". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ Leigh, David (13 October 2009). "Gag on Guardian reporting MP's Trafigura question lifted". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ Rusbridger, Alan (14 October 2009). "The Trafigura fiasco tears up the textbook". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ Higham, Nick (13 October 2009). "When is a secret not a secret?". BBC News. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ "Edward Snowden files: No 10 contacted Guardian – BBC News". Bbc.co.uk. 21 August 2013. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "Guardian's Alan Rusbridger tells of hard drive destruction | Video". Media.theage.com.au. 21 August 2013. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Duncan Campbell (3 June 2014). "Revealed: GCHQ's beyond top secret middle eastern internet spy base". The Register. 
^ Julian Assange (10 January 2017). I am Julian Assange founder of WikiLeaks -- Ask Me Anything. 68 minutes in. Retrieved 15 January 2017. 
^ Conlan, Tara (8 October 2008). "Guardian owner the Scott Trust to be wound up after 72 years". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 10 October 2008. 
^ "Living Our Values: Social, Ethical and Environmental Audit 2006". Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2013. 
^ "Guardian Media Group 2005/06 results: 28/07/2006: A LANDMARK YEAR FOR GMG". Archived from the original on 21 August 2006. Retrieved 9 August 2006. 
^ "Manchester Evening News sold by Guardian Media Group". Manchester Evening News. M.E.N. Media. 9 February 2010. Archived from the original on 19 July 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2010. 
^ Rayner, Gordon (18 June 2011). "Riches to rags as Guardian bleeds £33m in a year". London: The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 21 October 2011. 
^ Sabbagh, Dan (16 June 2011). "Guardian and Observer to adopt 'digital-first' strategy". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 21 October 2011. 
^ "Can The Guardian Survive?". More Intelligent Life. Retrieved 11 August 2013. 
^ Jane Martinson (25 January 2016). "Guardian News & Media to cut costs by 20 per cent | Media". The Guardian. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Mance, Henry (10 September 2014). "Guardian launches paid membership scheme". FT.com. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "Join Choose Tier – The Guardian Members". theguardian.com. Retrieved 16 October 2016. 
^ Frederick Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England, Progress, 1973, p 109.
^ Ian Hunter (2003). Malcolm Muggeridge: A Life. Regent College Publishing. p. 74. ISBN 978-1-57383-259-5. 
^ "The Scott Trust: values and history". The Guardian. 26 July 2015. Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ a b "Political affiliation". The Guardian. 16 November 2008. Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ Department of the Official Report (Hansard), House of Commons, Westminster (19 November 2001). "Hansard 374:54 19 November 2001". Publications.parliament.uk. Retrieved 28 July 2009. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Leader (2 July 1994). "Labour: the choice for the future". The Guardian. London. 
^ Leader (2 May 1997). "A political earthquake: The Tory loss is cataclysmic; Labour's win historic". The Guardian. London. 
^ "Iraq: the case for decisive action". The Guardian. 19 January 2003.
^ Wells, Matt (16 October 2004). "World writes to undecided voters". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 13 July 2008. 
^ Ashley, Jackie (29 April 2008). "Are the Guardianistas rats?". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 13 July 2008. 
^ "Magic or not, let in the daylight". London. 6 December 2000. Retrieved 14 November 2013. 
^ Seddon, Mark (21 February 2005). "Smaller size, higher brow?". New Statesman. London. Archived from the original on 12 March 2010. 
^ Seaton, Matt (23 April 2010). "The Guardian's election editorial meeting: report". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ Editorial (30 April 2010). "General election 2010: The liberal moment has come". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 25 May 2010. 
^ Editorial (1 May 2015). "The Guardian view: Britain needs a new direction, Britain needs Labour". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 1 May 2015. 
^ White, Michael (9 March 2011). "Media self-censorship: not just a problem for Turkey". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "'Comandante' Chavez Still Revered By Some, Despite Failings". NPR. 10 April 2013. Retrieved 11 March 2015. 
^ Editorial. "The Guardian view on Labour's choice: Corbyn has shaped the campaign, but Cooper can shape the future". The Guardian. 
^ Sinclair, Ian (19 October 2015). "Guardian On The Wrong Side Of History Over Corbyn". The Morning Star. Retrieved 30 March 2016. 
^ "The Guardian's Summary of Julian Assange's Interview Went Viral and Was Completely False". The Intercept. 29 December 2016.
^ "Security researchers call for Guardian to retract false WhatsApp "backdoor" story". TechCrunch. 20 January 2017. 
^ Moxie Marlinspike (13 January 2017). "There is no WhatsApp 'backdoor'". Today, the Guardian published a story falsely claiming that WhatsApp's end to end encryption contains a "backdoor." 
^ William Turton (13 January 2017). "There's No Security Backdoor in WhatsApp, Despite Reports". Gizmodo. According to Alec Muffett, an experienced security researcher who spoke to Gizmodo, the Guardian’s story is “major league fuckwittage.” 
^ "Guardian WhatsApp Timeline". Maciej Cegłowski. 27 February 2017. Last edited 13 June 2017.
^ Audit Bureau of Circulations Ltd– abc.org.uk
^ Durrani, Arif (3 August 2013). "NEWSPAPER ABCs: Guardian hits historic low in February following 20p price hike – Media news". Media Week. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "Manchester Guardian". Spartacus-educational.com. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "Tuesday's morning conference". The Guardian. UK. 13 September 2007. Retrieved 11 February 2007. 
^ Cozens, Claire (1 September 2005). "New-look Guardian launches on September 12". MediaGuardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ Crossgrove, Carl. "Guardian: review". Typographica. Retrieved 11 July 2015. 
^ Paul A Barnes; Christian E Schwartz (15 November 2006). "Does type design matter in newspapers?". FontShop Benelux. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2012. 
^ "Guardian Reborn, The Guardian". Archived from the original on 12 February 2007. Retrieved 5 May 2017. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) . Retrieved on 22 July 2007.
^ Cozens, Claire (13 January 2006). "Telegraph sales hit all-time low". MediaGuardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "Guardian, Telegraph and FT post modest sales rises in December". London: Guardian News and Media. 11 January 2013. 
^ Busfield, Steve (21 February 2006). "Guardian wins design award". MediaGuardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "The Guardian and The Observer to relaunch in tabloid format". 
^ "Katharine Viner and David Pemsel on the move to tabloid". 
^ Arthur, Charles (18 November 2009). "The Guardian's technology coverage: what happens next". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 25 May 2010. 
^ Rowson, Martin (25 November 2005). "Drawing fire". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ Bell, Emily (8 October 2005). "Editor's week". The Guardian. London. 
^ "Guardian.co.uk most read newspaper site in UK in March". www.journalism.co.uk. Retrieved 17 June 2014. 
^ Durrani, Arif (19 April 2011). "MailOnline overtakes Huffington Post to become world's no 2". MediaWeek. Haymarket. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013. 
^ "The Guardian: I'm impressed". idio. 1 June 2010. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2010. 
^ https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/mar/08/corrections-clarifications.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Gibson, Janine (28 February 2011). "Guardian Unlimited Talkboard closure". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "#Thinkfluencer episode 1: Selfies – video | Technology". The Guardian. 23 August 2013. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "Online Dating Site UK | Guardian Soulmates". Soulmates.theguardian.com. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Deans, Jason (8 December 2005). "Gervais to host Radio 2 Christmas show". MediaGuardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "Comedy stars and radio DJs top the download charts". The Guardian. London. 23 January 2006. 
^ Plunkett, John (6 February 2006). "Gervais podcast in the record books". MediaGuardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "Films". The Guardian. UK. 12 February 2009. Retrieved 28 July 2009. 
^ "Maggie O'Kane: Bringing the Guardian's Ethos to Tv". Buzzle.com. 7 November 2003. Retrieved 28 July 2009. [dead link]
^ "Films homepage". Guardian. UK. 12 February 2009. Retrieved 2 May 2010. 
^ a b Salih, Omar; Summers, Ben (28 January 2008). "Excerpt from Baghdad: A Doctor's Story". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 25 May 2010. 
^ Smith, Sean; Nzerem, Keme; Ulleri, Giovanni (18 August 2009). "On the frontline with British troops in Afghanistan". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 25 May 2010. 
^ "Guardian film-maker wins Royal Television Society award | Media". The Guardian. 20 February 2008. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "GuardianFilms Awards". The Guardian. London. 16 February 2009. Retrieved 25 May 2010. 
^ Sherrin, Ned (16 December 2000). "Surely shome mishtake?". The Guardian. London. 
^ Bernhard, Jim (2007). Porcupine, Picayune, & Post: how newspapers get their names. University of Missouri Press. pp. 26–27. ISBN 0-8262-1748-6. Retrieved 11 August 2013. 
^ "unknown". Encounter. Congress for Cultural Freedom. 58: 28. 1982. This article refers to the paper by the facetious name: The Grauniad.
^ Devlin, Keith (1 March 1984). "Prime beef: Mathematical micro-mysteries: Keith Devlin returns to prime time computation". The Guardian. London.  Reprinted in Devlin, Keith (1994). "Prime beef"". All the math that's fit to print: articles from the Manchester guardian. Cambridge University Press. p. 42. ISBN 0-88385-515-1. Retrieved 11 August 2013. 
^ Changing Faces: A History of the Guardian 1956–1988 Geoffrey Taylor Fourth Estate, 1993
^ Porcupine, Picayune, & Post: How Newspapers Get Their Names Jim Bernhard University of Missouri Press, 2007
^ McKie, David (8 November 2013). "John Cole obituary". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 November 2013. 
^ a b c "British Press Awards: Awards Ceremony – 23rd March 2010: 2010 Winners Announced". Archived from the original on 16 June 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2016. 
^ a b c Guardian staff (6 April 2011). "Press Awards 2011: Guardian wins Newspaper of the Year". The Guardian. London. 
^ Wells, Matt (20 March 2002). "Guardian triumphs at Press Awards". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. 
^ "The Webby Awards". Archived from the original on 8 April 2011. Retrieved 24 March 2016. 
^ "The 2006 Newspaper Awards". Archived from the original on 3 February 2004. Retrieved 29 May 2006. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 26 October 2005. Retrieved 28 July 2005. 
^ "Openness & Accountability: A Study of Transparency in Global Media Outlets". Archived from the original on 15 May 2008. Retrieved 19 June 2008. 
^ [1][dead link]
^ "The Paul Foot award for Campaigning Journalism 2007". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 16 October 2007. 
^ "The 100 greatest non-fiction books". The Guardian. 14 June 2011. Retrieved 26 September 2017. 
^ "Guardian 100 Greatest Non-Fiction Book awards". LibraryThing. Retrieved 26 September 2017. 
^ McCrum, Robert (2017). "100 Best Nonfiction Books of All Time". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 September 2017. 
^ "Comment, opinion and discussion from the Guardian US | The Guardian". Commentisfree.guardian.co.uk. 1 January 1970. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 18 November 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2007. 
^ Villani, Lisa (20 August 2009). "MIC: GNM archive (microsite)". The Guardian. London. 
^ "MIC: GNM archive (microsite)". The Guardian. London. 26 August 2009. 


Further reading[edit]

Ayerst, David. The Manchester Guardian: biography of a newspaper (Cornell University Press, 1971).
Merrill, John C., and Harold A. Fisher. The World's Great Dailies: profiles of fifty newspapers (1980), pp. 143–50.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Guardian.





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
The Manchester Guardian




Official website
History of the Guardian
Today's The Guardian front page at the Newseum website


Guardian Media companies grouped at OpenCorporates
Founding of the Manchester Guardian
Works by or about The Guardian at Internet Archive (historic)
Works by The Guardian at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Guardian Media Group



Subsidiaries and
divisions




Newspapers



The Guardian
The Guardian Weekly
The Observer





Other



GMG Property Services
theguardian.com
Guardian Australia








Joint ventures and
shareholdings



Development Hell (29.5%)
Ascential (50%)
Seven Publishing (41.9%)





Other



C. P. Scott
Guardian Student Media Award
Scott Trust
John Edward Taylor






 Category










v
t
e


 Media in the United Kingdom








UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals







Newspapers
(History)




Berliner



The Guardian
The Observer





Broadsheet



Financial Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
The Sunday Times





Compact



i
The Times





Middle-market



Daily Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday





Tabloid



Daily Mirror
Sunday Mirror
Morning Star
The Sunday People
Daily Star
Daily Star Sunday
The Sun
Sunday Sport








Magazines &
other periodicals



List of magazines by circulation
















Radio in the UK







National
stations




BBC



Analogue / digital
Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
5 Live
Digital only
Radio 1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
5 Live Sports Extra
6 Music
Asian Network
World Service
BBC National DAB (multiplex)





Independent
/ commercial



Analogue / digital
Absolute Radio
Classic FM
Heart
Kiss
Talksport
Digital only
Absolute 80s
Absolute Radio Extra
BFBS Radio
Capital
Digital One (multiplex)
Heart Extra
heat
The Hits
Jazz FM
Kerrang!
Kiss Fresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic
Planet Rock
Premier Christian Radio
Radio X
RNIB Connect Radio
Sound Digital (multiplex)
Smooth
Talkradio
UCB UK
Virgin Radio UK








Regional
& local
stations




BBC



List of BBC Local Radio stations
List of BBC Regional Radio stations





Independent
/ commercial



List of community radio stations
List of local commercial radio stations
List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations








Other
stations



List of hospital radio stations
Pirate radio
Restricted Service Licence (RSL)

List of RSL stations


List of satellite radio stations
List of student and schools radio





Other



Broadcasting House
FM broadcasting
The Studios, MediaCityUK
Radio Academy

Radio Academy Awards


Radio Independents Group
RAJAR
Most listened to programmes
















Television in the UK







Principal
channels
(List)




BBC



BBC One
BBC Two
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





ITV



ITV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
CITV
ITV Encore
ITVBe
ITV Box Office





Ch 4



Channel 4
E4
Film4
More4
4seven





Ch 5



Channel 5
5Prime
5Spike
5Star
5USA





Sky



Challenge
Pick
Real Lives
Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Living
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News





UKTV



Alibi
Dave
Drama
Eden
Gold
Good Food
Home
Really
W
Yesterday





Sony Pictures Television



Chart Show TV
Chart Show Hits
Movies4Men
Pop
Pop Max
Starz TV
Sony Channel
Sony Movie Channel
Scuzz
Tiny Pop
True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
truTV
The Vault








Services
&
platforms



All 4

Film4oD


analogue

analogue terrestrial (defunct)


BBC iPlayer

BBC Three


BBC Store
TalkTalk TV Store
BT TV
cable
digital

digital terrestrial
List of channels


Freesat

Freesat+


Freeview
high-definition

List of channels


ITV

ITV Hub, STV Player


local television
My5
Now TV
Real Digital
Restricted Service Licence
satellite

List of channels


Sky

Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky+
Sky+ HD


TalkTalk TV
Top Up TV
TVPlayer
Virgin Media

FilmFlex
TiVo
V+


YouView
Zattoo





Studios




Current



BBC Elstree Centre
BBC Pacific Quay
The Bottle Yard Studios
Broadcasting House
Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Gas Street Studios
The Leeds Studios
The London Studios
The Maidstone Studios
Mailbox Birmingham
MediaCityUK
Osterley Television Centre
Roath Lock
Television Centre, London





Defunct



British and Dominions Imperial Studios
Fountain Studios
Gate Studios
Granada Studios
MGM-British Studios
Pebble Mill Studios
Teddington Studios
Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne
Television Centre, Southampton
Upper Boat Studios








Other



Defunct channels
Edinburgh International Television Festival
History

List of years


List of channels
Student television
Viewing statistics

Most-watched broadcasts


















Companies and organisations







Companies




Major
companies



Archant
Ascential
Bauer Radio
BBC
Bloomsbury Publishing
BT Group
Channel Four Television Corporation
Daily Mail and General Trust
Dentsu Aegis Network
Economist Group
EMI Music Publishing
Endemol Shine UK
Global Group
Guardian Media Group
Haymarket Media Group
Informa
ITN
ITV plc
Johnston Press
Mecom Group
News UK
Newsquest
Northern & Shell
Now TV Limited
Origin Broadband
Pearson PLC
Press Holdings
RELX Group
Reuters
Sky UK Limited
Sky plc
STV Group
Syco
TalkTalk Group
Time Inc. UK
Trinity Mirror
UBM plc
Virgin Media
Wireless Group





Other resources



Arqiva
List of largest UK book publishers








Government
& regulatory
bodies



Advertising Standards Authority
BBC Trust
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Independent Press Standards Organisation
Ofcom
Press Recognition Panel
S4C Authority





Industry
& trades
bodies



British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Phonographic Industry
Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union
Clearcast
Digital TV Group
Digital UK
Equity
Federation Against Copyright Theft
National Union of Journalists
The Publishers Association
Royal Television Society
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting





Other



BBC Academy
National Film and Television School
National Science and Media Museum
















Regional and student media







Regional media



Media in England

Birmingham
London
Manchester


Media in Scotland

Aberdeen
Dundee
Glasgow


Media in Wales

Cardiff







Student media



Student television














 Category












v
t
e


Current White House James S. Brady Press Briefing Room seating chart







Row
Podium




1
2
3
4
5
6
7




NBC
Wall Street Journal
Agence France-Presse
MSNBC
Bloomberg BNA
Washington Examiner
Talk Media News/Univision




Fox News
CBS Radio
AP Radio
Foreign Pool
Time
Yahoo! News
Dallas Morning News




CBS News
Bloomberg
McClatchy
Washington Times
SiriusXM
Salem Radio
Globe/Roll Call




AP
NPR
AURN
The Hill
Regionals
Newsmax
CBN




ABC News
Washington Post
Politico
Fox News Radio
CSM/NY Post
Daily Mail
BBC/OAN




Reuters
NY Times
Chicago Tribune
VOA
RealClearPolitics
HuffPost/NY Daily News
BuzzFeed/Daily Beast




CNN
USA Today
ABC Radio
National Journal
Al Jazeera/PBS
Westwood One
Financial Times/Guardian




The seating chart as of July 10, 2017.







White House Correspondents' Association










v
t
e


United Kingdom Alternative Vote referendum, 2011




Results



Referendum question

"At present, the UK uses the “first past the post” system to elect MPs to the House of Commons. Should the “alternative vote” system be used instead?"



Legislation



Parliamentary Voting System and Constituencies Act 2011





Parties




For a "Yes" vote



Alliance Party of Northern Ireland
Christian Party
Christian Peoples Alliance
English Democrats
Green Party of England and Wales
Liberal Democrats
Liberal Party
Mebyon Kernow
Pirate Party UK
Plaid Cymru
Scottish Green Party
Scottish National Party
SDLP
Sinn Féin
UKIP
Libertarian Party





Neutral/split



Labour Party
Socialist Party of Great Britain
Official Monster Raving Loony Party





For a "No" vote



British National Party
Communist Party
Conservative Party
Democratic Unionist Party
England First Party
Green Party in Northern Ireland
Respect Party
Socialist Party
Traditional Unionist Voice
Ulster Unionist Party








Advocacy groups




Advocating a "Yes" vote



YES! To Fairer Votes





Advocating a "No" vote



NOtoAV








Print media




For a "Yes" vote



The Guardian
The Independent
Financial Times
Daily Mirror





For a "No" vote



The Sun
Daily Mail
The Times
Daily Express
The Daily Telegraph
The Economist
London Evening Standard









Politics Portal










v
t
e


Pulitzer Prize for Public Service (2001–2025)






Oregonian (2001)
New York Times (2002)
Boston Globe (2003)
New York Times (2004)
Los Angeles Times (2005)
Biloxi Sun Herald / New Orleans Times-Picayune (2006)
Wall Street Journal (2007)
Washington Post (2008)
Las Vegas Sun (2009)
Bristol Herald Courier (2010)
Los Angeles Times (2011)
The Philadelphia Inquirer (2012)
Sun-Sentinel (2013)
The Washington Post and The Guardian (2014)
The Post and Courier (2015)
Associated Press (2016)
New York Daily News and ProPublica (2017)








Complete list
(1918–1925)
(1926–1950)
(1951–1975)
(1976–2000)
(2001–2025)













Journalism portal
United Kingdom portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 220402319
GND: 4158503-3
SUDOC: 152903445
BNF: cb12342909v (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Guardian&oldid=818295095"					Categories: The Guardian1821 establishments in EnglandDaily newspapers published in the United KingdomEdinburgh Festival Fringe mediaHistory of ManchesterInvestigative news sourcesNational newspapers published in the United KingdomNewspapers published in LondonNewspapers published in ManchesterPublications established in 1821Pulitzer Prize-winning newspapersRepublicanism in the United KingdomHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles incorporating Cite DNB templateCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listPages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2013Articles with dead external links from June 2016Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from December 2017Use British English from August 2011Pages using infobox newspaper with unknown parametersAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016Articles needing additional references from March 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from August 2016Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2016All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingOpenCorporates groupingsArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers