




Classification
Latter Day Saint movement


Theology



Nontrinitarian
Mormonism





Governance
Hierarchical


Leader
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (Russell M. Nelson, President)[1]


Region
176 nations / territories


Headquarters
Salt Lake City, Utah, United States


Founder
Joseph Smith[2]


Origin
April 6, 1830[3]
Fayette, New York, United States


Separations
LDS denominations


Congregations
30,304[4]


Members
15,882,417[4][5][6]


Missionaries
70,946[4][7]


Aid organization
LDS Humanitarian Services


Tertiary institutions
4[8]


Other name(s)



LDS Church
Mormon Church





Official website
www.lds.org




Part of a series on


Christianity










Jesus
Christ






Jesus in Christianity
Son of God
Virgin birth
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection












Bible
Foundations






Old Testament
New Testament
Gospel
Canon
Books
Church
Creed
New Covenant









Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit






Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
History of theology
Mission
Patriology
Pneumatology
Salvation












History
Tradition






Mary
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early Christianity
Constantine
Councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Luther
Reformation
Radical Reformation









Related topics



Art
Holidays (list)
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism












Denominations
Groups






Western




Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant




Eastern




Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox
Assyrian




Nontrinitarian




Jehovah's Witness
Latter Day Saint
Oneness Pentecostal









 Christianity portal





v
t
e





The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (known as the LDS Church or, informally, the Mormon Church) is a Nontrinitarian, Christian restorationist church that is considered by its members to be the restoration of the original church founded by Jesus Christ. The church is headquartered in Salt Lake City, Utah, and has established congregations and built temples worldwide. According to the church, it has over 70,000 missionaries[4] and a membership of nearly 16 million.[4][5][6][9] It is ranked by the National Council of Churches as the fourth-largest Christian denomination in the United States.[10] It is the largest denomination in the Latter Day Saint movement founded by Joseph Smith during the period of religious revival known as the Second Great Awakening.
Adherents, often referred to as "Latter-day Saints" or, less formally, "Mormons", view faith in Jesus Christ and his atonement as fundamental principles of their religion.[11][12] LDS theology includes the Christian doctrine of salvation only through Jesus Christ,[13] though LDS doctrines regarding the nature of God and the potential of mankind differ significantly from mainstream Christianity. The church has an open canon which includes four scriptural texts:[14] the Bible (both Old and New Testaments), the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. Other than the Bible, the majority of the LDS canon constitutes revelation received by Joseph Smith and recorded by his scribes which includes commentary and exegesis about the Bible, texts described as lost parts of the Bible, and other works believed to be written by ancient prophets. Because of some of the doctrinal differences, some Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant churches consider the LDS Church to be distinct and separate from mainstream Christianity.[15]
Under the doctrine of continuing revelation, Latter-day Saints believe that the church president is a modern-day "prophet, seer, and revelator" and that Jesus Christ, under the direction of God the Father, leads the church by revealing his will to its president. Individual members of the church believe that they can also receive personal revelation from God in conducting their lives.[16] The president heads a hierarchical structure with various levels reaching down to local congregations. Bishops, drawn from the laity, lead local congregations. Male members, after reaching age 12, may be ordained to the priesthood, provided they are living the standards of the church. Women do not hold positions within the priesthood, but do occupy leadership roles in some church auxiliary organizations.[17]
Both men and women may serve as missionaries, and the church maintains a large missionary program that proselytizes and conducts humanitarian services worldwide. Faithful members adhere to church laws of sexual purity, health, fasting, and Sabbath observance, and contribute ten percent of their income to the church in tithing. In addition, the church teaches sacred ordinances through which adherents make covenants with God, including baptism, confirmation, the sacrament (holy communion), priesthood ordination, endowment, and celestial marriage (marriage blessings which extend beyond mortality)—all of which are of great significance to church members.[18]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Beginnings
1.2 Pioneer era
1.3 Modern times


2 Teachings and practices

2.1 Authorized texts
2.2 Distinctive doctrines and practices

2.2.1 Missionary service


2.3 Comparisons with Christian denominations outside the Latter Day Saint movement
2.4 Comparison with other Latter Day Saint movement faiths


3 Organization and structure

3.1 Name and legal entities
3.2 Geographic distribution and membership
3.3 Priesthood hierarchy
3.4 Programs and auxiliary organizations
3.5 Finances


4 Culture

4.1 Media and arts
4.2 Home and family
4.3 Social events and gatherings
4.4 Political involvement


5 Humanitarian services
6 Controversy and criticism
7 See also
8 References

8.1 Notes
8.2 Bibliography
8.3 Further reading


9 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
The history of the LDS Church is typically divided into three broad time periods: (1) the early history during the lifetime of Joseph Smith, which is in common with all Latter Day Saint movement churches; (2) a pioneer era under the leadership of Brigham Young and his 19th-century successors; and (3) a modern era beginning around the turn of the 20th century as Utah achieved statehood.
Beginnings[edit]




Adherents believe that Joseph Smith was called to be a modern-day prophet through, among other events, a visitation from God the Father and Jesus Christ.


See also: History of the Latter Day Saint movement and Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints)
The LDS Church was formally organized by Joseph Smith on April 6, 1830, in western New York.[19] Initial converts were drawn to the church in part because of the newly published Book of Mormon, a self-described chronicle of indigenous American prophets that Smith said he had translated from golden plates.[20]
Smith intended to establish the New Jerusalem in North America, called Zion.[21] In 1831, the church moved to Kirtland, Ohio (the eastern boundary of Zion),[22] and began establishing an outpost in Jackson County, Missouri (Zion's "center place"),[23] where he planned to eventually move the church headquarters.[24] However, in 1833, Missouri settlers brutally expelled the Latter Day Saints from Jackson County,[25] and the church was unable via a paramilitary expedition to recover the land.[26] Nevertheless, the church flourished in Kirtland[27] as Smith published new revelations and the church built the Kirtland Temple, culminating in a dedication of the building similar to the day of Pentecost.[28] The Kirtland era ended in 1838, after a financial scandal rocked the church and caused widespread defections.[29] Smith regrouped with the remaining church in Far West, Missouri,[30] but tensions soon escalated into violent conflicts with the old Missouri settlers.[31] Believing the Saints to be in insurrection, the Missouri governor ordered that the Saints be "exterminated or driven from the State."[32] In 1839, the Saints converted a swampland on the banks of the Mississippi River into Nauvoo, Illinois, which became the church's new headquarters.[33]
Nauvoo grew rapidly as missionaries sent to Europe and elsewhere gained new converts who then flooded into Nauvoo.[34] Meanwhile, Smith introduced polygamy to his closest associates.[35] He also established ceremonies, which he stated the Lord had revealed to him, to allow righteous people to become gods (joint heirs with Christ, see theosis)[36][37] in the afterlife,[38] and a secular institution to govern the Millennial kingdom.[39] He also introduced the church to a full accounting of his First Vision, in which two heavenly "personages" (God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ) appeared to him at age 14. This vision would come to be regarded by the LDS Church as the most important event in human history since the resurrection of Jesus.[40] Church members believe Joseph Smith is the first modern-day prophet.[41]
On June 27, 1844, Smith and his brother Hyrum were murdered by a mob in Carthage, Illinois,[42] while being held on charges of treason.[43] Because Hyrum was Joseph's designated successor,[44] their deaths caused a succession crisis,[45] and Brigham Young assumed leadership over the majority of Saints.[46] Young had been a close associate of Smith's and was senior apostle of the Quorum of the Twelve.[47] Other splinter groups followed other leaders in their own interpretation of the Latter Day Saint movement. These groups have no affiliation with the LDS Church.[48]
Pioneer era[edit]




Brigham Young led the LDS Church from 1844 until his death in 1877.


For two years after Smith's death, conflicts escalated between Mormons and other Illinois residents. Smith had predicted that the church would go to the West and be established in the tops of the Rocky Mountains.[49] Brigham Young took Smith's advice and led his followers, known in modern times as the Mormon pioneers, to Nebraska and then in 1847 to what became the Utah Territory.[50] As groups (over 60,000) arrived over a period of years, LDS settlers branched out and colonized a large region now known as the Mormon Corridor.
Young incorporated the LDS Church as a legal entity, and initially governed both the church and the state as a theocratic leader. He also publicized the practice of plural marriage,[51] a form of polygamy.
By 1857, tensions had again escalated between Mormons and other Americans, largely as a result of accusations involving polygamy and the theocratic rule of the Utah Territory by Young.[52] The Utah Mormon War ensued from 1857 to 1858, which resulted in the relatively peaceful[53] invasion of Utah by the United States Army, after which Young agreed to step down from power and be replaced by a non-Mormon territorial governor, Alfred Cumming.[54] Nevertheless, the LDS Church still wielded significant political power in the Utah Territory.[55]
At Young's death in 1877, he was followed by other church presidents, who resisted efforts by the United States Congress to outlaw Mormon polygamous marriages. In 1878, the United States Supreme Court, in Reynolds v. United States, decreed that "religious duty" to engage in plural marriage was not a valid defense to prosecutions for violating state laws against polygamy. Conflict between Mormons and the U.S. government escalated to the point that, in 1890, Congress disincorporated the LDS Church and seized most of its assets. Soon thereafter, church president Wilford Woodruff issued a manifesto that officially suspended the practice.[56] Although this manifesto did not dissolve existing plural marriages, so that families would not be split apart or damaged, no new polygamous marriages would be performed. Relations with the United States markedly improved after 1890, such that Utah was admitted as a U.S. state in 1896. Relations further improved after 1904, when church president Joseph F. Smith again disavowed polygamy before the United States Congress and issued a "Second Manifesto", calling for all plural marriages in the church to cease, as they were already against church doctrine since Woodruff issued the Manifesto. Eventually, the church adopted a policy of excommunicating its members found practicing polygamy and today actively distances itself from "fundamentalist" groups still practicing polygamy.[57]
Modern times[edit]




The Salt Lake Temple, which took 40 years to build, is one of the most iconic images of the church.


During the 20th century, the church grew substantially and became an international organization, due in part to the spread of missionaries around the globe. In 2000, the church reported 60,784 missionaries[58] and global church membership stood at just over 11 million.[58] Worldwide membership surpassed 13 million in 2007[59] and reached 14 million in July 2010,[60] with about six million of those within the United States.[61] However, it is estimated based on demographic studies from the early 1990s that only one-third of the total worldwide membership (about 4 million people as of 2005) are considered "active churchgoers."[62] The church cautions against overemphasis of growth statistics for comparison with other churches because relevant factors—including activity rates and death rates, methodology used in registering or counting members, what factors constitute membership, and geographical variations—are rarely accounted for in the comparisons.[63]
The church has become a strong and public champion of the nuclear family and at times played a prominent role in political matters, including opposition to MX Peacekeeper missile bases in Utah and Nevada,[64] the Equal Rights Amendment,[65] legalized gambling,[66] same-sex marriage,[67] and physician-assisted death.[68] Apart from issues that it considers to be ones of morality, however, the church maintains a position of political neutrality, but encourages its members to be politically active, to participate in elections, and to be knowledgeable about current political and social issues within their communities, states, and countries.[69]
A number of official changes have taken place to the organization during the modern era. One significant change was the ordination of men of black African descent to the priesthood in 1978, which reversed a policy originally instituted by Brigham Young in 1852.[70] There are also periodic changes in the structure and organization of the church, mainly to accommodate the organization's growth and increasing international presence. For example, since the early 1900s, the church has instituted a Priesthood Correlation Program to centralize church operations and bring them under a hierarchy of priesthood leaders. During the Great Depression, the church also began operating a church welfare system, and it has conducted numerous humanitarian efforts in cooperation with other religious organizations including Catholic Relief Services and Islamic Relief, as well as secular organizations such as the American Red Cross.
Teachings and practices[edit]
Authorized texts[edit]




The written canon of the LDS Church is referred to as its standard works.


The theology of the LDS Church consists of a combination of biblical doctrines with modern revelations and other commentary by LDS leaders, particularly Joseph Smith. The most authoritative sources of theology are the faith's canon of four religious texts, called the "standard works". Included in the standard works are the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. The Book of Mormon is said by the church to be "Another Testament of Jesus Christ" that Smith translated from buried golden plates. The LDS Church believes that the Angel Moroni told Smith about these golden plates and guided him to find them buried in the Hill Cumorah. The church believes that this Angel Moroni is at least partial fulfillment of Revelation 14:6 in the Bible. The church characterizes the Book of Mormon as "the most correct of any book on earth and the keystone of [the] religion".[71]
The Bible, also part of the church's canon, is believed to be "the word of God as far as it is translated correctly."[72] Most often, the church uses the Authorized King James Version. Sometimes, however, parts of the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (corrections and restorations of assertedly damaged or lost passages) are considered authoritative. Some excerpts of Smith's translation have been included in the Pearl of Great Price, which also includes further translations by Smith and church historical items. Other historical items and revelations are found in the Doctrine and Covenants.
Another source of authoritative doctrine is the pronouncements of the current Apostles and members of the First Presidency. The church teaches that the First Presidency (the church's president and his counselors) and the Quorum of Twelve Apostles are prophets[73] and that their teachings are generally given under inspiration from God through the Holy Spirit. Members of the church acknowledge (sustain) them regularly as prophets, seers, and revelators—this is done publicly twice a year at the church's worldwide general conference.[73]
Distinctive doctrines and practices[edit]
Main article: Beliefs and practices of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints




A couple after their marriage in the Manti Utah Temple


Several doctrines and practices of the LDS Church are peculiar within Christianity. For example, the Mormon cosmology and plan of salvation include the doctrines of a pre-mortal life, three degrees of heaven, and exaltation. According to these doctrines, every human spirit is a literal child of the Heavenly Father, and each has the potential to continue to learn, grow, and progress in the eternities, eventually achieving eternal life (which Latter-day Saints view as distinct from immortality), which is to become one with God in the same way that Jesus Christ is one with the Father, thus allowing the children of God to become divine beings or "gods" themselves,[74] the LDS view of theosis, also referred to as becoming a "joint-heir with Christ."[75] The process by which this is accomplished is called exaltation, a doctrine which includes the reunification of the mortal family after the resurrection and the ability to have spirit children in the afterlife and inherit a portion of God's kingdom.[75][76] To obtain this state of godhood, the church teaches that one must have faith in Jesus Christ, repent of his or her sins, strive to keep the commandments faithfully, and participate in a sequence of ceremonial covenants called ordinances, which include baptism, receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, the endowment, and celestial marriage.[77][78]
This latter ordinance, known as a sealing ceremony, reflects a singular LDS view with respect to families. According to LDS Church theology, men and women may be "sealed" to one another so that their marital bond continues into the eternities.[79] Children may also be sealed to their biological or adoptive parents to form permanent familial bonds, thus allowing all immediate and extended family relations to endure past death.[80] The most significant LDS ordinances may be performed via proxy in behalf of those who have died, such as baptism for the dead. The church teaches that all will have the opportunity to hear and accept or reject the gospel of Jesus Christ and the blessings that come to those who faithfully adhere to it, in this life or the next. Ordinances such as baptisms for the dead, sealings, and endowments are performed in temples that are built and dedicated specifically for these purposes.
The LDS faithful observe a health code called the "Word of Wisdom," in which they abstain from the consumption of alcohol, coffee, tea, and tobacco.[81] The Word of Wisdom also encourages the use of wholesome herbs and fruits within season, moderate consumption of meat, and consumption of grains.[81]
Latter-day Saints follow a moral code, called the "law of chastity," which prohibits adultery, all homosexual behavior, and any sexual relations outside of marriage.
LDS faithful donate a ten-percent tithe on their annual income, which is used to carry out the operations of the church, including construction of temples, meetinghouses, and other buildings, as well as other church uses.[82] Faithful members also set aside the first Sunday of each month to abstain from food and drink for at least two consecutive meals, and prayerfully dedicate the fast to a purpose of each individual's choosing. They donate at least the cost of the two skipped meals as a fast offering, which the church uses to assist the poor and needy and expand its worldwide humanitarian efforts.[83] Members are further instructed to set aside one night a week, typically Monday, for a "Family Home Evening," where they gather as a family to study gospel principles and participate in wholesome activities.
Missionary service[edit]




Missionaries typically commit to 18–24 months of full-time service.


Main article: Missionary (LDS Church)
All LDS young men are expected to serve a two-year, full-time proselytizing mission.[84] Missionaries do not choose where they serve or the language in which they will proselytize, and are expected to fund their missions themselves or with the aid of their families. Prospective male missionaries must be at least 18 years old and no older than 25, not yet married, have completed secondary school, and meet certain criteria for physical fitness and spiritual worthiness. Missionary service is not compulsory, nor is it required for young men to retain their church membership. Unmarried women 19 years and older may also serve as missionaries, generally for a term of 18 months. However, the LDS Church emphasizes that women are not under the same expectation to serve as male members are, and may serve solely as a personal decision. There is no maximum age for missionary service for women.[85] Prior to October 2012, the minimum age for full-time missionary service was generally 19 for men and 21 for women.[86] Retired couples are encouraged to serve missions, and may serve for either 6-, 12-, 18-, or 23-month terms.[87] Unlike younger missionaries, these senior missionaries may serve in non-proselytizing capacities such as humanitarian aid workers or family history specialists. Other men and women who desire to serve a mission, but may not be able to perform full-time service in another state or country due to health issues, may serve in a service mission. They might assist at Temple Square in Salt Lake City or aide in the seminary systems in schools. Many opportunities are available.[88]
Comparisons with Christian denominations outside the Latter Day Saint movement[edit]
See also: Mormonism and Christianity
The LDS Church shares various teachings with other branches of Christianity. These include a belief in the Bible (subject to an acknowledgement that it is imperfect),[89] the divinity of Jesus, and his atonement and resurrection. LDS theology also includes belief in the doctrine of salvation through Jesus alone, restorationism,[90] millennialism, continuationism, penal substitution,[91] and a form of apostolic succession. The practices of baptism by immersion and the eucharist (referred to as the sacrament) are also held in common. However, the Catholic Church considers doctrinal differences between the two groups to be so great that it will not accept a prior LDS baptism as evidence of Christian initiation, as it will baptism by other Christian groups, such as the Eastern Orthodox and Protestant churches.[92] The LDS Church does not accept baptisms performed in any other churches, as it teaches that baptism is only valid when it is conducted through proper priesthood authority.[93]
Nevertheless, the LDS Church differs from the many other churches within contemporary Christianity, and many people do not accept the church as part of Christianity.[94] The faith itself views other modern Christian faiths as having departed from true Christianity[95] via a general apostasy and maintains that it is a restoration of 1st-century Christianity and the only true and authorized Christian church.[96] Differences between the LDS Church and most of traditional Christianity include disagreement with aspects of the Nicene Creed, belief in a theory of human salvation that includes three heavens (referred to as "degrees of glory", its interpretation of I Cor. 15:35 et.seq.),[97] a doctrine of "exaltation" which includes the ability of humans to become gods and goddesses in the afterlife,[75] a dietary code called the Word of Wisdom, and unique ceremonies performed privately in LDS temples, such as the endowment and sealing ceremonies.




Latter-day Saints believe in the resurrection of Jesus, as depicted in this replica of Bertel Thorvaldsen's Christus statue located in the North Visitors' Center on Temple Square in Salt Lake City.


Officially, major Christian denominations view the LDS Church as standing apart from creedal Christianity.[98] Leaders of the LDS Church assert that the LDS Church is the only true church and that other churches do not have the authority to act in Jesus' name.[99]
From the perspective of Christians who agree with creeds, the most significant area of departure is the rejection by the LDS Church of certain parts of ecumenical creeds such as the Nicene Creed, which defines the predominant view of the Christian God as a Trinity of three separate persons in "one essence". LDS Church theology includes the belief in a "Godhead" composed of God the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost as three separate Persons who share a unity of purpose or will; however, they are viewed as three distinct Beings making one Godhead. Other significant differences relate to the church's acceptance of additional scripture, doctrine, and practices beyond what is found in the Catholic, Protestant, or Eastern Orthodox versions of the Bible.
Comparison with other Latter Day Saint movement faiths[edit]
See also: List of sects in the Latter Day Saint movement
The LDS Church shares a common heritage with a number of smaller faith groups that are collectively called the Latter Day Saint movement. The largest of these smaller groups is the Community of Christ (previously known as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints), based in Independence, Missouri, followed by The Church of Jesus Christ, based in Monongahela, Pennsylvania. Like the LDS Church, these faiths believe in Joseph Smith as a prophet and founder of their religion. They also accept the Book of Mormon, and most, but not all, accept at least some version of the Doctrine and Covenants. However, they tend to disagree to varying degrees with the LDS Church concerning doctrine and church leadership.
The main branches of the Latter Day Saint movement resulted from the crisis of succession upon the death of Joseph Smith. Other branches may be considered later offshoots of the LDS Church branch, mainly due to disagreements about plural marriage.
Organization and structure[edit]
Name and legal entities[edit]
Main article: Name of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
The church teaches that it is a continuation of the Church of Christ established in 1830 by Joseph Smith. This original church underwent several name changes during the 1830s, being called the Church of Jesus Christ, the Church of God,[100] and then in 1834, the name was officially changed to the Church of the Latter Day Saints.[101] In April 1838, the name was officially changed to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.[102] After Smith died, Brigham Young and the largest body of Smith's followers incorporated the LDS Church in 1851 by legislation of the State of Deseret[103] under the name "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints", which included a hyphenated "Latter-day" and a British-style lower-case "d."[104]
In 1887, the LDS Church was legally dissolved in the United States by the Edmunds–Tucker Act because of the church's practice of polygamy.[105] In the United States, the church continues to operate as an unincorporated entity.[106] Accepted informal names for the church include the LDS Church, the Latter-day Saints, and the Mormons. The term Mormon Church is in common use,[107] but the church began discouraging its use in the late 20th century, though takes no issue with the term Mormon itself.[108] The church requests that the official name be used when possible or, if necessary, shortened to "the Church" or "the Church of Jesus Christ".[109]
Tax-exempt corporations of the LDS Church include the Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,[110] a corporation sole which was organized in 1916 under the laws of the state of Utah to acquire, hold, and dispose of real property; the Corporation of the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,[111] which was established in 1923 in Utah to receive and manage money and church donations; and Intellectual Reserve, Inc., which was incorporated in 1997 to hold the church's copyrights, trademarks, and other intellectual property.[112] Non-tax-exempt corporations of the church include Bonneville International and the Deseret News.
Geographic distribution and membership[edit]
See also: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints membership statistics and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints membership history




  Countries and territories with at least one LDS temple
  Countries and territories with no LDS temple, but with organized congregations and/or missionaries
  Countries and territories with no official LDS presence



Church congregations are organized geographically. Members are generally expected to attend the congregation with their assigned geographical area; however, some geographical areas also provide separate congregations for young single adults (between the ages of 18 and 30), single adults aged 31 to 45,[113] or for speakers of alternate languages. For Sunday services, the church is grouped into either larger (~150 to ~400 people) congregations known as wards, or smaller congregations known as branches. Although the building may sometimes be referred to as a chapel, the room used as a chapel for religious services is only one component of the standard meetinghouse. The church maintains a virtual tour online of a typical example and also an online meetinghouse locator, which can be used to find the locations and meeting times of its congregations all over the world. Regional church organizations, encompassing multiple congregations, include stakes, missions, districts, areas, and regions.


Pew 2014 U.S. Religious Landscape Study[114]
Mormons (U.S.)
U.S. Avg.


Married
66%
49%


Divorced or separated
7%
11%


Have children under 18
41%
31%


Attendance at religious services (weekly or more)
77%
40%


The church reports a worldwide membership of 15 million[115] with approximately 8.3 million residing outside the United States, as of December 2011.[116][117] According to these statistics it is the fourth largest religious body in the United States.[118][119] The church membership report includes all baptized members and their children. Although the church does not release attendance figures to the public, researchers estimate that actual attendance at weekly LDS worship services globally is around 4 million.[62] Members living in the U.S. and Canada constitute 46% percent of membership, Latin America 38 percent, and members in the rest of the world 16 percent.[120] The 2012 Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life survey, conducted by Princeton Survey Research Associates International, found that approximately 2 percent of the U.S. adult population self identified as Mormon.[114]
The church continues to seek recognition in regions where it has had little or no influence. On August 30, 2010, church leaders announced that they were making significant progress on "regularized operations for the Church in China."[121]
For a list of notable Latter-day Saints, see List of Latter Day Saints.
Priesthood hierarchy[edit]
Main article: Priesthood (LDS Church)




Thomas S. Monson, President of the LDS Church from 2008 to 2018.


The LDS Church is organized in a hierarchical priesthood structure administered by men. Latter-day Saints believe that Jesus leads the church through revelation and has chosen a single man, called "the Prophet" or President of the Church, as his spokesman on the earth. While there have been exceptions in the past, he and two counselors are normally ordained apostles and form the First Presidency, the presiding body of the church; twelve other apostles form the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.[122] When a president dies, his successor is invariably the most senior member of the Quorum of the Twelve (the one who has been an apostle the longest), who reconstitutes a new First Presidency.[122] Following the death of Thomas S. Monson on January 2, 2018, senior apostle Russell M. Nelson became the presumptive successor to the church presidency. These men, and the other male members of the church-wide leadership (including the first two Quorums of Seventy and the Presiding Bishopric) are called general authorities. They exercise both ecclesiastical and administrative leadership over the church and direct the efforts of regional leaders down to the local level. General authorities and mission presidents work full-time and typically receive stipends from church funds or investments.[123]
At the local level, the church leadership are drawn from the laity and work on a part-time volunteer basis without stipend.[124] Like all members, they are asked to donate a tithe of 10 percent of their income to the church. An exception to that rule is for LDS missionaries, who work at the local level and are paid basic living expenses from a fund that receives contributions from their families or home congregations. But, prospective missionaries are encouraged to contribute the cost of their missions to this fund themselves when possible. Members volunteer general custodial work for local church facilities.





Interior of the Conference Center where the church holds its General Conferences twice a year.




All males who are living the standards of the church are generally considered for the priesthood and are ordained to the priesthood as early as age 12. Ordination occurs by a ceremony where hands are laid on the head of the one ordained. The priesthood is divided into an Aaronic priesthood for young men 12 and up, and a Melchizedek priesthood for men 18 and up.[125][126]
Programs and auxiliary organizations[edit]
See also: Auxiliary organization (LDS Church)
Under the leadership of the priesthood hierarchy are five auxiliary organizations that fill various roles in the church: Relief Society (a women's organization),[127] the Young Men and Young Women organizations (for adolescents ages 12 to 18), Primary (an organization for children up to age 12), and Sunday School (which provides a variety of Sunday classes for adolescents and adults). Women serve as presidents and counselors in the presidencies of the Relief Society, Young Women, and Primary, while men serve as presidents and counselors of the Young Men and Sunday School.[128] The church also operates several programs and organizations in the fields of proselytizing, education, and church welfare such as LDS Humanitarian Services. Many of these auxiliaries and programs are coordinated by the Priesthood Correlation Program, which is designed to provide a systematic approach to maintain worldwide consistency, orthodoxy, and control of the church's ordinances, doctrines, organizations, meetings, materials, and other programs and activities.




The carillon tower at Brigham Young University, one of several educational institutions sponsored by the church


The church operates a Church Educational System which includes Brigham Young University (BYU) (and its associated Jerusalem Center), BYU–Idaho, BYU–Hawaii, and LDS Business College. The church also operates Institutes of Religion near the campuses of many colleges and universities. For high-school aged youth, the church operates a four-year Seminary program, which provides religious classes for students to supplement their secular education. The church also sponsors a low-interest educational loan program known as the Perpetual Education Fund, which provides educational opportunities to students from developing nations.[8]




The church's Family History Library is the world's largest library dedicated to genealogical research


The church's welfare system, initiated during the Great Depression, provides aid to the poor. It is financed by fast offerings: monthly donations beyond the normal 10 percent tithe, which represents the cost of forgoing two meals on monthly Fast Sundays. Money from the program is used to operate Bishop's storehouses, which package and store food at low cost. Distribution of funds and food is administered by local bishops. The church also distributes money through its LDS Philanthropies division to disaster victims worldwide.
Other church programs and departments include LDS Family Services, which provides assistance with adoption, marital and family counseling, psychotherapy, and addiction counseling; the LDS Church History Department, which collects church history and records; and the Family History Department, which administers the church's large family history efforts, including the world's largest family history library and organization (FamilySearch).[129] The church is also a major sponsor of Scouting programs for boys, particularly in the United States, where it provides more members of the Boy Scouts of America than any other church.[130]
Finances[edit]
Main article: Finances of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Although the church has not released church-wide financial statements since 1959, in 1997, Time magazine called it one of the world's wealthiest churches per capita.[131] In a June 2011 cover story, Newsweek stated that the LDS Church "resembles a sanctified multinational corporation—the General Electric of American religion, with global ambitions and an estimated net worth of $30 billion."[132] Its for-profit, non-profit, and educational subsidiary entities are audited by an independent accounting firm: as of 2007[update], some done by Deloitte & Touche.[133][134] In addition, the church employs an independent audit department that provides its certification at each annual general conference that church contributions are collected and spent in accordance with church policy.[135]
The church receives significant funds from tithes and fast offerings. According to the church, tithing and fast offering money collected are devoted to ecclesiastical purposes and not used in for-profit ventures.
The church has also invested in for-profit business and real estate ventures such as Bonneville International, Deseret Book Company, City Creek Center, and cattle ranches in Utah, Florida, Nebraska, Canada and other locations.[136]
It has been estimated that the LDS Church received $33-billion in donations from its members in 2010 and, during the decade of the 2010s to net about $15-billion gains per year. According to Bloomberg Businessweek, the LDS Church's worth at $40 billion as of 2012.[137]
Culture[edit]
Main article: Culture of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Due to the differences in lifestyle promoted by church doctrine and history, members of the church have developed a distinct culture. It is primarily concentrated in the Intermountain West. As new members have joined around the world, many of the church's more distinctive practices have become part of new congregations, such as adhering to the Word of Wisdom, a health law or code prohibiting the consumption of tobacco, alcohol, coffee, tea, and illegal drugs.[81] As a result of members adhering to the Word of Wisdom, areas of the world with a high concentration of LDS members practice these restrictions. They sometimes come into conflict with local retail businesses that serve non-members.[138][139]
Meetings and outreach programs are held regularly and have become part of Latter-day Saint culture.
Media and arts[edit]
The culture has created substantial business opportunities for independent LDS media. Such communities include cinema, fiction, websites, and graphical art such as photography and paintings. The church owns a chain of bookstores called Deseret Book, which provide a channel through which publications are sold. Titles including The Work and the Glory and The Other Side of Heaven have found acceptance both within and outside the church; BYU TV, the church-sponsored television station, also airs on several networks. The church also produces six pageants annually depicting various events of the primitive and modern-day church. Its Easter pageant Jesus the Christ has been identified as the "largest annual outdoor Easter pageant in the world."[140]




The Mormon Tabernacle Choir has received a Grammy Award, two Emmy Awards, two Peabody Awards, and the National Medal of Arts.



No question the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is "having a moment" ... The Twilight vampire novels of Mormon Stephenie Meyer sell tens of millions of copies, Mormon convert Glenn Beck inspires daily devotion and outrage with his radio show, and HBO generated lots of attention with the Big Love finale. Even Broadway has gotten in on the act, giving us The Book of Mormon, a big-budget musical about Mormon missionaries by South Park creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone and Avenue Q writer Robert Lopez that, with 14 nominations, is expected to clean up at the (2011) Tony Awards on June 12.
— Newsweek magazine, June 2011[132]

Home and family[edit]
In 1995, the church's First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve issued "The Family: A Proclamation to the World," which stresses the importance of the family. The proclamation states that "marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children." The document further says that "gender is an essential characteristic of individual premortal, mortal, and eternal identity and purpose," that the father and mother have differing but equal roles in raising children, and that successful marriages and families, founded upon the teachings of Jesus Christ, can last eternally.[141] This document is widely cited by LDS members as a statement of principle.[142]
The adult women (members of the church's Relief Society) in a congregation meet at least quarterly for additional instruction and service. The meetings may consist of a service project, conferences, or of various classes being offered.
After interviewing and polling thousands of youth across America, evangelical statistician Christian Smith writes, "in general comparisons among major U.S. religious traditions using a variety of sociological measures of religious vitality and salience .... it is Mormon teenagers who are sociologically faring the best."[143]
Social events and gatherings[edit]




As part of its Young Men program, the church contributes more members to the Boy Scouts of America than any other chartered organization.[144]


In addition to these regularly scheduled meetings, additional meetings are frequently held at the meetinghouse. Auxiliary officers may conduct leadership meetings or host training sessions and classes. The ward or branch community may schedule social activities at the meetinghouse, including dances, dinners, holiday parties and musical presentations. The church's Young Men and Young Women organizations meet at the meetinghouse once a week, where the youth participate in activities and work on Duty to God, Scouting, or Personal Progress. Other popular activities are basketball, family history conferences, youth and singles conferences, dances, and various personal improvement classes. Church members may also reserve meetinghouses at no cost for weddings, receptions, and funerals.
In the summer, the LDS Church hosts week-long seminars throughout North America, known as Especially for Youth (EFY). This program is held Monday through Saturday during the summer months for youth ages 14–18. During this week, youths often spend the night in college campus dorms and the day in various classes taught by adult religious educators, as well as participating in other various activities such as scripture study and dances.[145]
Political involvement[edit]
Main article: LDS Church and politics in the United States
The LDS Church will take no partisan role in politics, stating that it will not "endorse, promote or oppose political parties, candidates or platforms; allow its church buildings, membership lists or other resources to be used for partisan political purposes; attempt to direct its members as to which candidate or party they should give their votes to ... or attempt to direct or dictate to a government leader."[146]
While the church takes an apolitical approach to candidates, it encourages its members to play an active role as responsible citizens in their communities, including becoming informed about issues and voting in elections. It actively works to counter anti-Mormonism that may come up during political campaigns. A 2012 Pew Center on Religion and Public Life survey indicates that 74 percent of U.S. members lean towards the Republican Party.[147] Some liberal members say they feel that they have to defend their worthiness due to political differences.[148] Referring to the 2012 U.S Republican Presidential Primary, Michael Otterson, the LDS Church's managing director for public affairs stated, "We now have two Latter-day Saints running, and the potential for misunderstanding or missteps is therefore twice what it was before."[149]
The official church stance on staying out of politics does not include if there are instances of what church leaders deem to be moral issues. It has previously opposed same-sex marriage in California Prop 8, supported a gay rights bill in Salt Lake City which bans discrimination against homosexual persons in housing and employment,[150][151] opposed gambling, opposed storage of nuclear waste in Utah,[152][153] and supported the Utah Compact.
Thirteen persons identified as members of the LDS Church are serving in the 115th United States Congress.[154] Utah's governor, Gary Herbert, is also a church member.[155] Church member Mitt Romney was the Republican Party's nominee in the U.S. 2012 presidential election. Jon Huntsman, Jr. sought the Republican nomination until his withdrawal in early 2012.[156]
Humanitarian services[edit]




U.S. Navy sailors moving LDS Church-donated humanitarian supplies to Beirut, Lebanon, in 2006


See also: LDS Philanthropies and LDS Humanitarian Services
The LDS Church stresses the importance of worldwide humanitarian service.[157][158] The church's welfare and humanitarian efforts are coordinated by LDS Philanthropies (LDSP), a church department under the direction of the Presiding Bishopric. Welfare efforts, originally initiated during the Great Depression, provide aid for the poor, financed by donations from church members. LDSP is also responsible for philanthropic donations to the LDS Church and other affiliated charities, such as the Church History Library, the Church Educational System—which includes Brigham Young University, the Perpetual Education Fund, and the Polynesian Cultural Center—the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, and efforts dedicated to providing funds for LDS missionaries and temple construction.[159][not specific enough to verify] Donations are also used to operate bishop's storehouses, which package and store food for the poor at low cost. Distribution of funds and food is administered by local bishops. These local storehouses distribute commodities to the needy as requested by local bishops on a specified form. Bishop's storehouses also provide service opportunities for those receiving assistance and for those desiring to serve missions or to volunteer in the church's welfare program. The day-to-day operations of the storehouses are typically run by senior-aged missionaries as store managers.[160]
The church also distributes money through its Humanitarian Services division to natural disaster victims worldwide.[161] The church's Humanitarian Center, established in 1991, prepares emergency relief supplies for worldwide shipment to disaster victims, works to establish a global sense of self-reliance, and offers service opportunities to both church members and non-members. The emergency relief supplies that the church donates typically include clothing, personal care kits, and medical supplies. According to the LDS Humanitarian Center website, it ships about 12 million pounds of shoes and clothing, one million hygiene kits, and one million pounds of medical supplies per year, to relieve suffering in more than 100 countries.[162] When a disaster strikes, the church works with local government officials and other organizations to determine the immediate needs, and sends the necessary supplies and food to the affected area within hours. Missionaries are then sent to help alleviate other long-term damages by assisting injured persons and reconstructing damaged buildings. The church carries out these efforts without regard to the nationality or religion of the recipients, and 100 percent of the financial contributions donated to the church by members and non-members are used for humanitarian purposes.[163]
The church has been involved in providing relief aid for victims of several disasters in recent years, including Hurricane Katrina,[164][165][166] the 2010 Haiti earthquake,[167] the 2011 Christchurch earthquake,[168] and the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami.[169] In 2005 the church partnered with Catholic Relief Services to provide aid for struggling families and individuals in Niger,[170] and it has also partnered with Islamic Relief to help victims of flooding in Pakistan.[171] In addition, the church sponsors five global projects (neonatal resuscitation training, clean water projects, wheelchair distribution, vision treatment, and measles vaccinations),[172] and works with local government agencies and other religious and secular organizations such as the American Red Cross and UNICEF to accomplish these needs. In 2003 the church joined Measles Initiative and has committed one million dollars per year to the campaign.[173]
Controversy and criticism[edit]
See also: Criticism of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
The LDS Church has been subject to criticism and sometimes discrimination since its early years in New York and Pennsylvania. In the late 1820s, criticism centered around the claim by Joseph Smith to have been led to a set of gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was reputedly translated.
In the 1830s, the greatest criticism was for Smith's handling of a banking failure in Kirtland, Ohio. After the Mormons migrated west, there was fear and suspicion about the LDS Church's political and military power in Missouri, culminating in the 1838 Mormon War and the infamous Mormon Extermination Order (Missouri Executive Order 44) by Governor Lilburn W. Boggs. In the 1840s, criticism of the church centered on its theocratic aspirations in Nauvoo, Illinois. Criticism of the practice of plural marriage and other doctrines taught by Smith were published in the Nauvoo Expositor. Opposition led to a series of events culminating in murder of Smith and his brother while jailed in 1844.




Protesters in front of the Newport Beach California Temple voicing their opposition to the church's support of Prop 8


As the church began openly practicing plural marriage under Brigham Young during the second half of the 19th century, the church became the target of nationwide criticism for that practice, as well as for the church's theocratic aspirations in the Utah Territory. Beginning in 1857, the church also came under significant media criticism after the Mountain Meadows massacre in southern Utah.
Academic critics have questioned the legitimacy of Smith as a prophet as well as the historical authenticity of the Book of Mormon and the Book of Abraham. Criticism has expanded to include claims of historical revisionism, homophobia, racism, and sexist policies. Notable 20th-century critics include Jerald and Sandra Tanner and historian Fawn Brodie. Evangelical Christians continue to argue that Smith was either fraudulent or delusional.
Mormon apologetics organizations, such as the Foundation for Apologetic Information & Research (FAIR) and the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies (FARMS), have been founded to counter these criticisms. Most of the apologetic work focuses on providing and discussing evidence supporting the claims of Smith and the Book of Mormon. It also criticizes what it considers to be a lack of honesty when it comes to the scholarship of non-Mormon critics.[citation needed] Scholars and authors such as Hugh Nibley, Daniel C. Peterson, Jeff Lindsay, Orson Scott Card, and James E. Talmage are well-known apologists within the church.
During the Civil Rights era of the 1960s and 1970s, the LDS Church was criticized for its policy of excluding black men of African descent from the priesthood, a policy that the church changed in 1978.[174] In more recent years, the Internet has provided a new forum for proponents and critics of religions, including the LDS Church.[175]
The church's support in 2008 of California's Proposition 8 sparked heated debate and protest by gay-rights organizations and others.[176][177][178] The church expressed support for a Salt Lake City ordinance protecting members of the LGBT community against discrimination in employment and housing while allowing religious institutions to consider lifestyles in actions such as hiring or providing university accommodations.[179]
Jewish groups criticized the LDS Church in 1995 after discovering that vicarious baptisms for the dead for victims of the Holocaust had been performed by members of the church.[180][181] After that criticism, church leaders put a policy in place to stop the practice, with an exception for baptisms specifically requested or approved by victims' relatives.[182] Jewish organizations again criticized the church in 2002, 2004, 2008, and 2012[183][184] stating that the church failed to honor the 1995 agreement.[182] The LDS Church says it has put institutional safeguards in place to avoid the submission of the names of Holocaust victims not related to Mormon members, but that the sheer number of names submitted makes policing the database of names impractical.[180]
Due to doctrinal differences, the LDS Church is generally considered to be distinct and separate from mainstream Christianity by Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant churches, which express differences with one another but consider each other's churches to be Christian.[15][185] Many have accused the LDS Church of not being a Christian church at all as a result of disagreements with Apostolic succession and the "Great Apostasy", the Nicene Creed, separation of the Godhead and, more so, Mormon cosmology and its Plan of Salvation including the doctrines of pre-mortal life, baptism for the dead, three degrees of heaven, and exaltation, the LDS view of theosis.
See also[edit]

Outline of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Index of articles related to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
List of missions of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
List of stakes of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Mormon (word)
Mormonism
Mormonism and Islam
Mormonism and Judaism



The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
LDS Church
LDS Church History
LDS Church Presidents
Temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Standard works
Priesthood (LDS Church)
Ordinance (Latter Day Saints)
Relief Society
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (LDS Church)
Seventy (LDS Church)
Culture of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Historic Sites of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
Criticism of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints




Christianity portal
Latter Day Saints portal
LDS Church portal
Book of Mormon portal
History of the Latter Day Saint movement portal


References[edit]
Notes[edit]


^ "Succession in the Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints". Intellectual Reserve, Inc. Retrieved January 3, 2018. 
^ "Chapter 7: Personal, Abiding Testimony". Teachings of Presidents of the Church: Heber J. Grant. Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 2011. pp. 62–70. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. 
^ Green, Doyle L. (January 1971). "April 6, 1830: The Day the Church Was Organized". Ensign. Intellectual Reserve, Inc. Retrieved April 3, 2017. 
^ a b c d e "2016 Statistical Report for 2017 April Conference", Mormon Newsroom, April 1, 2017.
^ a b "The Mormons . Interviews . D. Michael Quinn | PBS". www.pbs.org. Retrieved October 23, 2016. 
^ a b Stack, Peggy Fletcher. "New almanac offers look at the world of Mormon membership". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 23, 2016. 
^ At the end of 2016, the number of full-time and church service missionaries was 104,641.
^ a b "Topic: Education", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ Riess, Jana. "Mormon growth slows to its lowest level since 1937. Here's why that's great news". Religion News Service. Retrieved October 23, 2016. 
^ "National Council of Churches News: Church giving drops $1.2 billion reports 2012 Yearbook of Churches", ncccusa.org, National Council of Churches, March 20, 2012 
^ Smith 1976, p. 121 "The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it."
^ Monson, Thomas S. (January 2003), "The Way of the Master", Ensign: 2–7 
^ "For salvation cometh to none such except it be through repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ." Book of Mormon, Mosiah 3:12
^ Articles of Faith 1:8
^ a b Kennedy, John W. (February 2004), "Winning them softly", Christianity Today, 48 (2), retrieved October 7, 2006 
^ Oaks, Dallin H. (May 2008), "Testimony", Ensign, Perhaps the puzzle some feel can be explained by the reality that each of us has two different channels to God. We have a channel of governance through our prophet and other leaders. This channel, which has to do with doctrine, ordinances, and commandments, results in obedience. We also have a channel of personal testimony, which is direct to God. This has to do with His existence, our relationship to Him, and the truth of His restored gospel. This channel results in knowledge. 
^ Ballard, M. Russell (November 2007), "Faith, Family, Facts, and Fruits", Ensign 
^ Neuenschwander, Dennis B. (November 2001), "Ordinances and Covenants", Liahona 
^ Scholars and eyewitnesses disagree whether the church was organized in Manchester, New York at the Smith log home, or in Fayette at the home of Peter Whitmer. Bushman 2005, p. 109; Marquardt 2005, pp. 223–23 (arguing that organization in Manchester is most consistent with eye-witness statements). The LDS Church officially favors organization in Fayette.Lloyd, R. Scott (May 22, 2009), "'Major discovery' discussed at Mormon History Association Conference", LDS Church News, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ Book of Mormon, "Introduction".
^ Bushman 2005, p. 122; LDS D&C 57:1-3: "the city New Jerusalem shall be built by the gathering of the saints, beginning at [Jackson County, Missouri], even the place of the temple, which temple shall be reared in this generation".
^ Brodie 1971, p. 97 (citing letter by Smith to Kirtland converts, quoted in Howe 1833, p. 111). In 1834, Smith designated Kirtland as one of the "stakes" of Zion, referring to the tent–stakes metaphor of Isaiah 54:2.
^ Smith et al. 1835, p. 154; Bushman 2005, p. 162; Brodie 1971, p. 109.
^ Smith said in 1831 that God intended the Mormons to "retain a strong hold in the land of Kirtland, for the space of five years". (Doctrine and Covenants 64:21).
^ Bushman 2005, pp. 222–27; Brodie 1971, p. 137 (noting that the brutality of the Jackson Countians aroused sympathy for the Mormons and was almost universally deplored by the media).
^ Brodie 1971, pp. 141, 146–59; Bushman 2005, p. 322.
^ Brodie 1971, p. 101; Arrington 1992, p. 21 (by summer of 1835, there were 1500 to 2000 Saints in Kirtland); Desert Morning News 2008 Church Almanac p. 655 (from 1831 to 1838, church membership grew from 680 to 17,881).
^ Bushman 2005, pp. 310–19; Brodie 1971, p. 178.
^ Bushman 2005, pp. 328–38; Brooke 1994, p. 221 ("Ultimately, the rituals and visions dedicating the Kirtland temple were not sufficient to hold the church together in the face of a mounting series of internal disputes.")
^ Roberts 1905, p. 24 (referring to the Far West church as the "church in Zion"); Bushman 2005, p. 345 (The revelation calling Far West "Zion" had the effect of "implying that Far West was to take the place of Independence".)
^ Bushman 2005, pp. 357–364; Brodie 1971, pp. 227–30; Remini 2002, p. 134; Quinn 1994, pp. 97–98.
^ Bushman 2005, p. 367 (Boggs' executive order stated that the Mormon community had "made war upon the people of this State" and that "the Mormons must be treated as enemies, and must be exterminated or driven from the State if necessary for the public peace"). In 1976, Missouri issued a formal apology for this unconstitutional order (Bushman 2005, p. 398).
^ Bushman 2005, pp. 383–84.
^ Bushman 2005, p. 409; Brodie 1971, pp. 258, 264–65.
^ Brodie 1971, pp. 334–36; Bushman 2005, pp. 437, 644.
^ LDS D&C 132:18-20
^ Kimball, Spencer W. (October 1975), "The Lord's Plan for Men and Women", Ensign 
^ Widmer 2000, p. 119 (Smith echoed the words of Paul that faithful saints may become co-heirs with Jesus Romans 8:17); Roberts 1909, pp. 502–03; Bushman 2005, pp. 497–98 (the second anointing provided a conditional guarantee that those persons who were pure and faithful would be exalted, even if they sinned, if they were sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise).
^ Quinn 1994, pp. 120–22; Bushman 2005, pp. 519–21 (describing the Council of Fifty noting that Smith prophesied "the entire overthrow of this nation in a few years", at which time the Kingdom of God would be prepared to lead)
^ "Mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith – First Vision: This Is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!", JosephSmith.net, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 ; Allen 1966, p. 29 (belief in the First Vision now considered second in importance only to belief in the divinity of Jesus.); Hinckley, Gordon B. (November 1998), "What Are People Asking about Us?", Ensign, [N]othing we teach, nothing we live by is of greater importance than this initial declaration. 
^ Lyon, Stephanie J. (2013). "Psychotherapy and the Mormon Faith". Journal of Religion and Health. 52 (2): 622–630. doi:10.1007/s10943-013-9677-2. ISSN 0022-4197. PMID 23337975. 
^ Encyclopedia of Latter-Day Saint History p. 824; Brodie 1971, pp. 393–94; Bushman 2005.
^ Many local Illinoisans were uneasy with Mormon power, and their unease was fanned by the local media after Smith suppressed a newspaper containing an exposé regarding plural marriage, theocracy, and other sensitive and oft-misinterpreted issues. The suppression resulted in Smith being arrested, tried, and acquitted for "inciting a riot". On June 25, Joseph let himself be arrested and tried for the riot charges again, this time in Carthage, the county seat, where he was incarcerated without bail on a new charge of treason. Bentley, Joseph I. (1992), "Smith, Joseph: Legal Trials of Joseph Smith", in Ludlow, Daniel H, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, New York: Macmillan Publishing, pp. 1346–1348, ISBN 0-02-879602-0, OCLC 24502140 
^ Young, Brigham (October 15, 1844), "none", Times and Seasons, 5, p. 683, Did Joseph Smith ordain any man to take his place. He did. Who was it? It was Hyrum, but Hyrum fell a martyr before Joseph did. If Hyrum had lived he would have acted for Joseph. 
^ Quinn 1994, p. 143; Brodie (1971, p. 398).
^ Bushman 2005, pp. 556–57.
^ Smith's position as Prophet and President of the Church was originally left vacant, but later filled when the apostles could regroup based on the restored principle that the most senior apostle would always be the next President of the Church. As a result, Young, and any other senior apostle of the Quorum of the Twelve, would be ordained President of the Church as a matter of course upon the death of the former President, subject to unanimous agreement of the Quorum of the Twelve.
^ Quinn 1994, pp. 198–211.
^ Lindsay, Jeff, LDS FAQ: The Saints to Flourish in the Rocky Mountains, retrieved September 22, 2014 
^ "Mormon Pioneer National Historic Trail: History & Culture". nps.gov. U.S. National Park Service. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. The great Mormon migration of 1846–1847 was but one step in the LDS' quest for religious freedom and growth. 
^ The Mormon doctrine of plural wives was officially announced by one of the Twelve Apostles Orson Pratt and Smith's successor Brigham Young in a special conference of the elders of the church assembled in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on August 28, 1852, and reprinted in an extra edition of the Deseret News Only a small percentage of church leaders participated in plural marriage believing it was a part of a restitution of ancient Priesthood blessings and a commandment of god to raise up a righteous generation. At the time, it was not barred by statute within the United States."Minutes of conference: a special conference of the elders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints assembled in the Tabernacle, Great Salt Lake City, August 28th, 1852, 10 o'clock, a.m., pursuant to public notice". Deseret News Extra. September 14, 1852. p. 14. . See also: The 1850s: Official sanction in the LDS Church
^ See Tullidge, Edward, History of Salt Lake City, 132-35 (Original from the University of Michigan, 1886).
^ The most notable instance of violence during this war was the tragic Mountain Meadows massacre, in which leaders of a local Mormon militia, contrary to top church leaders orders, ordered the massacre of a civilian emigrant party who had the misfortune of traveling through Utah during the escalating military tensions. The Mormons feared the mobs which murdered their families at the Haun's mill massacre and other illegal thefts of land, and murders which had plagued them back east.
^ To combat the notion that rank-and-file Mormons were unhappy under Young's leadership, Cumming noted that he had offered to help any leave the territory who desired. Of the 50,000 inhabitants of the territory of Utah, the underwhelming response—56 men, 33 women, and 71 children, most of whom stated they left for economic reasons—impressed Cumming, as did the fact that Mormon leaders contributed supplies to the emigrants. Cumming to [Secretary of State Lewis Cass], written by Thomas Kane, May 2, 1858, BYU Special Collections.
^ Firmage, Edwin Brown; Mangrum, Richard Collin (2002), Zion in the Courts: A Legal History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 1830–1900, U. of Illinois Press, p. 140, ISBN 0-252-06980-3 
^ Official Declaration — 1
^ Hinckley, Gordon B. (November 1998), "What Are People Asking About Us?", Ensign: 70, If any of our members are found to be practicing plural marriage, they are excommunicated, the most serious penalty the Church can impose. Not only are those so involved in direct violation of the civil law, they are in violation of the law of this Church. 
^ a b Watson, F. Michael (May 2001), "Statistical Report, 2000", Ensign: 22 
^ Deseret Morning News 2008 Church Almanac p. 655
^ De Groote, Michael (January 23, 2011), "14 million Mormons and counting", Deseret News 
^ Stack, Peggy Fletcher (September 14, 2010), "LDS Church ramps up on global stage", The Salt Lake Tribune 
^ a b Stack, Peggy Fletcher (July 26, 2005), "Keeping members a challenge for LDS church", The Salt Lake Tribune 
^ "Background: Growth of the Church", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ "First Presidency Statement on Basing of MX Missile", Ensign: 76, June 1981 
^ "The Church and the Proposed Equal Rights Amendment: A Moral Issue", Ensign, insert, March 1980 
^ "News of the Church: Church's Stand against Gambling", Ensign: 74, March 1992 
^ "Topic: Same-Gender Attraction", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ "Topic: Euthanasia and Prolonging Life", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ "Topic: Political Neutrality", MormonNewsroom.org, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ Bush, Lester E., Jr. (1984). "Mormonism's Negro Doctrine: An Historical Overview". In Bush, Lester E., Jr.; Mauss, Armand L. Neither White nor Black: Mormon Scholars Confront the Race Issue in a Universal Church. Midvale, Utah: Signature Books. p. 70. ISBN 0-941214-22-2. OCLC 11103077. 
^ History of the Church, 4, p. 461 
^ Articles of Faith 1:8: "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly."
^ a b Eyring, Henry B. (November 2012), "The Sustaining of Church Officers", Ensign, It is proposed that we sustain the counselors in the First Presidency and the Twelve Apostles as prophets, seers, and revelators.  For past sustainings, see also: Search - "The Sustaining of Church Officers".
^ Bushman (2008, p. 74)
^ a b c Carter, K. Codell (1992). "Godhood". In Ludlow, Daniel H. Encyclopedia of Mormonism. New York: Macmillan Publishing. pp. 553–55. ISBN 0-02-879602-0. OCLC 24502140. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches that all resurrected and perfected mortals become gods. […] Those who achieve this state of perfection will become joint-heirs with Christ. […] Latter-day Saints believe that those who become gods will have the opportunity to […] add[] further offspring to the eternal family. 
^ "Chapter 47: Exaltation § Blessings of Exaltation". Gospel Principles. Salt Lake City, Utah: LDS Church. 2011. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. They will become gods[,][…] will be united eternally with their righteous family members and will be able to have eternal increase. 
^ Pope, Margaret McConkie (1992), "Exaltation", in Ludlow, Daniel H, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, New York: Macmillan Publishing, p. 479, ISBN 0-02-879602-0, OCLC 24502140  ("All Church ordinances lead to exaltation, and the essential crowning ordinances are the Endowment and the eternal marriage covenant of the temple.")
^ LDS Church (2006), Church Handbook of Instructions: Book 1, Stake Presidencies and Bishoprics, Salt Lake City, Utah: LDS Church, p. 80 
^ A man may be sealed to more than one wife if his previous wives are either dead or legally divorced from him; a living woman, however, may only be sealed to one husband. See LDS Church (2006), Church Handbook of Instructions, Salt Lake City, Utah: LDS Church, p. 85 . Thus, there is a common view within the LDS Church that though prohibited by the LDS Church in mortality, plural marriage will exist in the afterlife. See, e.g., Penrose, Charles W. (1897), Mormon Doctrine Plain and Simple, or Leaves from the Tree of Life, Salt Lake City, UT, p. 66  ("In the case of a man marrying a wife in the everlasting covenant who dies while he continues in the flesh and marries another by the same divine law, each wife will come forth in her order and enter with him into his glory."); Smith, Joseph Fielding (1954–56), McConkie, Bruce R., ed., Doctrines of Salvation: Sermons and Writings of Joseph Fielding Smith, 2, Bookcraft, p. 2  (stating of his deceased wives: "my wives will be mine forever").
^ See Hyer, Paul V. (1992), "Sealing: Temple Sealings", in Ludlow, Daniel H, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, New York: Macmillan Publishing, pp. 1289–1290, ISBN 0-02-879602-0, OCLC 24502140 ; Thomas, Ryan L. (1992), "Adoption of Children", in Ludlow, Daniel H, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, New York: Macmillan Publishing, pp. 20–21, ISBN 0-02-879602-0, OCLC 24502140 .
Children born to biological parents who have been sealed to each other are considered "born in the covenant" and need not be sealed to their parents. See Cottrell, Ralph L. (1992), "Born in the Covenant", in Ludlow, Daniel H, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, New York: Macmillan Publishing, p. 218, ISBN 0-02-879602-0, OCLC 24502140 
^ a b c Doctrine and Covenants 89.
^ "Gospel Topics: Tithing", lds.org, LDS Church 
^ "Gospel Topics: Fasting and Fast Offerings", lds.org, LDS Church 
^ In 1974, church president Spencer W. Kimball said that "every male member of the Church should fill a mission". Kimball, Spencer W. (May 1974), "Planning for a Full and Abundant Life", Ensign: 86, The question is asked: Should every young man fill a mission? And the answer of the Church is yes, and the answer of the Lord is yes. Enlarging this answer we say: Certainly every male member of the Church should fill a mission, like he should pay his tithing, like he should attend his meetings, like he should keep his life clean and free from the ugliness of the world and plan a celestial marriage in the temple of the Lord. While there is no compulsion for him to do any of these things, he should do them for his own good. . The church's current president, Thomas S. Monson, stated in 2012 that "missionary work is a priesthood duty" and encouraged "all young men who are worthy and who are physically able and mentally capable to respond to the call to serve."Monson, Thomas S. (November 2012), "Welcome to Conference", Ensign, We affirm that missionary work is a priesthood duty—and we encourage all young men who are worthy and who are physically able and mentally capable to respond to the call to serve. Many young women also serve, but they are not under the same mandate to serve as are the young men. We assure the young sisters of the Church, however, that they make a valuable contribution as missionaries, and we welcome their service.  In the church's October 2002 general conference, M. Russell Ballard, of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, stated that local leaders recommend for full-time missions "only those young men ... whom you judge to be spiritually, physically, mentally, and emotionally prepared to face today's realities of missionary work"; he added that "not every young man needs to be called to serve away from his home; some may best serve under your direction as ward missionaries." Ballard, M. Russell (November 2002), "The Greatest Generation of Missionaries", Ensign, Upon you bishops and you stake presidents rests the responsibility to recommend only those young men and women whom you judge to be spiritually, physically, mentally, and emotionally prepared to face today's realities of missionary work. Brethren, judge wisely and remember: not every young man needs to be called to serve away from his home; some may best serve under your direction as ward missionaries. 
^ Newlin, David Self; Stagg, Jennifer (October 8, 2012), LDS Church members respond to new mission age rules, KSL, retrieved March 7, 2013 
^ Walker, Joseph (October 6, 2012), "LDS Church lowers age requirement for missionary service", Deseret News 
^ "Missionary Policy Changes Give More Seniors Opportunity to Serve", LDS Church News Release, June 2, 2011.
^ "Church-Service Missionary". Lds.org. Retrieved 2017-10-16. 
^ Adherents believe in the Bible "as far as it is translated correctly": see Articles of Faith 1:8. Additionally, Joseph Smith taught that the Songs of Solomon "are not inspired writings".
^ Articles of Faith 1:6.
^ Book of Mormon, Alma 34:8–16.
^ Fr. Luis Ladaria, S.J. "The Question of the Validity of Baptism Conferred in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints". Retrieved November 1, 2010. 
^ "The Restoration of The Gospel in the Latter Days". The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Retrieved July 13, 2012. 
^ For example, a 2007 poll conducted by the Pew Research Center found that 31 percent of Americans surveyed do not consider Mormons to be Christian. See Public Expresses Mixed Views of Islam, Mormonism.
^ Smith, Joseph, Jr. (March 1, 1842a), "Church History [Wentworth Letter]", Times and Seasons, 3 (9): 706–10 [707]  (traditional Christian denominations "were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was acknowledged of God as His church and kingdom"). Smith, Joseph, Jr. (April 1, 1842c), "History of Joseph Smith", Times and Seasons, 3 (11): 748–49  Stating that Jesus told Smith that all existing Christian creeds "were an abomination in his sight".
^ D&C 1:30 (LDS Church is the "only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth").
^ Kimball, Spencer W. (November 1978), "An Eternal Hope in Christ", Ensign: 71, Then he taught and testified that even as Christ is risen from the dead, so will all men come forth from the grave; each will then be judged according to his works, and each will receive his appointed place in the mansions which are prepared. In that resurrected state, Paul said, there are 'celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial, and bodies telestial; but the glory of the celestial, one; and the terrestrial, another; and the telestial, another' (JST, 1 Cor. 15:40) 
^ See, for example, Presbyterians and Latter-day Saints, retrieved January 30, 2007  (Presbyterian Church USA, stating that "Mormonism is a new and emerging religious tradition distinct from the historic apostolic tradition of the Christian Church"); Should Lutherans Rebaptize Former Mormons Who Are Joining the Congregation?, retrieved August 15, 2006  Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, stating that LDS Church doctrine regarding the Trinity is "substantially different from that of orthodox, creedal Christianity"; General Conference 2000 806-NonDis, retrieved August 15, 2006  (United Methodist Church, stating that the LDS Church, "by self-definition, does not fit within the bounds of the historic, apostolic tradition of Christian faith").
^ According to Joseph Smith, Jesus told him that the other churches claiming to be Christian creeds "were an abomination in the Lords sight; that those professors [of religion] were all corrupt". Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:19.
^ Roberts, B. H (1905), History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, 3, Deseret News, pp. 23, 24 
^ Smith, Joseph, Jr.; Williams, Frederick G.; Cowdery, Oliver (1834), "Minutes of a Conference of the Elders of the Church of Christ, May 3, 1834", The Evening and the Morning Star, 2 (20): 160 
^ Smith, Joseph, Jr (August 1838), "Special Collections", Elders' Journal of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, 1 (4): 52. , Manuscript History of the Church, book A-1, LDS Church Archives, 1838, p. 37 , reproduced in Jessee, Dean C., ed. (1989), The Papers of Joseph Smith: Autobiographical and Historical Writings, 1, Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book, pp. 302–303 . Marquardt, H. Michael; Walters, Wesley P., eds. (1994), Inventing Mormonism: Tradition and the Historical Record, Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books, p. 160 
^ The initial incorporation by the non-existent State of Deseret "(1851) Laws and Ordinances of the State of Deseret (Utah) Compilation 1851".  was not legally valid, but was soon ratified by the Utah Territory in 1851 "(1851) Acts Resolutions and Memorials Passed by the First Annual and Special Sessions of the Legislative Assembly of the Territory of Utah, 1851".  and 1855. See Late Corporation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints v. Romney, 136 U.S. 44–45 (1890).
^ "State of Deseret: An Ordinance, incorporating the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints". February 4, 1851. 
^ Montoya, Maria; Belmonte, Laura A.; Guarneri, Carl J.; Hackel, Steven; Hartigan-O'Connor, Ellen (2016). Global Americans: A History of the United States. Cengage Learning. p. 442. ISBN 9781337515672. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ Munoz, Vincent Phillip (2015). Religious Liberty and the American Supreme Court: The Essential Cases and Documents. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 312. ISBN 9781442250321. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ "?". Archived from the original on January 24, 2010. 
^ Taylor, Scott (2 April 2011). "LDS or Mormon? It depends". Deseret News. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ "Topic: Style Guide — The Name of the Church", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ "Corporation of the Presiding Bishop of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints - Utah Business Search". State of Utah. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ "Corporation of the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints - Utah Business Search". State of Utah. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ "Intellectual Reserve, Inc". trademarkia.com. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ "16. Single Members", Handbook 2: Administering the Church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 
^ a b "Mormons". Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. 2014. Retrieved December 2, 2016. 
^ "News Release: 15 Million Member Milestone Announced at Church's General Conference", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, October 5, 2013 ; Hales, Brook P. (May 2009), "Statistical Report, 2008", Ensign: 30  This is the church's own accounting, based on membership records. The church's definition of "membership" includes all persons who were ever baptized, or whose parents were members while the person was under the age of eight called "members of record" (LDS Church 2006, pp. 145–46), who have neither been excommunicated nor asked to have their names removed from church records (LDS Church 2006, pp. 116, 148–49).
^ Subtracting U.S. membership of 6,144,582 (December 31, 2011) from total worldwide membership (December 31, 2011) of 14,441,346, results in 8,296,764 (rounded to 8.3 million) members outside the United States of America
^ "Facts and Statistics: United States", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ 2005 Yearbook of American and Canadian Churches, National Council of Churches[full citation needed]
^ "Largest U.S. Churches, 2005". Information Please Database (infoplease.com). Pearson Education. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. 
^ "Facts and Statistics", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church 
^ "News Release: Church in Talks to "Regularize" Activities in China", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church 
^ a b Haight, David B. (May 1986), "A Prophet Chosen of the Lord", Ensign: 7 
^ Ludlow, Daniel H., Latter-day Prophets Speak: Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Church Presidents, 1948/1993, ch. 32.
^ For a time, the church had a paid local clergy; however, that practice was discontinued in the early 1900s. See D. Michael Quinn (1997), Mormon Hierarchy: Extensions of Power, Salt Lake City: Signature Books, ch. 6.
^ "Aaronic Priesthood | The Priesthood of Aaron". www.lds.org. Retrieved December 3, 2015. 
^ "Melchizedek Priesthood". www.lds.org. Retrieved December 3, 2015. 
^ The Relief Society was founded in 1842 in Nauvoo, Illinois, and with the motto "Charity Never Faileth", the organization today includes more than 5 million women in more than 165 countries. "Topic: Relief Society History", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 . Every Latter-day Saint woman age 18 or older is a member of the Relief Society.
^ "Organization How the Church Is Organized", lds.org, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ AAG International Research, AAG International Research, AAG, retrieved October 31, 2009 
^ Boy Scouts of America Membership Report – 2007 (PDF), P.R.A.Y., January 7, 2008, archived from the original (PDF) on May 28, 2008, retrieved May 22, 2008 
^ Biema, David Van. Kingdom Come. Time Magazine, Vol. 150 No. 5, August 4, 1997 (estimating the church's value at over $30 billion).
^ a b Kirn, Walter (June 5, 2011). "The Mormon Moment". Newsweek. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. 
^ "Belo Corp 8-K/A SEC Filing § 3". sec.edgar-online.com. EDGAR Online. April 10, 1995. Archived from the original on January 7, 2009. 
^ "Financial Planning Archived May 27, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.". finserve.byu.edu. Retrieved May 16, 2007.
^ Cantwell, Robert W. (May 2007), "Church Auditing Department Report, 2006", Ensign, The Church Auditing Department has been granted access to all records and systems necessary to evaluate the adequacy of controls over receipts of funds, expenditures, and safeguarding of church assets. The Church Auditing Department is independent of all other church departments and operations, and the staff consists of certified public accountants, certified internal auditors, certified information systems auditors, and other credentialed professionals. Based upon audits performed, the Church Auditing Department is of the opinion that, in all material respects, contributions received, expenditures made, and assets of the church for the year 2006 have been recorded and administered in accordance with appropriate accounting practices, approved budgets, and church policies and procedures. 
^ Winter, Caroline (July 18, 2012). "How the Mormons Make Money". Bloomberg Businessweek
^ Fletcher, Peggy. "Historian digs into the hidden world of Mormon finances, shows how church went from losing money to making money — lots of it - The Salt Lake Tribune". Sltrib.com. Retrieved 2017-10-16. 
^ Editorial Board (December 27, 2006), "Liquor stores: Banning phone listings, stores won't stop abuse", The Salt Lake Tribune 
^ Megan Johnson (December 15, 2008). "America's 10 Fittest Cities—and 10 Least Fit, Too". Retrieved October 14, 2010. 
^ Griffiths, Lawn (March 24, 2007), "Mesa Mormon temple prepares for Easter pageant", East Valley Tribune, archived from the original on September 11, 2007, retrieved November 30, 2008 
^ The Family: A Proclamation to the World, LDS Church, 1995 . See also: The Family: A Proclamation to the World
^ Brinley, Douglas E. (1998), Together forever: Gospel perspectives for marriage and family, Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, p. 48, ISBN 1-57008-540-4, OCLC 40185703 
^ Smith, Christian; Denton, Melinda Lundquist (2005), Soul Searching: The Religious and Spiritual Lives of American Teenagers, Oxford University Press, p. 261, ISBN 019518095X, OCLC 55947930 
^ Monson, Thomas S. (November 1982), "Run, Boy, Run!", Ensign 
^ Craig, Chanelle. "Especially For Youth". Chanelle Craig. Retrieved March 5, 2015. 
^ "News Story: Church Reemphasizes Political Neutrality", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, December 6, 2007 
^ "Majority of Mormons Lean Republican; Half Cite Discrimination Against Their Faith". ABC News. January 12, 2012. Retrieved November 13, 2012. 
^ "Liberal Mormons: A Minority Within a Minority". USA Today. October 30, 2012. Retrieved November 13, 2012. 
^ Weisman, Jonathan (August 3, 2011). "Mormons Duck Political Duel". The Wall Street Journal. pp. A1, A6. 
^ Johnson, Kirk (November 11, 2009), "Mormon Support of Gay Rights Statute Draws Praise", The New York Times 
^ "News Story: Statement Given to Salt Lake City Council on Nondiscrimination Ordinances", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, January 1, 2009 
^ No to nuclear storage, LDS say, Deseret News, May 5, 2006 
^ LDS joins N-storage foes, The Salt Lake Tribune, May 5, 2006 
^ The religious composition of the 115th Congress BY ALEKSANDRA SANDSTROM, Pew Forum, January 3, 2017.
^ Sarah Jane Weaver, "15 Mormons serving in U.S. Congress" Church News, January 8, 2011.
^ Mormon Mission: Mitt Romney, Jon Huntsman Challenged by Stereotypes video report & article by Lauren Vance, ABC News, June 25, 2011.
^ "The Mormons: Humanitarian Programs". American Experience website. PBS. Retrieved March 18, 2014. 
^ Riley, Naomi Schaefer (Fall 2012). "A Welfare System That Works". Philanthropy. Philanthropy Roundtable. 
^ "LDS Philanthropies: Helping Change and Save Lives". LDS Philanthropies. 
^ "Overview of Bishops' Storehouses", Welfare Operations Training, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ "News Story: Annual Report Highlights Church Emergency Relief", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, March 9, 2011 
^ "Humanitarian Services: Latter-day Saint Humanitarian Center", lds.org, LDS Church 
^ "Topic: Humanitarian Services", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, retrieved September 23, 2014 
^ "News Story: Church Providing Relief to Hurricane Katrina Victims", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, September 1, 2005 
^ "News Story: Latter-day Saints to Mobilize Another 4,000 Volunteers in Chainsaw Brigade's Second Wave", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, September 16, 2005 
^ "Mormon Helping Hands Make a Difference", Meridian Magazine, October 20, 2005, archived from the original on February 1, 2010 
^ "Emergency Response: Doing Our Part: Port-au-Prince, Haiti", LDSCharities.org, LDS Charities 
^ "Church News: Christchurch Members' Faith Remains Unshaken as Recovery Continues", lds.org, LDS Church, April 7, 2011 
^ "News Release: Church Update on Response to Japan Earthquake and Tsunami", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, March 14, 2011 
^ Moore, Carrie A. (March 11, 2005), "LDS-Catholic aid for Niger", Deseret News 
^ Askar, Jamshid Ghazi (September 11, 2010), "Mormon church, Islamic Relief team up for Pakistan flood relief", Deseret News 
^ "Humanitarian Service: What the Church Is Doing: Humanitarian Programs", lds.org, LDS Church 
^ "Humanitarian Aid". Mormon.org. 
^ Turner, John G. (2016). Out of Obscurity: Mormonism Since 1945. Oxford University Press. pp. 132–137. ISBN 0199358222. Retrieved September 23, 2016. 
^ Sink, Mindy (September 6, 2003), "Religion Journal; Spiritual Issues Lead Many to the Net", The New York Times, retrieved February 21, 2008 
^ Jesse McKinley and Kirk Johnson (November 14, 2008), "Mormons Tipped Scale in Ban on Gay Marriage", The New York Times, retrieved February 14, 2012 
^ "San Diego march for marriage equality draws 20,000 protesters", Gay & Lesbian Times, archived from the original on February 14, 2009, retrieved January 21, 2009 
^ "Commentary: California and Same-Sex Marriage", MormonNewsroom.org, LDS Church, June 30, 2008 
^ Taylor, Scott (November 10, 2009), "Mormon Church Backs Gay Protecting City Ordinances", Deseret News 
^ a b Urbina, Ian (December 21, 2003). "New York Times: Again, Jews Fault Mormons Over Posthumous Baptisms". The New York Times. Retrieved November 14, 2012. 
^ Bushman 2006, pp. 86
^ a b "The LDS Agreement: the Issue of The Mormon Baptisms of Jewish Holocaust Victims", Jewishgen.org, Museum of Jewish Heritage – A Living Memorial to the Holocaust, retrieved November 14, 2012 
^ Mark Oppenheimer (March 2, 2012), "A Twist on Posthumous Baptisms Leave Jews Miffed at Mormon Rite", The New York Times, retrieved November 13, 2012 
^ "Mormons crack down on proxy baptisms; whistleblower's access blocked". Retrieved November 14, 2012. 
^ Ratzinger, Joseph (June 5, 2001), "Response to a 'dubium' on the validity of baptism conferred by 'The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints', called 'Mormons'", Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, retrieved August 15, 2006  (the official Roman Catholic view).

"Presbyterians and Latter-day Saints", Interfaith Relations, Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), archived from the original on January 23, 2010, retrieved January 30, 2007  (a Presbyterian view).
"Should Lutherans Rebaptize Former Mormons Who Are Joining the Congregation?", Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, retrieved June 19, 2010  (a Lutheran view).
"806-NonDis", General Conference 2000, The United Methodist Church, retrieved August 15, 2006  (a Methodist view).
LeBlanc, Douglas (June 13, 2005), "Latter-day politics", GetReligion, retrieved November 22, 2008  (an Episcopalian view).
Young, Alexey (March–April 1996), "Cults Within & Without", Orthodox America, retrieved June 19, 2010  (an Orthodox view).




Bibliography[edit]


Allen, James B. (1966), "The Significance of Joseph Smith's First Vision in Mormon Thought", Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought, 1 (3), archived from the original on June 13, 2011 .
Anderson, Richard Lloyd (1989), Investigating the Book of Mormon Witnesses, Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Company, ISBN 0-87579-242-1 
Garr, Arnold K.; Cannon, Donald Q.; Cowan, Richard (2000), Encyclopedia of Latter-Day Saint History, Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book Company, ISBN 1-57345-822-8 
LDS Church (2006), Church Handbook of Instructions, Salt Lake City, Utah: LDS Church  (published only to certain clergy—not generally available to church members or the public).

LDS Church (2008b), 2008 Church Almanac, Deseret Morning News, ISBN 978-1-59038-900-3 
Newell, Coke (2001), Latter Days: An Insider's Guide to Mormonism, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, St. Martin's Griffin, ISBN 0-312-28043-2 
Ostling, Richard; Ostling, Joan K. (2000), Mormon America: The Power and the Promise (1st ed.), HarperSanFrancisco, ISBN 0-06-066372-3 
Parry, Donald W.; Peterson, Daniel C.; Welch, John W., eds. (2002), Echos and Evidences of the Book of Mormon, Provo, Utah: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, ISBN 0-934893-72-1 
Reynolds, Noel B.; Tate, Charles D., eds. (1982), Book of Mormon Authorship: New Light on Ancient Origins, Provo, Utah: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, ISBN 0-934893-18-7 
Riess, Jana; Bigelow, Christopher Kimball (2005), Mormonism For Dummies, For Dummies, ISBN 0-7645-7195-8 
Robinson, Stephen E. (1992), Are Mormons Christians?, Bookcraft, Inc., ISBN 0-88494-784-X 
Shipps, Jan (1987), Mormonism: The Story of a New Religious Tradition, University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-01417-0 
Shipps, Jan (2000), Sojourner in the Promised Land: Forty Years Among the Mormons, University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-02590-3 
Smith, Joseph, Jr. (March 1, 1842), "Church History [Wentworth Letter]", Times and Seasons, 3 (9): 706–710 .
Smith, Joseph Fielding, ed. (1976), Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (index and concordance by Robert J. Matthews), Deseret Book Company, ISBN 0-87747-665-9 
Williams, Drew (2003), The Complete Idiot's Guide to Understanding Mormonism, Alpha, ISBN 0-02-864491-3 


Further reading[edit]


Williams, Drew (2003), The Complete Idiot's Guide to Understanding Mormonism, Alpha, ISBN 0-02-864491-3 
Shipps, Jan (2000), Sojourner in the Promised Land: Forty Years Among the Mormons, University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-02590-3 
Shipps, Jan (1987), Mormonism: The Story of a New Religious Tradition, University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-01417-0 
Ostling, Richard; Ostling, Joan K. (2000), Mormon America: The Power and the Promise (1st ed.), HarperSanFrancisco, ISBN 0-06-066372-3 
Riess, Jana; Bigelow, Christopher Kimball (2005), Mormonism For Dummies, For Dummies, ISBN 0-7645-7195-8 
Newell, Coke (2001), Latter Days: An Insider's Guide to Mormonism, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, St. Martin's Griffin, ISBN 0-312-28043-2 
Stark, Rodney (2005), The Rise of Mormonism, Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-231-13634-X 
Prince, Gregory (2005), David O. McKay and the Rise of Modern Mormonism, University of Utah Press, ISBN 0-87480-822-7 
Foreman, Grant (1935), Missionaries of the Latter Day Saints Church in Indian Territory, Createspace, ISBN 978-1533469199 
Winder, Michael (2007), Presidents and Prophets, Covenant Communications, ISBN 1-59811-452-2 
Kidd, Clark (1998), A Convert's Guide to Mormon Life: A Guidebook for New Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Deseret Book Company, ISBN 1-57008-520-X 
Bushman, Richard (2008), Mormonism: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-531030-6 
Brase, Brad (1998), Why Would Anyone Join the Mormon Church?, Bonneville Publishing Company, ISBN 1-55517-387-X 
Brown, Dennis (2008), Evidences of the True Church, Cedar Fort, ISBN 0-88290-712-3 
Denison, Alan (2002), Guess Who Wants to Have You for Lunch?, Foundation for Apologetic Information & Research, ISBN 1-893036-05-7 
Eliason, Eric (2001), Mormons and Mormonism: an introduction to an American world religion, University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-06912-9 
Millet, Robert (1998), Latter-day Christianity: 10 Basic Issues, Maxwell Institute, ISBN 0934893322 
Millet, Robert (2008), Magnifying Priesthood Power, Cedar Fort, ISBN 0-88290-779-4 
Millet, Robert (2007), The vision of Mormonism: pressing the boundaries of Christianity, Paragon House, ISBN 1-55778-868-5 
Neilson, Reid (2008), Global Mormonism in the 21st Century, Brigham Young University, ISBN 978-0-8425-2696-8 
Shuster, Eric (2010), The Biblical Roots of Mormonism, Cedar Fort, Inc., ISBN 1-59955-406-2 
Scott, Tom (2012), It's True: An Evangelical Pastor's Journey to Truth in the Mormon Church, Brigham Distributing, ISBN 0983603049 
Webb, Stephen H. (2013), Mormon Christianity: What Other Christians Can Learn From the Latter-day Saints, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0199316813 


External links[edit]

Find more aboutThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Textbooks from Wikibooks



Listen to this article (info/dl)












This audio file was created from a revision of the article "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" dated 2007-01-12, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles

Official church websites

LDS.org – Official church website
Mormon.org – Official church website, with information about basic beliefs.
MormonNewsroom.org – Official church website, with news of the church and official church statements.
MormonChannel.org – Official media site with audio and video publications including podcasts and Mormon Messages content.
Mormon and Gay - An Official Church Website – Official site about the LDS Church's view on homosexuality.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in China – Official site on Mormons in China
Mormon.org - Worship with us - Virtual tour of a typical meetinghouse
Meetinghouse Locator - Online meeting house locator

Other sites

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Works by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at Internet Archive







v
t
e


The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints



History



Joseph Smith

death
succession crisis


Anthon Transcript
Incorporation
First Vision
Brigham Young
Handcart companies
Mormon Battalion
Name of the church
Pioneers
1890 Manifesto
Good Neighbor policy
Statistical membership
Mormonism and violence
Historic sites





Sacred texts



Bible: King James Version, Joseph Smith Translation
Book of Mormon
Doctrine and Covenants
Pearl of Great Price

Book of Moses
Book of Abraham
Joseph Smith–Matthew
Joseph Smith–History
Articles of Faith







Beliefs and practices



Apostasy and restoration
Calling
Family Home Evening
Fast Sunday
For the Strength of Youth
God in Mormonism
Home teaching
Marriage

Celestial


Ordinances
Plan of Salvation
Priesthood
Revelation
Sexuality
"The Family: A Proclamation to the World"
Word of Wisdom





Culture and worship



Brigham Young University
LDS cinema (Films)
Cultural depictions
Deseret Book
Deseret Industries
Especially for Youth
General Conference
Hymns

Book


LDS Humanitarian Services
Missionary service
Mormons
Mormon Channel
Mormon music
Mormon Tabernacle Choir
Pageants
Sunday School
Temples
Worship services

Sacrament







Organization



Church Educational System
FamilySearch
Finances
Primary
Relief Society
Young Men
Young Women





Leadership



President

List


Thomas S. Monson
First Presidency
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles
Presiding Bishop
Quorums of the Seventy





Criticism



Anti-Mormonism
Blacks and the church
Book of Mormon

Archeology
Genetics
Historical authenticity
Linguistics
Origin


Homosexuals and the church
Mountain Meadows massacre
MormonLeaks
Polygamy
Salamander letter
September Six





Other related articles



Bloggernacle
FairMormon
Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies
I'm a Mormon
Mormon fundamentalism
Mormon studies
Mormonism and Christianity
Mormonism and women





Books



LDS Church small
LDS Church big
Standard works
Book of Mormon
Joseph Smith
Pearl of Great Price
Mormon Texts
Temples
Ordinances
Presidents
History
Culture
Criticism








Category
 LDS Church portal
WikiProject










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Historic sites of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints



Northeast




Palmyra



Book of Mormon Historic Publication Site
Hill Cumorah
Smith Family Farm (Sacred Grove)





Kirtland



Historic Kirtland Village (Newel K. Whitney Store)
Kirtland Temple





Other



Priesthood Restoration Site
John Johnson Farm
Joseph Smith Birthplace Memorial
Peter Whitmer log home
Washington D.C. Temple Visitors' Center








Midwest




Nauvoo



Nauvoo Visitors' Center
Nauvoo Temple
Nauvoo Historic District
Red Brick Store





Missouri



Far West Temple Site
Adam-ondi-Ahman
Liberty Jail
Independence (Zion) Temple Lot
Independence Visitors' Center
Haun's Mill





Other



Carthage Jail
Winter Quarters (Mormon Trail Center
Mormon Pioneer Cemetery)








West




Salt Lake City



Temple Square (Salt Lake Temple
Tabernacle
Tabernacle Organ
Assembly Hall
Gardens)
Conference Center (Organ)
Church Office Building
Joseph Smith Memorial Building
Church Administration Building
Relief Society Building
Brigham Young Complex (Beehive House
Lion House)
Family History Library
Church History Museum
Church History Library
Granite Mountain Records Vault
Mormon Pioneer Memorial Monument
This is the Place Monument
Brigham Young Monument





Other



Cove Fort
Farmington Rock Chapel
St. George Temple Visitors' Center
Laie Hawaii Temple Visitors' Center
Polynesian Cultural Center
Mormon Corridor
Martin's Cove
Pipe Spring National Monument








Non-U.S.



Gadfield Elm Chapel
Jerusalem Center
Mexico City Temple Visitors' Center
New Zealand Temple Visitors' Center






 LDS Church Portal  Book










v
t
e


Pageants of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints






Castle Valley (Castle Dale, Utah)
Clarkston (Clarkston, Utah)
Hill Cumorah Pageant (Palmyra, New York)
Jesus the Christ (Mesa, Arizona)
Mormon Miracle (Manti, Utah)
Nauvoo (Nauvoo, Illinois)
Truth Will Prevail (Chorley, Lancashire, England)












v
t
e


Latter Day Saint movement



Fundamental ideas



Mormonism
Mormonism and Christianity
Mormon fundamentalism
List of sects
Mormon studies





History



History of the Latter Day Saint movement
Church of Christ
Extermination Order
Succession crisis


History of the LDS Church

Mormon handcart pioneers
Mormon Battalion
Mormon Reformation
Mountain Meadows massacre




Community of Christ history

Amboy Conference
Restoration Branches




Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite) history

Rigdonite
William Bickerton







Sacred texts



Bible

Old Testament
New Testament


Book of Mormon (Outline)
Doctrine and Covenants (Book of Commandments)
Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible
Pearl of Great Price





Founders and leaders



Joseph Smith (Outline)
Oliver Cowdery
Sidney Rigdon
Brigham Young
Joseph Smith III
James Strang
William Bickerton
Granville Hedrick
Alpheus Cutler





LDS denominations



The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Outline)
Community of Christ
Bickertonite
Strangite
Hedrickite
Mormon fundamentalism

FLDS Church
Apostolic United Brethren







Doctrines and practices



Articles of Faith
Confirmation
Gifts of the Spirit
Views on God
Islam and Mormonism
Judaism and Mormonism
Priesthood
Restoration
Revelation
Temples
Tithing
Word of Wisdom





Controversies



Criticism
polygamy

origin


Black people and Mormonism
violence
Historicity of the Book of Mormon

origin
archaeology


List of prophecies of Joseph Smith





Books



List of sects
LDS Church
Community of Christ
Book of Mormon
Books of the Book of Mormon
Joseph Smith
Mormonism and polygamy








Latter Day Saints Portal

LDS Church Portal
Community of Christ Portal














v
t
e


Christianity



Jesus



Christ
Jesus in Christianity
Virgin birth
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Son of God








Foundations



Church
Creed
Gospel
New Covenant





Bible



Books
Canon
Old Testament
New Testament





Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit


Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
Ecclesiology
History of theology
Mission
Salvation






History and
tradition




Mary
Joseph
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early
Constantine
Ecumenical councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Reformation
Luther






Denomi-
nations
and
traditions
(list)





Western



Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Holiness
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant





Eastern



Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite)
Assyrian Church of the East ("Nestorian")
Eastern Catholic Churches





Nontrinitarian



Jehovah's Witnesses
Latter Day Saint movement
Oneness Pentecostalism








Related topics



Art
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism








 Category
 Christianity portal














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 138458342
LCCN: n80126081
ISNI: 0000 0001 2184 7583
GND: 2015463-X
SUDOC: 026609614
BNF: cb11882435k (data)












						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Church_of_Jesus_Christ_of_Latter-day_Saints&oldid=818498965"					Categories: Christian denominations established in the 19th centuryReligious organizations based in the United StatesReligious organizations established in 1830The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints1830 establishments in New York (state)Organizations that oppose same-sex marriageHidden categories: Articles needing more detailed referencesWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia pending changes protected pages (level 1)Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from November 2016Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016Spoken articlesArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles with DMOZ linksArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers