

Thrash metal


Stylistic origins



NWOBHM
speed metal
hardcore punk





Cultural origins
Early 1980s, United States, United Kingdom and Germany


Typical instruments



Electric guitar
bass guitar
drums
vocals





Derivative forms



Black metal
death metal
groove metal





Fusion genres




Crossover thrash
funk metal[1]
grindcore
metalcore
heavy hardcore




Regional scenes




Australia
San Francisco Bay Area
Brazil
Germany
Poland
United Kingdom




Other topics




Extreme metal
NWOAHM
power metal
thrashcore




Thrash metal (or simply thrash) is a subgenre of heavy metal music characterized by its overall aggression and often fast tempo. The songs usually use fast percussive beats and low-register guitar riffs, overlaid with shredding-style lead work. The lyrics often deal with social issues and reproach of The Establishment, using direct and denunciatory language, an approach borrowed from hardcore punk.
The genre evolved in the early 1980s from combining the fast drum beats and attitude of hardcore with the double bass drumming, heavy and complex guitar style of the new wave of British heavy metal (NWOBHM). It emerged partially as a reaction to the more conventional and widely acceptable glam metal, a less aggressive, pop music–infused heavy metal subgenre which appeared simultaneously. Thrash metal was an inspiration for subsequent extreme genres such as death metal and black metal.
Four American bands—Anthrax, Megadeth, Metallica, and Slayer—are credited with pioneering and popularizing the genre, and they have come to be called the "Big Four of Thrash". The Clash of the Titans tour (1990–1991), which featured Megadeth, Slayer, and Anthrax, is considered the genre's pinnacle, after which thrash metal saw a decline in popularity throughout the decade. Thrash metal has seen a resurgence in recent times, with many of the older bands returning to their roots with their new releases. A new generation of thrash metal bands emerged in the early 2000s, drawing lyrical and visual inspiration from the older groups.



Contents


1 Characteristics
2 History

2.1 Origins
2.2 Early 1980s
2.3 Mid-1980s
2.4 Late 1980s
2.5 1990s
2.6 2000s and 2010s


3 Genre spinoffs
4 Regional scenes
5 See also
6 Notes
7 Bibliography



Characteristics[edit]




Kirk Hammett and James Hetfield of Metallica (pictured in 2008). Metallica's early work is regarded as essential to the development of the genre in the 1980s.


Thrash metal generally features fast tempos, low-register, complex guitar riffs, high-register guitar solos and double bass drumming.[2] The genre evolved in the early 1980s from combining the drum beats of hardcore punk with the guitar style of the new wave of British heavy metal.[3] It emerged partially as a reaction to the more conventional and widely acceptable glam metal, a less aggressive, pop-infused heavy metal subgenre which appeared simultaneously.[4] The rhythm guitar parts are played with heavy distortion and often palm muted to create a tighter and more precise sound.[5] Vocally, thrash metal can employ anything from melodic singing to shouted vocals. Most guitar solos are played at high speed, as they are usually characterized by shredding, and use techniques such as sweep picking, legato phrasing, alternate picking, tremolo picking, string skipping, and two-hand tapping.




Thrash metal band Overkill


The guitar riffs often use chromatic scales and emphasize the tritone and diminished intervals, instead of using conventional single scale based riffing. For example, the intro riff of Metallica's "Master of Puppets" (the title track of the namesake album) is a chromatic descent, followed by a chromatic ascent based on the tritone.
Speed, pacing and time-changes also define thrash metal. Thrash tends to have an accelerating feel which may be due in large part to its aggressive drumming style. For example, drummers often use two bass drums, or a double-bass pedal, in order to create a relentless, driving beat. Cymbal stops/chokes are often used to transition from one riff to another or to precede an acceleration in tempo. Some common characteristics of the genre are fast guitar riffs with aggressive picking styles and fast guitar solos, and extensive use of two bass drums as opposed to the conventional use of only one, typical of most rock music.
To keep up with the other instruments, many bassists use a plectrum. However, some prominent thrash metal bassists have used their fingers, such as Frank Bello, Greg Christian, Steve DiGiorgio, Robert Trujillo and Cliff Burton. Several bassists use a distorted bass tone, an approach popularized by Burton and Motörhead's Lemmy. Lyrical themes in thrash metal include warfare, corruption, injustice, murder, suicide, isolation, alienation, addiction, and other maladies that afflict the individual and society. In addition, politics, particularly pessimism and dissatisfaction towards politics, are common themes among thrash metal bands. Humor and irony can occasionally be found (Anthrax for example), but they are limited, and are exception rather than a rule.[6][7]
History[edit]
Origins[edit]




Venom's early work is considered a major influence on thrash metal.


Among the earliest songs to be labeled thrash metal was Queen's "Stone Cold Crazy", recorded and released in 1974. The song was described as being thrash metal "before the term had been invented".[8] Black Sabbath's "Symptom of the Universe", released in 1975, was the inspiration for Diamond Head's "Am I Evil?".[9] Since then, NWOBHM bands directly influenced the development of early thrash. The early work of artists such as Diamond Head, Iron Maiden, Judas Priest, Venom, Motörhead, Tygers of Pan Tang, Raven, and Angel Witch, among others, introduced the fast-paced instrumentation that became an essential aspect of thrash.
Void is hailed as one of the earliest examples of hardcore/heavy metal crossover, whose chaotic musical approach is often cited as particularly influential.[10] Their 1982 split LP with fellow Washington band The Faith showed both bands exhibiting quick, fiery, high-speed punk rock. It has been argued that those recordings laid the foundation for early thrash metal, at least in terms of selected tempos.[11]
In Europe, the earliest band of the emerging thrash movement was Venom from Newcastle upon Tyne, formed in 1979. Their 1982 album Black Metal has been cited as a major influence on many subsequent genres and bands in the extreme metal world, such as Bathory, Hellhammer, Slayer, and Mayhem. The European scene was almost exclusively influenced by the most aggressive music Germany and England were producing at the time. British bands such as Tank and Raven, along with German band Accept, motivated musicians from central Europe to start bands of their own, eventually producing groups such as Sodom, Kreator, and Destruction from Germany, as well as Switzerland's Coroner. The Swedish punk band Warheads have also been described as a proto-thrash band.
Early 1980s[edit]
In 1981, a Southern California band Leather Charm wrote a song entitled "Hit the Lights". Leather Charm soon disbanded and the band's primary songwriter, vocalist/rhythm guitarist James Hetfield met drummer Lars Ulrich through a classified advertisement. Together, Hetfield and Ulrich formed Metallica, the first of the "Big Four" thrash bands, with lead guitarist Dave Mustaine, who would later form Megadeth, another of the "Big Four" originators of thrash, and bassist Ron McGovney. Metallica later relocated to the San Francisco Bay Area. McGovney was replaced with Cliff Burton, and Mustaine was later replaced with Kirk Hammett. "Hit the Lights" was featured on their first studio album, Kill 'Em All, released in mid–1983.[12]
The term "thrash metal" was first used in the music press by Kerrang! magazine's journalist Malcolm Dome while making a reference to the Anthrax song "Metal Thrashing Mad".[13] Prior to this, Metallica frontman James Hetfield referred to Metallica's sound as speed metal or power metal.
Another "Big Four" thrash band formed in Southern California in 1981, when guitarists Jeff Hanneman and Kerry King met while auditioning for the same band and subsequently decided to form a band of their own. Hanneman and King recruited vocalist/bassist Tom Araya, a former respiratory therapist, and drummer Dave Lombardo, a pizza delivery driver, and Slayer was formed. Slayer was discovered by Metal Blade Records executive Brian Slagel while performing Iron Maiden's "Phantom of the Opera" at a show, and were promptly signed to the label. In December 1983, less than six months after the release of Kill 'Em All, Slayer put out their debut album, Show No Mercy.
In 1982, Stress recorded what is considered to be the first Brazilian heavy metal album.[14] Roosevelt "Bala" (bass and vocals) claimed this to be the first thrash metal album, since it was recorded before Metallica's Kill 'Em All. However, later he stated that some compositions have elements of thrash, like the speed, fast alternate picking, and the aggressive vocals and sound. Canada also produced influential speed metal bands such as Annihilator, Anvil, Exciter, Razor and Voivod.
Mid-1980s[edit]









"Set the World Afire"





The second track from Megadeth's third studio album, So Far, So Good... So What! (1988)






Problems playing this file? See media help.


The popularity of thrash metal increased in 1984 with the release of Metallica's sophomore record Ride the Lightning, as well as Anthrax's debut Fistful of Metal. Overkill and Slayer released extended plays on independent labels the same year. This led to a heavier sounding form of thrash, which was reflected in Exodus' Bonded by Blood and Slayer's Hell Awaits. In 1985, the German band Kreator released their debut album Endless Pain and the Brazilian band Sepultura released their EP Bestial Devastation. Megadeth, which was formed by former Metallica guitarist Dave Mustaine, released their debut album Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good!, and Anthrax released the critically acclaimed Spreading the Disease in 1985.
A number of high-profile albums were released in 1986. Metallica released Master of Puppets. Megadeth released Peace Sells... but Who's Buying?, which proved to be the band's commercial and critical breakthrough and a landmark album that AllMusic cited as "a classic of early thrash".[15] Slayer, regarded as one of the most sinister thrash metal bands from the early 1980s,[16][unreliable source?] released Reign in Blood, an album considered to have single-handedly inspired the death metal genre.[17] Kreator released Pleasure to Kill, which would later be a major influence on the death metal scene.[18]
Late 1980s[edit]




Slayer (pictured in 2007) released Reign in Blood in 1986, considered a landmark achievement in the genre's history.


In 1987, Anthrax released their third album Among the Living, which borrowed elements from their two previous releases, with fast guitar riffs and pounding drums. Death Angel took a similar approach with their 1987 debut, The Ultra-Violence. In 1988, Suicidal Tendencies, who had previously been a straightforward hardcore punk band, released their major label debut How Will I Laugh Tomorrow When I Can't Even Smile Today.

Sepultura's third album, Beneath the Remains, earned them some mainstream appeal as it was released by Roadrunner Records. Testament continued through the late 1980s with The New Order and Practice What You Preach, both albums showing the band's musical growth and gaining Testament nearly the same level of popularity as the "Big Four".[19][20] Vio-lence and Forbidden, two relative latecomers to the Bay Area thrash metal scene, released their debut albums Eternal Nightmare and Forbidden Evil in 1988. Canadian thrashers Annihilator released their highly technical debut Alice in Hell in 1989, which was praised for its fast riffs and extended guitar solos. Sadus appeared later, demonstrating a sound which was primarily driven by the fretless bass of Steve DiGiorgio. In Germany, Sodom released Agent Orange, and Kreator would release Extreme Aggression.
From 1987 to 1989, Overkill released Taking Over, Under the Influence and The Years of Decay, three albums considered their best. In 1988, Slayer released South of Heaven, Megadeth released So Far, So Good... So What!, Anthrax released State of Euphoria while Metallica's ...And Justice for All spawned the band's first video, the World War I-themed song "One".
A substantial number of thrash metal groups pay tribute to punk rock and hardcore punk. Metallica has covered Discharge ("Free Speech for the Dumb"), Anti-Nowhere League ("So What?"), Killing Joke ("the Wait"), Ramones ("53rd & 3rd", among others), and The Misfits ("Die Die my Darling", "Last Caress/Green Hell"),[21] and Slayer recorded Undisputed Attitude, an album of punk rock covers, including Minor Threat, early DRI, and Iggy and the Stooges.[22] Megadeth have covered two Sex Pistols songs ("Anarchy in the UK" and "Problems"), as have Anthrax ("God Save the Queen" and "Friggin' in the Riggin"). Anthrax have also covered "Protest and Survive" by Discharge on their album Attack of the Killer B's, "We're a Happy Family" by Ramones, and "New Noise" by the Swedish band Refused as a hidden track on Worship Music. Overkill have covered the Sex Pistols ("No Feelings"), Ramones ("I'm Against it"), and Dead Boys ("Sonic Reducer", and "Ain't Nothing to Do"). In addition, Pantera covered Poison Idea ("the Badge").[23]
1990s[edit]




During the 1990s, there were thrash metal bands that were abandoning the thrash metal genre. In spite of this, Pantera (pictured) were using elements of thrash metal in their groove metal style.


A number of more typical but technically sophisticated albums were released in 1990, including Megadeth's Rust in Peace, Anthrax's Persistence of Time, Slayer's Seasons in the Abyss, Suicidal Tendencies' Lights...Camera...Revolution!, Testament's Souls of Black, Kreator's Coma of Souls, Destruction's Cracked Brain, Forbidden's Twisted into Form, Exodus' Impact Is Imminent, and the more groove-oriented Pantera's Cowboys from Hell. All of those albums were commercial high points for the aforementioned artists. Many of these bands embarked on a group tour called the "Clash of the Titans" the same year. Several albums that continued this style, which had come to be known as technical thrash metal, were released in 1991, such as Overkill's Horrorscope, Heathen's Victims of Deception, Dark Angel's Time Does Not Heal, and Coroner's Mental Vortex.
Later in 1991, Metallica released their eponymous album, known as "The Black Album". The album marked a stylistic change in the band, eliminating much of the speed and longer song structures of the band's previous work, and instead focusing on more concise and slower songs. It would go on to become the band's best selling album, and began a wave of thrash metal bands releasing more commercially oriented albums.
After the commercial and artistic climax for the genre, the energy of the thrash metal was exhausted and it was overtaken by the rising alternative metal and grunge movements.[24] In the 1990s many veteran thrash metal bands began changing to more accessible, radio-friendly styles.[25] Metallica was a notable example of this shift, particularly with their mid–to–late 1990s albums Load, and ReLoad, which displayed minor blues and southern rock influences, and were seen as a major departure from the band's earlier sound.[26] Megadeth took a more accessible heavy metal route starting with their 1992 album Countdown to Extinction,[27] and Testament released the melodic The Ritual in 1992.[28]
As further extreme metal genres came to prominence in the 1990s (industrial metal, death metal, and black metal each finding their own fanbase, the heavy metal "family tree" soon found itself blending aesthetics and styles.[29] For example, bands with all the musical traits of thrash metal began using death growls, a vocal style borrowed from death metal, while black metal bands often utilized the airy feel of synthesizers, popularized in industrial metal. Today the placing of bands within distinct subgenres remains a source of contention for heavy metal fans, however, little debate resides over the fact that thrash metal is the sole proprietor of its respective spinoffs.
2000s and 2010s[edit]
Many 1980s-era thrash bands who split or were inactive during the 1990s – such as Dark Angel, Death Angel, Nuclear Assault, and Forbidden – reunited in the 2000s. Notable bands returned to their roots with releases such as Metallica's Death Magnetic (2008), Megadeth's Endgame (2009), Slayer's World Painted Blood (2009), Exodus' Exhibit B: The Human Condition (2010), Anthrax's Worship Music (2011), Overkill's The Electric Age (2012), Testament's Dark Roots of Earth (2012), and Flotsam and Jetsam's Ugly Noise (2012).
In September 2009, it was announced that Metallica's Lars Ulrich was attempting to assemble a tour with the "Big Four" on one bill. "It all started when Rick Rubin encouraged us, a couple of years before, to revisit some of our earlier records," he told Kerrang! founder Geoff Barton in 2010. "Last year, we sat down and took stock of all the good fortune and good times we'd enjoyed. And we basically – as you know, because you were invited – tried to put 200 of the people who were primarily responsible for us being inducted into the Hall of Fame in one room, in one place, for a couple of days. We got most of them over to Cleveland, where the ceremony was held, and it was a great trip down memory lane. In the wake of that, this whole thing – the Big Four tour – came up."[30]
The bands shared the stage for seven shows in the Sonisphere Festival concert series. The first took place in Warsaw, Poland; the last one in Istanbul, Turkey. In May 2010, Metallica announced that the concert in Sofia, Bulgaria on June 22, 2010 would be transmitted via satellite to movie theaters across the United States, Europe, Canada, and Latin America. The show also provided the historic moment of all current members of the Big Four (bar Slayer's Tom Araya, Kerry King and Jeff Hanneman) sharing the stage to perform "Am I Evil?" by Diamond Head.
Genre spinoffs[edit]
Thrash metal is directly responsible for the development of underground metal genres, such as death metal and black metal.[31] In addition to this, metalcore, grindcore and deathcore employ similar riffs in their composition, the former with more focus on melody rather than chromaticism. The blending of punk ethos and metal's brutal nature led to even more extreme, underground styles after thrash metal began gaining mild commercial success in the late 1980s.[32] With gorier subject matter, heavier downtuning of guitars, more consistent use of blast beat drumming, and darker, atonal death growls, death metal was established in the mid-1980s.
Black metal, also related to thrash metal, has emerged at the same time, with many black metal bands taking influence from thrash metal bands such as Venom.[33] Black metal continued deviating from thrash metal, often providing more orchestral overtones, open tremolo picking, blast beat drumming, shrieked or raspy vocals and pagan or occult-based aesthetics to distinguish itself from thrash metal. Thrash metal with stronger punk elements is called crossover thrash. Its overall sound is more punk-influenced than traditional thrash metal, but has more heavy metal elements than hardcore punk and thrashcore.[34]
Regional scenes[edit]
Thrash metal emerged predominantly from a handful of regional scenes, each of which was generally distinguished by the unique characteristics of its bands.

Bay Area thrash metal: In addition to being the most commercially successful, San Francisco Bay Area thrash tended to be the most progressive and technical of the major regional thrash scenes, being strongly NWOBHM influenced. Metallica, Testament, Exodus, Death Angel, Vio-lence, Possessed, and Forbidden are prominent examples of bands to emerge from this region.
East Coast thrash metal: Centered in New York City, the East Coast's thrash metal tended to display a sound that incorporated a strong hardcore punk influence. An emphasis was placed on aggression and speed rather than technicality. Anthrax, Overkill, Nuclear Assault, Toxik, and Whiplash exemplified the style to emerge from this regional scene.
British thrash metal: The British thrash bands leaned towards a more traditional heavy metal approach, often heavier and less aggressive than their American counterparts. The most notable bands from this scene are Onslaught, Xentrix, and Sabbat.
Brazilian thrash metal: The Brazilian thrash scene is notable for producing a handful of bands that would become principal parts of thrash metal's prevalence in the early 1990s. There were three scenes where Brazilian thrash metal was originated: Belo Horizonte (the most prominent), São Paulo, and Rio de Janeiro. The most famous bands from this scene are Sepultura, Dorsal Atlântica, Executer, Chakal, MX, Korzus, and Sarcófago.
Teutonic thrash metal: The German and Swiss region spawned dozens of bands since the mid-1980s that developed its own style. The most prominent bands from this scene are Kreator, Destruction, Sodom, Tankard, Coroner, Holy Moses, and Exumer.

See also[edit]

List of thrash metal bands

Notes[edit]


^ Prato, Greg (16 September 2014). Primus, Over the Electric Grapevine: Insight into Primus and the World of Les Claypool. Akashic Books. ISBN 978-1-61775-322-0. 
^ Bowar, Chad. "What Is Thrash Metal?". About.com. Retrieved January 28, 2014. 
^ McIver, Joel (April 29, 2010). "A History of Thrash Metal". Total Guitar. MusicRadar. Retrieved June 17, 2014. 
^ Weinstein 2000, p. 48.
^ Pillsbury 2006, p. 20.
^ Anthony, David (August 1, 2014). "Anthrax's ode to Judge Dredd became thrash metal's missing link". The A.V. Club. Retrieved August 26, 2014. 
^ Weinstein 2000, p. 50-51.
^ "This Months Q's 50, Stone Cold Crazy". Q. February 2011. 
^ Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Black Sabbath: Symptom of the Universe". AllMusic. Retrieved August 27, 2014. 
^ Burton, Brent (August 30, 2011). "Two classic D.C. hardcore bands empty their vaults". Washington City Paper. Retrieved August 11, 2012. 
^ Raggett, Ned. "The Faith/Void Split LP". AllMusic. Retrieved August 11, 2012. 
^ Heller, Jason (March 28, 2013). "An introduction to the snarling, belligerent rebelliousness of thrash". The A.V. Club. Retrieved July 13, 2013. 
^ Dome, Malcolm (February 23, 1984). "Anthrax: Fistful Of Metal". Kerrang!. London, UK: Spotlight Publications Ltd. 62: 8. 
^ Rivadavia, Eduardo. "Stress Biography". AllMusic. Retrieved June 20, 2012. 
^ Huey, Steve. "Megadeth: Peace Sells...But Who's Buying?". AllMusic. Retrieved August 26, 2014. 
^ "Slayer band page". Rockdetector.com. Archived from the original on 2007-09-30. Retrieved 2010-08-10. 
^ Huey, Steve. "Slayer: Reign in Blood". AllMusic. Retrieved August 10, 2010. 
^ Lee, Cosmo (2006). "Interview with Cannibal Corpse". Invisible Oranges. Archived from the original on July 3, 2007. Retrieved August 29, 2014. 
^ Lee, Cosmo (May 7, 2007). "Get Thrashed: The Story of Thrash Metal". Stylus Magazine. Retrieved January 28, 2014. 
^ Ferris, D.X. (August 8, 2007). "Talkin' Thrash". Cleveland Scene. Archived from the original on November 10, 2007. Retrieved September 3, 2014. 
^ Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Metallica: Garage, Inc". AllMusic. Retrieved August 26, 2014. 
^ Jurek, Thom. "Slayer: Undisputed Attitude". AllMusic. Retrieved August 26, 2014. 
^ "Poison Idea's Pig Champion Was Large in Life, Large in Passing". Blabbermouth.net. February 6, 2006. Retrieved July 11, 2012. 
^ Mclver, Joel (2009). The Bloody Reign of Slayer. Omnibus Press. 
^ "Speed/Thrash Metal". AllMusic. Retrieved January 30, 2014. 
^ Sharpe-Young 2007, p. 256.
^ Sharpe-Young 2007, p. 241.
^ Syme, Anthony. "Interview with Chuck Billy". MetalUpdate.com. Retrieved September 1, 2014. 
^ Dunn, Sam (2005). Metal: A Headbanger's Journey. IMDB.
^ Barton, Geoff: "The Big Four reunite"; Classic Rock #148, August 2010, p19
^ Weinstein 2000, p. 288.
^ Sharpe-Young 2007, p. 162.
^ Sharpe-Young 2007, p. 208.
^ Claes, Sean. "Superjoint Ritual Feature Interview". Blistering. Archived from the original on August 20, 2004. Retrieved August 10, 2010. 


Bibliography[edit]

Ekeroth, Daniel (2008). Swedish Death Metal. Bazillion Points Books. ISBN 978-0-9796163-1-0. 
Pillsbury, Glenn (2006). Damage Incorporated: Metallica and the Production of Musical Identity. Routledge. ISBN 1-136-09122-X. 
Sharpe-Young, Garry (2007). Thrash Metal. Zonda Books Limited. ISBN 978-0-9582684-3-1. 
Weinstein, Deena (2000). Heavy Metal: The Music and Its Culture. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-80970-5. 







v
t
e


Heavy metal



Subgenres and
fusion genres



Alternative metal
Avant-garde metal
Black metal
Blackgaze
Celtic metal
Christian metal
Crossover thrash
Crust punk
Cyber metal
Deathgrind
Death metal
Death 'n' roll
Deathcore
Death-doom
Djent
Doom metal
Drone metal
Extreme metal
Folk metal
Funk metal
Glam metal
Goregrind
Gothic metal
Grindcore
Groove metal
Industrial metal
Kawaii metal
Latin metal
Mathcore
Medieval metal
Melodic death metal
Melodic metalcore
Metalcore
National Socialist black metal
Neoclassical metal
Neue Deutsche Härte
Nu metal
Nu metalcore
Pagan metal
Pirate metal
Pornogrind
Post-metal
Power metal
Progressive metal
Progressive metalcore
Rap metal
Sludge metal
Speed metal
Stoner metal
Symphonic black metal
Symphonic metal
Technical death metal
Thrash metal
Traditional heavy metal
Unblack metal
Viking metal





Musical elements



Bass

Bass stack
Fuzz bass


Death growl
Drumming

Blast beat
Cymbal choke
Double bass drumming
Gallop drumbeat


Guitar

Distortion
Dropped tunings
Guitar solo
Palm muting
Power chord
Shred guitar
Stacks


Lyrics





Notable scenes
and movements



African heavy metal
Argentine heavy metal
Australian thrash metal
Australian heavy metal
Bay Area thrash metal
Brazilian thrash metal
Chinese heavy metal
Hungarian metal
Japanese metal
Les Légions Noires
New wave of American heavy metal
New wave of British heavy metal
Norwegian black metal
Swedish death metal
Teutonic thrash metal
Ukrainian metal





Controversies



Lyrics
National Socialist black metal
Poseur





Culture



Bands
Fashion
Festivals
Headbanging
Heavy metal subculture
Sign of the horns
Umlaut








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Extreme metal



Genres



Black metal
death metal
doom metal
speed metal
thrash metal





Subgenres




Black metal



Ambient black metal
industrial black metal
symphonic black metal
war metal





Death metal



Melodic death metal
slam death metal
symphonic death metal
technical death metal





Doom metal



Epic doom
funeral doom
traditional doom








Fusion genres



Black-doom
black 'n' roll
blackened death metal
blackgaze
crossover thrash
crust punk
death-doom
death 'n' roll
drone metal
grindcore

deathgrind
goregrind
pornogrind


metalcore

deathcore
electronicore
mathcore
melodic metalcore
nu metalcore
progressive metalcore


pagan metal
sludge metal
stoner metal
Viking metal





Derivative forms



Avant-garde metal
funk metal
gothic metal
groove metal
neoclassical metal
post-metal
power metal





Notable scenes



Australian thrash metal
Bay Area thrash metal
Brazilian thrash metal
Les Légions Noires
Norwegian black metal
Swedish death metal
Teutonic thrash metal





Other topics



Growling
hardcore punk
heavy metal subgenres
list of bands
moshing
NWOBHM
shrieking






 Heavy metal music portal










v
t
e


Hardcore punk



Styles



Bandana thrash
Black metal
Christian hardcore
Crossover thrash
Crunkcore
Crust punk
D-beat
Deathcore
Deathgrind
Death metal
Digital hardcore
Electronicore
Emo
Goregrind
Grindcore
Groove metal
Heavy hardcore
Mathcore
Melodic hardcore
Melodic metalcore
Metalcore
Nardcore
Nintendocore
Nu metalcore
Pornogrind
Post-hardcore
Powerviolence
Progressive metalcore
Queercore
Rapcore
Riot grrrl
Screamo
Skacore
Skate punk
Sludge metal
Street punk
Taqwacore
Thrash metal
Thrashcore





Regional scenes




International



Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Canada
Italy
Greece
Japan
Scandinavia
Yugoslavia





United States



Boston
California
Chicago
Minneapolis
New Jersey
New York
Philadelphia
Washington, D.C.








Other topics



DIY ethic
Hardline
Hardcore skinhead
List of hardcore genres
List of hardcore punk bands
List of musicians in the second wave of punk music
Moshing
Oi!
Poseur
Punk ideologies
Punk subculture (includes section on hardcore)
Straight edge
Youth crew






 Portal









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thrash_metal&oldid=818303140"					Categories: Thrash metalHeavy metal genresExtreme metal1980s in music1990s in music2000s in music2010s in music21st-century music genres20th-century music genresMusic of CaliforniaMusic of New JerseyMusic of New York CityMusic of New York (state)Brazilian styles of musicBritish styles of musicAmerican styles of musicGerman styles of musicHidden categories: Articles using Template:Infobox music genre with invalid colour combinationArticles with hAudio microformatsAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from March 2016