



Sihwa Lake Tidal Power Station, located in Gyeonggi Province, South Korea, is the world's largest tidal power installation, with a total power output capacity of 254 MW.




Part of a series on


Renewable energy




Biofuel
Biomass
Geothermal
Hydropower
Solar energy
Tidal power
Wave power
Wind power






Topics by country
100% renewable energy
Marketing and policy trends







v
t
e







Part of a series about


Sustainable energy





Energy conservation




Cogeneration
Efficient energy use
Green building
Heat pump
Low-carbon power
Microgeneration
Passive solar building design




Renewable energy




Anaerobic digestion
Biofuel
Geothermal
Hydroelectricity
Solar
Tidal
Wave
Wind




Sustainable transport




Carbon-neutral fuel
Electric vehicle
Fossil fuel phase-out
Green vehicle
Plug-in hybrid





 Sustainable development portal


 Renewable energy portal
 Environment portal








v
t
e





Tidal power or tidal energy is a form of hydropower that converts the energy obtained from tides into useful forms of power, mainly electricity.
Although not yet widely used, tidal energy has potential for future electricity generation. Tides are more predictable than the wind and the sun. Among sources of renewable energy, tidal energy has traditionally suffered from relatively high cost and limited availability of sites with sufficiently high tidal ranges or flow velocities, thus constricting its total availability. However, many recent[when? clarification needed] technological developments and improvements, both in design (e.g. dynamic tidal power, tidal lagoons) and turbine technology (e.g. new axial turbines, cross flow turbines), indicate that the total availability of tidal power may be much higher than previously assumed, and that economic and environmental costs may be brought down to competitive levels.
Historically, tide mills have been used both in Europe and on the Atlantic coast of North America. The incoming water was contained in large storage ponds, and as the tide went out, it turned waterwheels that used the mechanical power it produced to mill grain.[1] The earliest occurrences date from the Middle Ages, or even from Roman times.[2][3] The process of using falling water and spinning turbines to create electricity was introduced in the U.S. and Europe in the 19th century.[4]
The world's first large-scale tidal power plant was the Rance Tidal Power Station in France, which became operational in 1966. It was the largest tidal power station in terms of output until Sihwa Lake Tidal Power Station opened in South Korea in August 2011. The Sihwa station uses sea wall defense barriers complete with 10 turbines generating 254 MW.[5]



Contents


1 Generation of tidal energy
2 Generating methods

2.1 Tidal stream generator
2.2 Tidal barrage
2.3 Dynamic tidal power
2.4 Tidal lagoon


3 US and Canadian studies in the twentieth century
4 US Studies in the twenty first century
5 Tidal power development in the UK
6 Current and future tidal power schemes
7 Tidal power issues

7.1 Environmental concerns

7.1.1 Tidal turbines
7.1.2 Tidal barrage
7.1.3 Tidal lagoon


7.2 Corrosion
7.3 Fouling


8 Structural Health Monitoring
9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 External links



Generation of tidal energy[edit]




Variation of tides over a day


Main articles: Tide and Tidal acceleration
Tidal power is taken from the Earth's oceanic tides. Tidal forces are periodic variations in gravitational attraction exerted by celestial bodies. These forces create corresponding motions or currents in the world's oceans. Due to the strong attraction to the oceans, a bulge in the water level is created, causing a temporary increase in sea level. When the sea level is raised, water from the middle of the ocean is forced to move toward the shorelines, creating a tide. This occurrence takes place in an unfailing manner, due to the consistent pattern of the moon’s orbit around the earth.[6] The magnitude and character of this motion reflects the changing positions of the Moon and Sun relative to the Earth, the effects of Earth's rotation, and local geography of the sea floor and coastlines.
Tidal power is the only technology that draws on energy inherent in the orbital characteristics of the Earth–Moon system, and to a lesser extent in the Earth–Sun system. Other natural energies exploited by human technology originate directly or indirectly with the Sun, including fossil fuel, conventional hydroelectric, wind, biofuel, wave and solar energy. Nuclear energy makes use of Earth's mineral deposits of fissionable elements, while geothermal power taps the Earth's internal heat, which comes from a combination of residual heat from planetary accretion (about 20%) and heat produced through radioactive decay (80%).[7]
A tidal generator converts the energy of tidal flows into electricity. Greater tidal variation and higher tidal current velocities can dramatically increase the potential of a site for tidal electricity generation.
Because the Earth's tides are ultimately due to gravitational interaction with the Moon and Sun and the Earth's rotation, tidal power is practically inexhaustible and classified as a renewable energy resource. Movement of tides causes a loss of mechanical energy in the Earth–Moon system: this is a result of pumping of water through natural restrictions around coastlines and consequent viscous dissipation at the seabed and in turbulence. This loss of energy has caused the rotation of the Earth to slow in the 4.5 billion years since its formation. During the last 620 million years the period of rotation of the earth (length of a day) has increased from 21.9 hours to 24 hours;[8] in this period the Earth has lost 17% of its rotational energy. While tidal power will take additional energy from the system, the effect[clarification needed] is negligible and would only be noticed over millions of years.[citation needed]
Generating methods[edit]




The world's first commercial-scale and grid-connected tidal stream generator – SeaGen – in Strangford Lough.[9] The strong wake shows the power in the tidal current.


Tidal power can be classified into four generating methods:
Tidal stream generator[edit]
Main article: Tidal stream generator
Tidal stream generators make use of the kinetic energy of moving water to power turbines, in a similar way to wind turbines that use wind to power turbines. Some tidal generators can be built into the structures of existing bridges or are entirely submersed, thus avoiding concerns over impact on the natural landscape. Land constrictions such as straits or inlets can create high velocities at specific sites, which can be captured with the use of turbines. These turbines can be horizontal, vertical, open, or ducted.[10]
Tidal barrage[edit]
Main article: Tidal barrage
Tidal barrages make use of the potential energy in the difference in height (or hydraulic head) between high and low tides. When using tidal barrages to generate power, the potential energy from a tide is seized through strategic placement of specialized dams. When the sea level rises and the tide begins to come in, the temporary increase in tidal power is channeled into a large basin behind the dam, holding a large amount of potential energy. With the receding tide, this energy is then converted into mechanical energy as the water is released through large turbines that create electrical power through the use of generators.[11] Barrages are essentially dams across the full width of a tidal estuary.
Dynamic tidal power[edit]
Main article: Dynamic tidal power




Top-down view of a DTP dam. Blue and dark red colors indicate low and high tides, respectively.


Dynamic tidal power (or DTP) is an untried but promising technology that would exploit an interaction between potential and kinetic energies in tidal flows. It proposes that very long dams (for example: 30–50 km length) be built from coasts straight out into the sea or ocean, without enclosing an area. Tidal phase differences are introduced across the dam, leading to a significant water-level differential in shallow coastal seas – featuring strong coast-parallel oscillating tidal currents such as found in the UK, China, and Korea.
Tidal lagoon[edit]
A new tidal energy design option is to construct circular retaining walls embedded with turbines that can capture the potential energy of tides. The created reservoirs are similar to those of tidal barrages, except that the location is artificial and does not contain a preexisting ecosystem.[10] The lagoons can also be in double (or triple) format without pumping[12] or with pumping[13] that will flatten out the power output. The pumping power could be provided by excess to grid demand renewable energy from for example wind turbines or solar photovoltaic arrays. Excess renewable energy rather than being curtailed could be used and stored for a later period of time. Geographically dispersed tidal lagoons with a time delay between peak production would also flatten out peak production providing near base load production though at a higher cost than some other alternatives such as district heating renewable energy storage. The proposed Tidal Lagoon Swansea Bay in Wales, United Kingdom would be the first tidal power station of this type once built.[14]
US and Canadian studies in the twentieth century[edit]
The first study of large scale tidal power plants was by the US Federal Power Commission in 1924 which if built would have been located in the northern border area of the US state of Maine and the south eastern border area of the Canadian province of New Brunswick, with various dams, powerhouses, and ship locks enclosing the Bay of Fundy and Passamaquoddy Bay (note: see map in reference). Nothing came of the study and it is unknown whether Canada had been approached about the study by the US Federal Power Commission.[15]
In 1956, utility Nova Scotia Light and Power of Halifax commissioned a pair of studies into the feasibility of commercial tidal power development on the Nova Scotia side of the Bay of Fundy. The two studies, by Stone & Webster of Boston and by Montreal Engineering Company of Montreal independently concluded that millions of horsepower could be harnessed from Fundy but that development costs would be commercially prohibitive at that time.[16]
There was also a report on the international commission in April 1961 entitled "Investigation of the International Passamaquoddy Tidal Power Project" produced by both the US and Canadian Federal Governments. According to benefit to costs ratios, the project was beneficial to the US but not to Canada. A highway system along the top of the dams was envisioned as well.
A study was commissioned by the Canadian, Nova Scotian and New Brunswick governments (Reassessment of Fundy Tidal Power) to determine the potential for tidal barrages at Chignecto Bay and Minas Basin – at the end of the Fundy Bay estuary. There were three sites determined to be financially feasible: Shepody Bay (1550 MW), Cumberline Basin (1085 MW), and Cobequid Bay (3800 MW). These were never built despite their apparent feasibility in 1977.[17]
US Studies in the twenty first century[edit]
A project to create a tidal power installation was begun in early 2014 by the Snohomish PUD in Washington but was ended in late 2014 due to problems obtaining funding.[18]
Tidal power development in the UK[edit]
The world's first marine energy test facility was established in 2003 to start the development of the wave and tidal energy industry in the UK. Based in Orkney, Scotland, the European Marine Energy Centre (EMEC) has supported the deployment of more wave and tidal energy devices than at any other single site in the world. EMEC provides a variety of test sites in real sea conditions. Its grid connected tidal test site is located at the Fall of Warness, off the island of Eday, in a narrow channel which concentrates the tide as it flows between the Atlantic Ocean and North Sea. This area has a very strong tidal current, which can travel up to 4 m/s (8 knots) in spring tides. Tidal energy developers that have tested at the site include: Alstom (formerly Tidal Generation Ltd); ANDRITZ HYDRO Hammerfest; Atlantis Resources Corporation; Nautricity; OpenHydro; Scotrenewables Tidal Power; Voith.[19] The resource could be 4 TJ per year.[20] Elsewhere in the UK, annual energy of 50 TWh can be extracted if 25 GW capacity is installed with pivotable blades.[21][22][23]
Current and future tidal power schemes[edit]
Main article: List of tidal power stations

The first tidal power station was the Rance tidal power plant built over a period of 6 years from 1960 to 1966 at La Rance, France.[24] It has 240 MW installed capacity.
254 MW Sihwa Lake Tidal Power Plant in South Korea is the largest tidal power installation in the world. Construction was completed in 2011.[25][26]
The first tidal power site in North America is the Annapolis Royal Generating Station, Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia, which opened in 1984 on an inlet of the Bay of Fundy.[27] It has 20 MW installed capacity.
The Jiangxia Tidal Power Station, south of Hangzhou in China has been operational since 1985, with current installed capacity of 3.2 MW. More tidal power is planned near the mouth of the Yalu River.[28]
The first in-stream tidal current generator in North America (Race Rocks Tidal Power Demonstration Project) was installed at Race Rocks on southern Vancouver Island in September 2006.[29][30] The next phase in the development of this tidal current generator will be in Nova Scotia (Bay of Fundy).[31]
A small project was built by the Soviet Union at Kislaya Guba on the Barents Sea. It has 0.4 MW installed capacity. In 2006 it was upgraded with a 1.2MW experimental advanced orthogonal turbine.
Jindo Uldolmok Tidal Power Plant in South Korea is a tidal stream generation scheme planned to be expanded progressively to 90 MW of capacity by 2013. The first 1 MW was installed in May 2009.[32]
A 1.2 MW SeaGen system became operational in late 2008 on Strangford Lough in Northern Ireland.[33]
The contract for an 812 MW tidal barrage near Ganghwa Island (South Korea) north-west of Incheon has been signed by Daewoo. Completion is planned for 2015.[25]
A 1,320 MW barrage built around islands west of Incheon is proposed by the South Korean government, with projected construction starting in 2017.[34]
The Scottish Government has approved plans for a 10MW array of tidal stream generators near Islay, Scotland, costing 40 million pounds, and consisting of 10 turbines – enough to power over 5,000 homes. The first turbine is expected to be in operation by 2013.[35]
The Indian state of Gujarat is planning to host South Asia's first commercial-scale tidal power station. The company Atlantis Resources planned to install a 50MW tidal farm in the Gulf of Kutch on India's west coast, with construction starting early in 2012.[36]
Ocean Renewable Power Corporation was the first company to deliver tidal power to the US grid in September, 2012 when its pilot TidGen system was successfully deployed in Cobscook Bay, near Eastport.[37]
In New York City, 30 tidal turbines will be installed by Verdant Power in the East River by 2015 with a capacity of 1.05MW.[38]
Construction of a 320 MW tidal lagoon power plant outside the city of Swansea in the UK was granted planning permission in June 2015 and work is expected to start in 2016. Once completed, it will generate over 500GWh of electricity per year, enough to power roughly 155,000 homes.[39]
A turbine project is being installed in Ramsey Sound in 2014.[40][41]
The largest tidal energy project entitled MeyGen (398MW) is currently in construction in the Pentland Firth in northern Scotland [42]
A combination of 5 tidal stream turbines from Tocardo are placed in the Oosterscheldekering, the Netherlands, and have been operational since 2015 with a capacity of 1,2 MW [43]

Tidal power issues[edit]
Environmental concerns[edit]
Tidal power can have effects on marine life. The turbines can accidentally kill swimming sea life with the rotating blades, although projects such as the one in Strangford feature a safety mechanism that turns off the turbine when marine animals approach.[44] Some fish may no longer utilize the area if threatened with a constant rotating or noise-making object. Marine life is a huge factor when placing tidal power energy generators in the water and precautions are made to ensure that as many marine animals as possible will not be affected by it. The Tethys database provides access to scientific literature and general information on the potential environmental effects of tidal energy.[45]
Tidal turbines[edit]
The main environmental concern with tidal energy is associated with blade strike and entanglement of marine organisms as high speed water increases the risk of organisms being pushed near or through these devices. As with all offshore renewable energies, there is also a concern about how the creation of EMF and acoustic outputs may affect marine organisms. It should be noted that because these devices are in the water, the acoustic output can be greater than those created with offshore wind energy. Depending on the frequency and amplitude of sound generated by the tidal energy devices, this acoustic output can have varying effects on marine mammals (particularly those who echolocate to communicate and navigate in the marine environment, such as dolphins and whales). Tidal energy removal can also cause environmental concerns such as degrading farfield water quality and disrupting sediment processes.[46] Depending on the size of the project, these effects can range from small traces of sediment building up near the tidal device to severely affecting nearshore ecosystems and processes.[47]
Tidal barrage[edit]
Installing a barrage may change the shoreline within the bay or estuary, affecting a large ecosystem that depends on tidal flats. Inhibiting the flow of water in and out of the bay, there may also be less flushing of the bay or estuary, causing additional turbidity (suspended solids) and less saltwater, which may result in the death of fish that act as a vital food source to birds and mammals. Migrating fish may also be unable to access breeding streams, and may attempt to pass through the turbines. The same acoustic concerns apply to tidal barrages. Decreasing shipping accessibility can become a socio-economic issue, though locks can be added to allow slow passage. However, the barrage may improve the local economy by increasing land access as a bridge. Calmer waters may also allow better recreation in the bay or estuary.[47] In August 2004, a humpback whale swam through the open sluice gate of the Annapolis Royal Generating Station at slack tide, ending up trapped for several days before eventually finding its way out to the Annapolis Basin.[48]
Tidal lagoon[edit]
Environmentally, the main concerns are blade strike on fish attempting to enter the lagoon, acoustic output from turbines, and changes in sedimentation processes. However, all these effects are localized and do not affect the entire estuary or bay.[47]
Corrosion[edit]
Salt water causes corrosion in metal parts. It can be difficult to maintain tidal stream generators due to their size and depth in the water. The use of corrosion-resistant materials such as stainless steels, high-nickel alloys, copper-nickel alloys, nickel-copper alloys and titanium can greatly reduce, or eliminate, corrosion damage.
Mechanical fluids, such as lubricants, can leak out, which may be harmful to the marine life nearby. Proper maintenance can minimize the amount of harmful chemicals that may enter the environment.
Fouling[edit]
The biological events that happen when placing any structure in an area of high tidal currents and high biological productivity in the ocean will ensure that the structure becomes an ideal substrate for the growth of marine organisms. In the references of the Tidal Current Project at Race Rocks in British Columbia this is documented. Also see this page and Several structural materials and coatings were tested by the Lester Pearson College divers to assist Clean Current in reducing fouling on the turbine and other underwater infrastructure.
Structural Health Monitoring[edit]
The high load factors resulting from the fact that water is 800 times denser than air and the predictable and reliable nature of tides compared with the wind makes tidal energy particularly attractive for Electric power generation. Condition monitoring is the key for exploiting it cost-efficiently.[49]
See also[edit]


Renewable energy portal
Energy portal
Sustainable development portal



Tidal power in New Zealand
Tidal power in Scotland
World energy resources and consumption
Structural health monitoring
Marine energy

Notes[edit]


Baker, A. C. 1991, Tidal power, Peter Peregrinus Ltd., London.
Baker, G. C., Wilson E. M., Miller, H., Gibson, R. A. & Ball, M., 1980. "The Annapolis tidal power pilot project", in Waterpower '79 Proceedings, ed. Anon, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, pp 550–559.
Hammons, T. J. 1993, "Tidal power", Proceedings of the IEEE, [Online], v81, n3, pp 419–433. Available from: IEEE/IEEE Xplore. [July 26, 2004].
Lecomber, R. 1979, "The evaluation of tidal power projects", in Tidal Power and Estuary Management, eds. Severn, R. T., Dineley, D. L. & Hawker, L. E., Henry Ling Ltd., Dorchester, pp 31–39.


References[edit]


^ Ocean Energy Council (2011). "Tidal Energy: Pros for Wave and Tidal Power". [permanent dead link]
^ "Microsoft Word - RS01j.doc" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-05-17. Retrieved 2011-04-05. 
^ Minchinton, W. E. (October 1979). "Early Tide Mills: Some Problems". Technology and Culture. Society for the History of Technology. 20 (4): 777–786. doi:10.2307/3103639. JSTOR 3103639. 
^ Dorf, Richard (1981). The Energy Factbook. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
^ Glenday, Craig (2013). Guinness world records 2014. ISBN 9781908843159. 
^ DiCerto, JJ (1976). The Electric Wishing Well: The Solution to the Energy Crisis. New York: Macmillan. 
^ Turcotte, D. L.; Schubert, G. (2002). "Chapter 4". Geodynamics (2nd ed.). Cambridge, England, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 136–137. ISBN 978-0-521-66624-4. 
^ George E. Williams (2000). "Geological constraints on the Precambrian history of Earth's rotation and the Moon's orbit". Reviews of Geophysics. 38 (1): 37–60. Bibcode:2000RvGeo..38...37W. doi:10.1029/1999RG900016. 
^ Douglas, C. A.; Harrison, G. P.; Chick, J. P. (2008). "Life cycle assessment of the Seagen marine current turbine". Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part M: Journal of Engineering for the Maritime Environment. 222 (1): 1–12. doi:10.1243/14750902JEME94. 
^ a b "Tidal - Capturing tidal fluctuations with turbines, tidal barrages, or tidal lagoons". Tidal / Tethys. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). Archived from the original on 16 February 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2016. 
^ Evans, Robert (2007). Fueling Our Future: An Introduction to Sustainable Energy. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
^ "Hydrological Changing Double Current-typed Tidal Power Generation" (video). Archived from the original on 2015-10-18. Retrieved 2015-04-15. 
^ "Enhancing Electrical Supply by Pumped Storage in Tidal Lagoons" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-09-24. Retrieved 2014-03-13. 
^ Elsevier Ltd, The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford, OX5 1GB, United Kingdom. "Green light for world's first tidal lagoon". renewableenergyfocus.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2015. Retrieved 26 July 2015. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Niagara's Power From The Tides" Archived 2015-03-21 at the Wayback Machine. May 1924 Popular Science Monthly
^ Nova Scotia Light and Power Company, Limited, Annual Report, 1956
^ Chang, Jen (2008), "6.1", Hydrodynamic Modeling and Feasibility Study of Harnessing Tidal Power at the Bay of Fundy (PDF) (PhD thesis), Los Angeles: University of Southern California, archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-11-22, retrieved 2011-09-27 
^ "Tidal Energy Research | Power Supply | Snohomish County PUD". www.snopud.com. Archived from the original on 2017-06-06. Retrieved 2017-12-06. 
^ "EMEC: European Marine Energy Centre". emec.org.uk. Archived from the original on 2007-01-27. 
^ Lewis, M.; Neill, S.P.; Robins, P.E.; Hashemi, M.R. "Resource assessment for future generations of tidal-stream energy arrays". Energy. 83: 403–415. doi:10.1016/j.energy.2015.02.038. 
^ "Norske oppfinneres turbinteknologi kan bli brukt i britisk tidevannseventyr". Teknisk Ukeblad. 14 January 2017. Archived from the original on 15 January 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2017. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-01-18. Retrieved 2017-01-15. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2017-01-16. Retrieved 2017-01-15. 
^ L'Usine marémotrice de la Rance Archived April 8, 2005, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b "Hunt for African Projects". Newsworld.co.kr. Archived from the original on 2011-07-19. Retrieved 2011-04-05. 
^ "Tidal power plant nears completion". yonhapnews.co.kr. Archived from the original on 2012-04-25. 
^ "Nova Scotia Power - Environment - Green Power- Tidal". Nspower.ca. Archived from the original on 2011-06-12. Retrieved 2011-04-05. 
^ "China Endorses 300 MW Ocean Energy Project". Renewableenergyworld.com. Archived from the original on 2012-07-15. Retrieved 2011-04-05. 
^ "Race Rocks Demonstration Project". Cleancurrent.com. Archived from the original on 2008-07-05. Retrieved 2011-04-05. 
^ "Tidal Energy, Ocean Energy". Racerocks.com. Archived from the original on 2011-06-12. Retrieved 2011-04-05. 
^ "Information for media inquiries". Cleancurrent.com. 2009-11-13. Archived from the original on 2007-06-03. Retrieved 2011-04-05. 
^ Korea's first tidal power plant built in Uldolmok, Jindo[dead link]
^ "Tidal energy system on full power". BBC News. December 18, 2008. Archived from the original on August 26, 2010. Retrieved March 26, 2010. 
^ $ 3-B tidal power plant proposed near Korean islands
^ "Islay to get major tidal power scheme". BBC. March 17, 2011. Archived from the original on March 18, 2011. Retrieved 2011-03-19. 
^ "India plans Asian tidal power first". BBC News. January 18, 2011. Archived from the original on January 19, 2011. 
^ "1st tidal power delivered to US grid off Maine" Archived September 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., CBS MoneyWatch, September 14, 2012
^ "Turbines Off NYC East River Will Create Enough Energy to Power 9,500 Homes". U.S. Department of Energy. Archived from the original on 11 February 2012. Retrieved 13 February 2012. 
^ Oliver, Antony (9 June 2015). "Swansea Tidal Lagoon power plant wins planning permission". Infrastructure Intelligence. Archived from the original on 11 September 2015. Retrieved 6 July 2015. 
^ Macalister, Terry. "Tidal power firm signs deal to sell electricity to EDF Energy Archived 2016-10-12 at the Wayback Machine." The Guardian, 25 September 2014.
^ , Ellie. "First full-scale tidal generator in Wales unveiled: Deltastream array to power 10,000 homes using ebb and flow of the ocean Archived 2014-08-28 at the Wayback Machine." Daily Mail, 7 August 2014.
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-12-02. Retrieved 2016-12-01. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2017-08-18. Retrieved 2017-07-06. 
^ "Tidal Energy Technology Brief" (PDF). International Renewable Energy Agency. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 November 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2015. 
^ "Tethys". Archived from the original on 2016-05-15. 
^ Martin-Short, R.; Hill, J.; Kramer, S. C.; Avdis, A.; Allison, P. A.; Piggott, M. D. (2015-04-01). "Tidal resource extraction in the Pentland Firth, UK: Potential impacts on flow regime and sediment transport in the Inner Sound of Stroma". Renewable Energy. 76: 596–607. doi:10.1016/j.renene.2014.11.079. 
^ a b c "Tethys". Archived from the original on 2014-05-25. 
^ "Whale still drawing crowds at N.S. river". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 2016-03-04. 
^ "Structural Health Monitoring in Composite Tidal energy converters". Archived from the original on 2014-03-25. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tidal power.



Enhanced tidal lagoon with pumped storage and constant output as proposed by David J.C. MacKay, Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, UK.
Marine and Hydrokinetic Technology Database The U.S. Department of Energy's Marine and Hydrokinetic Technology Database provides up-to-date information on marine and hydrokinetic renewable energy, both in the U.S. and around the world.
Tethys Database A database of information on potential environmental effects of marine and hydrokinetic and offshore wind energy development.
Severn Estuary Partnership: Tidal Power Resource Page
Location of Potential Tidal Stream Power sites in the UK
University of Strathclyde ESRU—Detailed analysis of marine energy resource, current energy capture technology appraisal and environmental impact outline
Coastal Research - Foreland Point Tidal Turbine and warnings on proposed Severn Barrage
Sustainable Development Commission - Report looking at 'Tidal Power in the UK', including proposals for a Severn barrage
World Energy Council - Report on Tidal Energy
European Marine Energy Centre - Listing of Tidal Energy Developers -retrieved 1 July 2011 (link updated 31 January 2014)
Resources on Tidal Energy
Structural Health Monitoring of composite tidal energy converters







v
t
e


Ocean energy



Wave power



Australia
New Zealand
United States








Tidal power



New Zealand
Annapolis Royal Generating Station





Other



Marine current power
Offshore construction
Ocean thermal energy conversion
Osmotic power
Pelamis wave energy converter
SDE Sea Waves Power Plant
Wind power (offshore)
Wave farm








 Ocean energy
 Portals: Energy
Renewable energy
Sustainable development












v
t
e


Physical oceanography



Waves



Airy wave theory
Ballantine scale
Benjamin–Feir instability
Boussinesq approximation
Breaking wave
Clapotis
Cnoidal wave
Cross sea
Dispersion
Edge wave
Equatorial waves
Fetch
Gravity wave
Green's law
Infragravity wave
Internal wave
Iribarren number
Kelvin wave
Kinematic wave
Longshore drift
Luke's variational principle
Mild-slope equation
Radiation stress
Rogue wave
Rossby wave
Rossby-gravity waves
Sea state
Seiche
Significant wave height
Soliton
Stokes boundary layer
Stokes drift
Stokes wave
Swell
Trochoidal wave
Tsunami

megatsunami


Undertow
Ursell number
Wave action
Wave base
Wave height
Wave power
Wave radar
Wave setup
Wave shoaling
Wave turbulence
Wave–current interaction
Waves and shallow water

one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations
shallow water equations


Wind wave

model
















Circulation



Atmospheric circulation
Baroclinity
Boundary current
Coriolis force
Coriolis–Stokes force
Craik–Leibovich vortex force
Downwelling
Eddy
Ekman layer
Ekman spiral
Ekman transport
El Niño–Southern Oscillation
General circulation model
Geostrophic current
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project
Gulf Stream
Halothermal circulation
Humboldt Current
Hydrothermal circulation
Langmuir circulation
Longshore drift
Loop Current
Modular Ocean Model
Ocean dynamics
Ocean gyre
Princeton Ocean Model
Rip current
Subsurface currents
Sverdrup balance
Thermohaline circulation

shutdown


Upwelling
Whirlpool
World Ocean Circulation Experiment





Tides



Amphidromic point
Earth tide
Head of tide
Internal tide
Lunitidal interval
Perigean spring tide
Rip tide
Rule of twelfths
Slack water
Tidal bore
Tidal force
Tidal power
Tidal race
Tidal range
Tidal resonance
Tide gauge
Tideline





Landforms



Abyssal fan
Abyssal plain
Atoll
Bathymetric chart
Coastal geography
Cold seep
Continental margin
Continental rise
Continental shelf
Contourite
Guyot
Hydrography
Oceanic basin
Oceanic plateau
Oceanic trench
Passive margin
Seabed
Seamount
Submarine canyon
Submarine volcano





Plate
tectonics



Convergent boundary
Divergent boundary
Fracture zone
Hydrothermal vent
Marine geology
Mid-ocean ridge
Mohorovičić discontinuity
Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis
Oceanic crust
Outer trench swell
Ridge push
Seafloor spreading
Slab pull
Slab suction
Slab window
Subduction
Transform fault
Volcanic arc





Ocean zones



Benthic
Deep ocean water
Deep sea
Littoral
Mesopelagic
Oceanic
Pelagic
Photic
Surf
Swash





Sea level



Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis
Future sea level
Global Sea Level Observing System
North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System
Sea-level curve
Sea level rise
World Geodetic System





Acoustics



Deep scattering layer
Hydroacoustics
Ocean acoustic tomography
Sofar bomb
SOFAR channel
Underwater acoustics





Satellites



Jason-1
Jason-2 (Ocean Surface Topography Mission)
Jason-3





Related



Argo
Benthic lander
Color of water
DSV Alvin
Marginal sea
Marine energy
Marine pollution
Mooring
National Oceanographic Data Center
Ocean
Ocean exploration
Ocean observations
Ocean reanalysis
Ocean surface topography
Ocean thermal energy conversion
Oceanography
Pelagic sediment
Sea surface microlayer
Sea surface temperature
Seawater
Science On a Sphere
Thermocline
Underwater glider
Water column
World Ocean Atlas








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Natural resources



Air




Pollution / quality



Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor

developing nations


Law

Clean Air Act (USA)


Ozone depletion





Emissions



Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)











Energy



Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (peak oil)
Geothermal
Nuclear
Solar

sunlight
shade


Tidal
Wave
Wind





Land



Arable

peak farmland


Degradation
Law

property


Management

habitat conservation


Minerals

mining

law
sand


peak
rights


Soil

conservation
fertility
health
resilience


Use

planning
reserve







Life



Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries

law
management


Food
Forests

genetic resources
law
management


Game

law


Gene bank
Herbalist plants
Marine conservation
Non-timber forest products
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife

conservation
management


Wood





Water




Types / location



Aquifer

storage and recovery


Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater

pollution
recharge
remediation


Hydrosphere
Ice

bergs
glacial
polar


Irrigation
Rain

harvesting


Stormwater
Surface water
Wastewater

reclaimed







Aspects



Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources

management
policy










Related







Commons

enclosure
global
land
tragedy of


Economics

ecological


Ecosystem services
Exploitation

overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day


Management

adaptive


Natural capital

accounting


Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness





Resource



Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable








 Portals



Agriculture and agronomy
Energy
Environment
Fishing
Forestry
Mining
Water
Wetlands








 Category

agencies
law
management
ministries
organizations


Colleges
 Natural resources









Authority control



NDL: 00573678











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tidal_power&oldid=817835724"					Categories: Tidal powerCoastal constructionTidesRenewable energyHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with dead external links from June 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2017