





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Time in the United States, by law, is divided into nine standard time zones covering the states and its possessions, with most of the United States observing daylight saving time (DST) for approximately the spring, summer, and fall months. The time zone boundaries and DST observance are regulated by the Department of Transportation. Official and highly precise timekeeping services (clocks) are provided by two federal agencies: the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) (an agency of the Department of Commerce); and its military counterpart, the United States Naval Observatory (USNO). The clocks run by these services are kept synchronized with each other as well as with those of other international timekeeping organizations.
It is the combination of the time zone and daylight saving rules, along with the timekeeping services, which determines the legal civil time for any U.S. location at any moment.




Map of U.S. time zones between April 2, 2006, and March 11, 2007. The current situation is different only in that several Indiana counties are now in the eastern time zone instead of the central time zone.





Contents


1 History

1.1 From GMT to UTC


2 United States time zones

2.1 Standard time and daylight saving time
2.2 Zones used in the contiguous U.S.
2.3 Zones used in states beyond the contiguous U.S.
2.4 Zones outside the states
2.5 Minor Outlying Islands
2.6 Antarctic research stations


3 Boundaries between the zones

3.1 Eastern/Central boundary
3.2 Central/Mountain boundary
3.3 Mountain/Pacific boundary


4 Daylight saving time
5 Time representation
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]
Prior to the adoption of four standard time zones for the continental United States, many towns and cities set clocks based on sunsets and sunrises at their locations and by observing the Sun's zenith at noon (mean solar time). Dawn and dusk occur at different times but time differences between distant locations were barely noticeable prior to the 19th century because of long travel times and the lack of long-distance instant communications prior to the development of the telegraph.
The use of local solar time became increasingly awkward as railways and telecommunications improved.[1] American railroads maintained many different time zones during the late 1800s. Each train station set its own clock making it difficult to coordinate train schedules and confusing passengers. Time calculation became a serious problem for people travelling by train (sometimes hundreds of miles in a day), according to the Library of Congress. Every city in the United States used a different time standard so there were more than 300 local sun times to choose from. Time zones were therefore a compromise, relaxing the complex geographic dependence while still allowing local time to be approximate with mean solar time. Railroad managers tried to address the problem by establishing 100 railroad time zones, but this was only a partial solution to the problem.[1]
Operators of the new railroad lines needed a new time plan that would offer a uniform train schedule for departures and arrivals. Four standard time zones for the continental United States were introduced at noon on November 18, 1883, when the telegraph lines transmitted time signals to all major cities.[2]
In October 1884, the International Meridian Conference at Washington DC adopted a proposal which stated that the prime meridian for longitude and timekeeping should be one that passes through the centre of the transit instrument at the Greenwich Observatory in the United Kingdom (UK). The conference therefore established the Greenwich Meridian as the prime meridian and Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) as the world's time standard. The US time-zone system grew from this, in which all zones referred back to GMT on the prime meridian.[1]
From GMT to UTC[edit]
GMT was superseded as the international civil time standard by Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) in 1960, when the International Radio Consultative Committee formalized the concept of Coordinated Universal Time, abbreviated as UTC. It is, within about 1 second, mean solar time at 0°.[3] It does not observe daylight saving time. It is one of several closely related successors to Greenwich Mean Time (GMT). For most purposes, UTC is considered interchangeable with GMT, but GMT is no longer precisely defined by the scientific community.
United States time zones[edit]
Standard time zones in the United States are currently defined at the federal level by law 15 USC §260.[4] The federal law also establishes the transition dates and times at which daylight saving time occurs, if observed. It is ultimately the authority of the Secretary of Transportation, in coordination with the states, to determine which regions will observe which of the standard time zones and if they will observe daylight saving time.[5] As of August 9, 2007, the standard time zones are defined in terms of hourly offsets from UTC.[6] Prior to this they were based upon the mean solar time at several meridians 15° apart west of Greenwich (GMT).
Only the full-time zone names listed below are official; abbreviations are by common use conventions, and duplicated elsewhere in the world for different time zones.
The United States uses nine standard time zones. As defined by US law[7] they are:

The Atlantic standard time zone
The Eastern standard time zone
The Central standard time zone
The Mountain standard time zone
The Pacific standard time zone
The Alaska standard time zone
The Hawaii–Aleutian standard time zone
The Samoa standard time zone
The Chamorro standard time zone

View the standard time zone boundaries here.
Standard time and daylight saving time[edit]


Time Zone
Standard Time
Daylight Time
States in Zone


Hawaii–Aleutian Time Zone
HST (UTC−10:00)
HDT (UTC−09:00)
Alaska, Hawaii (no DST)


Alaska Time Zone
AKST (UTC−09:00)
AKDT (UTC−08:00)
Alaska


Pacific Time Zone
PST (UTC−08:00)
PDT (UTC−07:00)
California, Washington, Oregon, Nevada, Idaho


Mountain Time Zone
MST (UTC−07:00)
MDT (UTC−06:00)
Arizona (no DST outside of Navajo Nation), Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Wyoming


Central Time Zone
CST (UTC−06:00)
CDT (UTC−05:00)
Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Wisconsin


Eastern Time Zone
EST (UTC−05:00)
EDT (UTC−04:00)
Connecticut, Florida, District of Columbia, Delaware, Georgia, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Vermont, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia


Zones used in the contiguous U.S.[edit]
From east to west, the times zones of the contiguous United States are:

The Eastern standard time zone: (Zone R), which comprises roughly the states on the Atlantic coast and the eastern two thirds of the Ohio Valley.
The Central standard time zone: (Zone S), which comprises roughly the Gulf Coast, Mississippi Valley, and Great Plains.
The Mountain standard time zone: (Zone T), which comprises roughly the states and portions of states that include the Rocky Mountains.
The Pacific standard time zone: (Zone U), which comprises roughly the states on the Pacific coast, plus Nevada and the Idaho panhandle.

Zones used in states beyond the contiguous U.S.[edit]

The Alaska standard time zone: (AKST; UTC−09:00; Zone V), which comprises most of the state of Alaska.
The Hawaii-Aleutian standard time zone: (or unofficially Hawaii Standard Time: HST) (HAST; UTC−10:00; zone W), which includes Hawaii and most of the length of the Aleutian Islands chain (west of 169°30′W).

Zones outside the states[edit]

The Atlantic standard time zone: (AST; UTC−04:00; Zone Q), which comprises Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
The Samoa standard time zone (SST; UTC−11:00; Zone X), which comprises American Samoa.
The Chamorro standard time zone: (ChST; UTC+10:00; Zone K), which comprises Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands.

Minor Outlying Islands[edit]
Some United States Minor Outlying Islands are outside the time zones defined by 15 U.S.C. §260 and exist in waters defined by Nautical time. In practice, military crews may simply use Zulu time (UTC±00:00) when on these islands. Baker Island and Howland Island are in UTC−12, while Wake Island is in UTC+12:00. Because they exist on opposite sides of the International Date Line, it can, for example, be noon Thursday on Baker and Howland islands while simultaneously being noon Friday on Wake Island. Other outlying islands include Jarvis Island, Midway Atoll, Palmyra Atoll, and Kingman Reef (UTC−11:00); Johnston Atoll (UTC−10:00); and Navassa Island, Bajo Nuevo Bank, and Serranilla Bank (UTC−05:00).
Antarctic research stations[edit]
See also: Time in Antarctica
In Antarctica, the US research facility Palmer Station is in UTC−03:00, while McMurdo Station and Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station use UTC+12:00 in order to coordinate with their main supply base in New Zealand.
Boundaries between the zones[edit]
(Described from north to south along each boundary.)
Eastern/Central boundary[edit]




Marker showing the border of Wayne County, Kentucky, and the Eastern Time Zone






Time in Indiana: red areas belong to the Central Time Zone.



roughly follows the border between Wisconsin (to the south and west) and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan (to the north and east); the Upper Peninsula counties that border Wisconsin (namely Gogebic, Iron, Dickinson, and Menominee counties) observe CT, all other counties in the U.P. observe ET
follows Lake Michigan
divides a small portion of Northwestern Indiana near Chicago from the rest of the state
follows the border between Illinois (west) and Indiana (east)
divides a small portion of Southwestern Indiana from the rest of the state
divides Kentucky in half roughly along a line that is west of Louisville, Kentucky running from northwest to southeast.
divides the region legally defined as East Tennessee, except for four counties adjoining Middle Tennessee, from the rest of Tennessee.
follows the border between Alabama (west) and Georgia (east)
divides the Florida Panhandle along the Apalachicola River and Intracoastal Waterway just west of Tallahassee, Florida.

Central/Mountain boundary[edit]

divides the southwest portion of North Dakota from the rest of the state
divides South Dakota roughly in half
divides the western third of Nebraska from the rest of the state
divides a very small portion of extreme western Kansas bordering Colorado (Greeley, Hamilton, Sherman, and Wallace counties) from the rest of the state (three other counties which border Colorado—Cheyenne, Morton, and Stanton counties—observe CST)
follows the border between New Mexico (west) and Oklahoma (east)
follows the border between New Mexico (west) and Texas (east)
divides El Paso County, Hudspeth County, and a portion of northern Culberson County that includes eastern Guadalupe Mountains National Park from the rest of Texas

Mountain/Pacific boundary[edit]

follows the border between northern Idaho (to the west) and northwestern Montana (to the east)
turns west at 45°33.46′N 114°33.89′W﻿ / ﻿45.55767°N 114.56483°W﻿ / 45.55767; -114.56483 (just south of Nez Perce Pass), and follows the Idaho County line to the Salmon River
follows the Salmon River west to the town of Riggins, where the Salmon River turns north. This puts almost all of northern Idaho in the Pacific time zone, except for the small loop described next.
turns north and follows the Salmon River to the Snake River at the Oregon border (at 45°51.3′N 116°47.5′W﻿ / ﻿45.8550°N 116.7917°W﻿ / 45.8550; -116.7917). Interestingly, this loop to the north creates a curious situation where one can enter a more-westerly time zone by traveling east over one of the bridges across this portion of the Salmon River.
turns south and follows the Snake River between Oregon (west) and Idaho (east) to the northern border of Malheur County, Oregon
turns west and follows the northern border of Malheur County, Oregon to its western border, where it turns south
follows the western border of Malheur County to latitude 42.45° (42°27′ N), where it turns east, and returns to the Oregon/Idaho border
turns south and follows the border between Oregon (west) and Idaho (east)
turns east and follows the border between Idaho (north) and Nevada (south) along the 42nd parallel north to longitude 114.041726 W.
turns south and follows the border between Nevada (west) and Utah (east), except for following the west city limit line of West Wendover dividing it from the rest of Nevada, and putting it in the mountain time zone. Jackpot, Nevada, just south of the 42nd parallel and some 25 miles (40 km) west of the time zone south turn, also observes Mountain Time, on an unofficial basis.
follows the border between Nevada (west) and Arizona (east)
follows the border between California (west) and Arizona (east), as defined by the Colorado river, to the border between the U.S. and Mexico.

Daylight saving time[edit]
Main article: Daylight saving time in the United States
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 extended daylight saving time (DST) for an additional month beginning in 2007. The start of DST now occurs on the second Sunday in March and ends on the first Sunday in November.
Clocks will be set ahead one hour at 2 a.m. on the following start dates and set back one hour at 2 a.m. on these ending dates:


Year
Start date
Ending date


2006
April 2
October 29


2007
March 11
November 4


2008
March 9
November 2


2009
March 8
November 1


2010
March 14
November 7


2011
March 13
November 6


2012
March 11
November 4


2013
March 10
November 3


2014
March 9
November 2


2015
March 8
November 1


2016
March 13
November 6


2017
March 12
November 5


2018
March 11
November 4


2019
March 10
November 3


2020
March 8
November 1


In response to the Uniform Time Act of 1966, each state of the US has officially chosen to apply one of two rules over its entire territory:

Most use the standard time for their zone (or zones, where a state is divided between two zones), except for using daylight saving time during the summer months. Originally this ran from the last Sunday in April until the last Sunday in October. Two subsequent amendments, in 1986 and 2005, have shifted these days so that daylight saving time now runs from the second Sunday in March until the first Sunday in November.




Arizona time zones



Arizona and Hawaii use standard time throughout the year. However:

The Navajo Nation observes DST throughout its entire territory, including the portion that lies in Arizona. But the Hopi Nation, which is entirely surrounded by the Navajo Nation and is entirely in Arizona, does not observe DST. (See map inset right.)


In 2005, Indiana passed legislation which took effect on April 2, 2006, that placed the entire state on daylight saving time (see Time in Indiana). Before then, Indiana officially used standard time year-round, with the following exceptions:

The portions of Indiana that were on Central Time observed daylight saving time.
Also, some Indiana counties near Cincinnati and Louisville were on Eastern Time, but did (unofficially) observe DST.



Time representation[edit]
Further information: Date and time notation in the United States and Speaking clock § United States
There exist more than one hundred clock towers in the United States; see Category:Clock towers in the United States.
See also[edit]

History of time in the United States
List of time zones by U.S. state
Daylight saving time in the United States
Lists of time zones
Effects of time on North American broadcasting
Date and time notation in the United States
East Coast bias

References[edit]



^ a b c "Why Do We Have Time Zones?". 
^ What is Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) http://wwp.greenwichmeantime.com/info/gmt.htm
^ Bernard Guinot, "Solar time, legal time, time in use" Metrologica, August 2011 (volume 48, issue 4), pages 181–185.
^ 15 USC §260.
^ "15 U.S. Code Subchapter IX - STANDARD TIME". 
^ Pupblic Law 110–69 — America COMPETES Act (August 9, 2007). Sec. 3013)
^ Standard Time Zone Boundaries 49CFR71



External links[edit]

Official website
U.S. Navy time zone page
North American Time Zone border data and images
CFR's Title 40 - Protection of Environment (also at wikisource:Code of Federal Regulations/Title 49/Subtitle A/Part 71)
Standard Time Law 15USC260-267 (also at wikisource:United States Code/Title 15/Chapter 6/Subchapter IX)







v
t
e


Time in the Americas






North America
South America





Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela









Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands
US Virgin Islands












v
t
e


Time in the United States



States



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming





Federal district

Washington, D.C.



Insular areas



American Samoa
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
U.S. Virgin Islands











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Time_in_the_United_States&oldid=817932069"					Categories: Time in the United StatesGeography of the United StatesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2013All articles needing additional references