



Time series: random data plus trend, with best-fit line and different applied filters


A time series is a series of data points indexed (or listed or graphed) in time order. Most commonly, a time series is a sequence taken at successive equally spaced points in time. Thus it is a sequence of discrete-time data. Examples of time series are heights of ocean tides, counts of sunspots, and the daily closing value of the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Time series are very frequently plotted via line charts. Time series are used in statistics, signal processing, pattern recognition, econometrics, mathematical finance, weather forecasting, earthquake prediction, electroencephalography, control engineering, astronomy, communications engineering, and largely in any domain of applied science and engineering which involves temporal measurements.
Time series analysis comprises methods for analyzing time series data in order to extract meaningful statistics and other characteristics of the data. Time series forecasting is the use of a model to predict future values based on previously observed values. While regression analysis is often employed in such a way as to test theories that the current values of one or more independent time series affect the current value of another time series, this type of analysis of time series is not called "time series analysis", which focuses on comparing values of a single time series or multiple dependent time series at different points in time.[1] Interrupted time series analysis is the analysis of interventions on a single time series
Time series data have a natural temporal ordering. This makes time series analysis distinct from cross-sectional studies, in which there is no natural ordering of the observations (e.g. explaining people's wages by reference to their respective education levels, where the individuals' data could be entered in any order). Time series analysis is also distinct from spatial data analysis where the observations typically relate to geographical locations (e.g. accounting for house prices by the location as well as the intrinsic characteristics of the houses). A stochastic model for a time series will generally reflect the fact that observations close together in time will be more closely related than observations further apart. In addition, time series models will often make use of the natural one-way ordering of time so that values for a given period will be expressed as deriving in some way from past values, rather than from future values (see time reversibility.)
Time series analysis can be applied to real-valued, continuous data, discrete numeric data, or discrete symbolic data (i.e. sequences of characters, such as letters and words in the English language[2]).



Contents


1 Methods for analysis
2 Panel data
3 Analysis

3.1 Motivation
3.2 Exploratory analysis
3.3 Curve fitting
3.4 Function approximation
3.5 Prediction and forecasting
3.6 Classification
3.7 Signal estimation
3.8 Segmentation


4 Models

4.1 Notation
4.2 Conditions
4.3 Tools
4.4 Measures


5 Visualization

5.1 Overlapping charts
5.2 Separated charts


6 Software
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



Methods for analysis[edit]
Methods for time series analysis may be divided into two classes: frequency-domain methods and time-domain methods. The former include spectral analysis and wavelet analysis; the latter include auto-correlation and cross-correlation analysis. In the time domain, correlation and analysis can be made in a filter-like manner using scaled correlation, thereby mitigating the need to operate in the frequency domain.
Additionally, time series analysis techniques may be divided into parametric and non-parametric methods. The parametric approaches assume that the underlying stationary stochastic process has a certain structure which can be described using a small number of parameters (for example, using an autoregressive or moving average model). In these approaches, the task is to estimate the parameters of the model that describes the stochastic process. By contrast, non-parametric approaches explicitly estimate the covariance or the spectrum of the process without assuming that the process has any particular structure.
Methods of time series analysis may also be divided into linear and non-linear, and univariate and multivariate.
Panel data[edit]
A time series is one type of panel data. Panel data is the general class, a multidimensional data set, whereas a time series data set is a one-dimensional panel (as is a cross-sectional dataset). A data set may exhibit characteristics of both panel data and time series data. One way to tell is to ask what makes one data record unique from the other records. If the answer is the time data field, then this is a time series data set candidate. If determining a unique record requires a time data field and an additional identifier which is unrelated to time (student ID, stock symbol, country code), then it is panel data candidate. If the differentiation lies on the non-time identifier, then the data set is a cross-sectional data set candidate.
Analysis[edit]
There are several types of motivation and data analysis available for time series which are appropriate for different purposes and etc.
Motivation[edit]
In the context of statistics, econometrics, quantitative finance, seismology, meteorology, and geophysics the primary goal of time series analysis is forecasting. In the context of signal processing, control engineering and communication engineering it is used for signal detection and estimation, while in the context of data mining, pattern recognition and machine learning time series analysis can be used for clustering, classification, query by content, anomaly detection as well as forecasting[citation needed].
Exploratory analysis[edit]




Tuberculosis incidence US 1953-2009


Further information: Exploratory analysis
The clearest way to examine a regular time series manually is with a line chart such as the one shown for tuberculosis in the United States, made with a spreadsheet program. The number of cases was standardized to a rate per 100,000 and the percent change per year in this rate was calculated. The nearly steadily dropping line shows that the TB incidence was decreasing in most years, but the percent change in this rate varied by as much as +/- 10%, with 'surges' in 1975 and around the early 1990s. The use of both vertical axes allows the comparison of two time series in one graphic.
Other techniques include:

Autocorrelation analysis to examine serial dependence
Spectral analysis to examine cyclic behavior which need not be related to seasonality. For example, sun spot activity varies over 11 year cycles.[3][4] Other common examples include celestial phenomena, weather patterns, neural activity, commodity prices, and economic activity.
Separation into components representing trend, seasonality, slow and fast variation, and cyclical irregularity: see trend estimation and decomposition of time series

Curve fitting[edit]
Main article: Curve fitting
Curve fitting[5][6] is the process of constructing a curve, or mathematical function, that has the best fit to a series of data points,[7] possibly subject to constraints.[8][9] Curve fitting can involve either interpolation,[10][11] where an exact fit to the data is required, or smoothing,[12][13] in which a "smooth" function is constructed that approximately fits the data. A related topic is regression analysis,[14][15] which focuses more on questions of statistical inference such as how much uncertainty is present in a curve that is fit to data observed with random errors. Fitted curves can be used as an aid for data visualization,[16][17] to infer values of a function where no data are available,[18] and to summarize the relationships among two or more variables.[19] Extrapolation refers to the use of a fitted curve beyond the range of the observed data,[20] and is subject to a degree of uncertainty[21] since it may reflect the method used to construct the curve as much as it reflects the observed data.
The construction of economic time series involves the estimation of some components for some dates by interpolation between values ("benchmarks") for earlier and later dates. Interpolation is estimation of an unknown quantity between two known quantities (historical data), or drawing conclusions about missing information from the available information ("reading between the lines").[22] Interpolation is useful where the data surrounding the missing data is available and its trend, seasonality, and longer-term cycles are known. This is often done by using a related series known for all relevant dates.[23] Alternatively polynomial interpolation or spline interpolation is used where piecewise polynomial functions are fit into time intervals such that they fit smoothly together. A different problem which is closely related to interpolation is the approximation of a complicated function by a simple function (also called regression).The main difference between regression and interpolation is that polynomial regression gives a single polynomial that models the entire data set. Spline interpolation, however, yield a piecewise continuous function composed of many polynomials to model the data set.
Extrapolation is the process of estimating, beyond the original observation range, the value of a variable on the basis of its relationship with another variable. It is similar to interpolation, which produces estimates between known observations, but extrapolation is subject to greater uncertainty and a higher risk of producing meaningless results.
Function approximation[edit]
Main article: Function approximation
In general, a function approximation problem asks us to select a function among a well-defined class that closely matches ("approximates") a target function in a task-specific way. One can distinguish two major classes of function approximation problems: First, for known target functions approximation theory is the branch of numerical analysis that investigates how certain known functions (for example, special functions) can be approximated by a specific class of functions (for example, polynomials or rational functions) that often have desirable properties (inexpensive computation, continuity, integral and limit values, etc.).
Second, the target function, call it g, may be unknown; instead of an explicit formula, only a set of points (a time series) of the form (x, g(x)) is provided. Depending on the structure of the domain and codomain of g, several techniques for approximating g may be applicable. For example, if g is an operation on the real numbers, techniques of interpolation, extrapolation, regression analysis, and curve fitting can be used. If the codomain (range or target set) of g is a finite set, one is dealing with a classification problem instead. A related problem of online time series approximation[24] is to summarize the data in one-pass and construct an approximate representation that can support a variety of time series queries with bounds on worst-case error.
To some extent the different problems (regression, classification, fitness approximation) have received a unified treatment in statistical learning theory, where they are viewed as supervised learning problems.
Prediction and forecasting[edit]
In statistics, prediction is a part of statistical inference. One particular approach to such inference is known as predictive inference, but the prediction can be undertaken within any of the several approaches to statistical inference. Indeed, one description of statistics is that it provides a means of transferring knowledge about a sample of a population to the whole population, and to other related populations, which is not necessarily the same as prediction over time. When information is transferred across time, often to specific points in time, the process is known as forecasting.

Fully formed statistical models for stochastic simulation purposes, so as to generate alternative versions of the time series, representing what might happen over non-specific time-periods in the future
Simple or fully formed statistical models to describe the likely outcome of the time series in the immediate future, given knowledge of the most recent outcomes (forecasting).
Forecasting on time series is usually done using automated statistical software packages and programming languages, such as R, S, SAS, SPSS, Minitab, pandas (Python) and many others.

Classification[edit]
Main article: Statistical classification
Assigning time series pattern to a specific category, for example identify a word based on series of hand movements in sign language
Signal estimation[edit]
See also: Signal processing and Estimation theory
This approach is based on harmonic analysis and filtering of signals in the frequency domain using the Fourier transform, and spectral density estimation, the development of which was significantly accelerated during World War II by mathematician Norbert Wiener, electrical engineers Rudolf E. Kálmán, Dennis Gabor and others for filtering signals from noise and predicting signal values at a certain point in time. See Kalman filter, Estimation theory, and Digital signal processing
Segmentation[edit]
Main article: Time-series segmentation
Splitting a time-series into a sequence of segments. It is often the case that a time-series can be represented as a sequence of individual segments, each with its own characteristic properties. For example, the audio signal from a conference call can be partitioned into pieces corresponding to the times during which each person was speaking. In time-series segmentation, the goal is to identify the segment boundary points in the time-series, and to characterize the dynamical properties associated with each segment. One can approach this problem using change-point detection, or by modeling the time-series as a more sophisticated system, such as a Markov jump linear system.
Models[edit]
Models for time series data can have many forms and represent different stochastic processes. When modeling variations in the level of a process, three broad classes of practical importance are the autoregressive (AR) models, the integrated (I) models, and the moving average (MA) models. These three classes depend linearly on previous data points.[25] Combinations of these ideas produce autoregressive moving average (ARMA) and autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models. The autoregressive fractionally integrated moving average (ARFIMA) model generalizes the former three. Extensions of these classes to deal with vector-valued data are available under the heading of multivariate time-series models and sometimes the preceding acronyms are extended by including an initial "V" for "vector", as in VAR for vector autoregression. An additional set of extensions of these models is available for use where the observed time-series is driven by some "forcing" time-series (which may not have a causal effect on the observed series): the distinction from the multivariate case is that the forcing series may be deterministic or under the experimenter's control. For these models, the acronyms are extended with a final "X" for "exogenous".
Non-linear dependence of the level of a series on previous data points is of interest, partly because of the possibility of producing a chaotic time series. However, more importantly, empirical investigations can indicate the advantage of using predictions derived from non-linear models, over those from linear models, as for example in nonlinear autoregressive exogenous models. Further references on nonlinear time series analysis: (Kantz and Schreiber),[26] and (Abarbanel)[27]
Among other types of non-linear time series models, there are models to represent the changes of variance over time (heteroskedasticity). These models represent autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) and the collection comprises a wide variety of representation (GARCH, TARCH, EGARCH, FIGARCH, CGARCH, etc.). Here changes in variability are related to, or predicted by, recent past values of the observed series. This is in contrast to other possible representations of locally varying variability, where the variability might be modelled as being driven by a separate time-varying process, as in a doubly stochastic model.
In recent work on model-free analyses, wavelet transform based methods (for example locally stationary wavelets and wavelet decomposed neural networks) have gained favor. Multiscale (often referred to as multiresolution) techniques decompose a given time series, attempting to illustrate time dependence at multiple scales. See also Markov switching multifractal (MSMF) techniques for modeling volatility evolution.
A Hidden Markov model (HMM) is a statistical Markov model in which the system being modeled is assumed to be a Markov process with unobserved (hidden) states. An HMM can be considered as the simplest dynamic Bayesian network. HMM models are widely used in speech recognition, for translating a time series of spoken words into text.
Notation[edit]
A number of different notations are in use for time-series analysis. A common notation specifying a time series X that is indexed by the natural numbers is written

X = {X1, X2, ...}.

Another common notation is

Y = {Yt: t ∈ T},

where T is the index set.
Conditions[edit]
There are two sets of conditions under which much of the theory is built:

Stationary process
Ergodic process

However, ideas of stationarity must be expanded to consider two important ideas: strict stationarity and second-order stationarity. Both models and applications can be developed under each of these conditions, although the models in the latter case might be considered as only partly specified.
In addition, time-series analysis can be applied where the series are seasonally stationary or non-stationary. Situations where the amplitudes of frequency components change with time can be dealt with in time-frequency analysis which makes use of a time–frequency representation of a time-series or signal.[28]
Tools[edit]






This section is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this section to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (February 2012)



Tools for investigating time-series data include:

Consideration of the autocorrelation function and the spectral density function (also cross-correlation functions and cross-spectral density functions)
Scaled cross- and auto-correlation functions to remove contributions of slow components[29]
Performing a Fourier transform to investigate the series in the frequency domain
Use of a filter to remove unwanted noise
Principal component analysis (or empirical orthogonal function analysis)
Singular spectrum analysis
"Structural" models:

General State Space Models
Unobserved Components Models


Machine Learning

Artificial neural networks
Support Vector Machine
Fuzzy Logic
Gaussian Processes
Hidden Markov model


Queueing Theory Analysis
Control chart

Shewhart individuals control chart
CUSUM chart
EWMA chart


Detrended fluctuation analysis
Dynamic time warping[30]
Cross-correlation[31]
Dynamic Bayesian network
Time-frequency analysis techniques:

Fast Fourier Transform
Continuous wavelet transform
Short-time Fourier transform
Chirplet transform
Fractional Fourier transform


Chaotic analysis

Correlation dimension
Recurrence plots
Recurrence quantification analysis
Lyapunov exponents
Entropy encoding



Measures[edit]
Time series metrics or features that can be used for time series classification or regression analysis:[32]

Univariate linear measures

Moment (mathematics)
Spectral band power
Spectral edge frequency
Accumulated Energy (signal processing)
Characteristics of the autocorrelation function
Hjorth parameters
FFT parameters
Autoregressive model parameters
Mann–Kendall test


Univariate non-linear measures

Measures based on the correlation sum
Correlation dimension
Correlation integral
Correlation density
Correlation entropy
Approximate entropy[33]
Sample entropy
Fourier entropyuk
Wavelet entropy
Rényi entropy
Higher-order methods
Marginal predictability
Dynamical similarity index
State space dissimilarity measures
Lyapunov exponent
Permutation methods
Local flow


Other univariate measures

Algorithmic complexity
Kolmogorov complexity estimates
Hidden Markov Model states
Rough path signature[34]
Surrogate time series and surrogate correction
Loss of recurrence (degree of non-stationarity)


Bivariate linear measures

Maximum linear cross-correlation
Linear Coherence (signal processing)


Bivariate non-linear measures

Non-linear interdependence
Dynamical Entrainment (physics)
Measures for Phase synchronization
Measures for Phase locking


Similarity measures:[35]

Cross-correlation
Dynamic Time Warping[30]
Hidden Markov Models
Edit distance
Total correlation
Newey–West estimator
Prais–Winsten transformation
Data as Vectors in a Metrizable Space

Minkowski distance
Mahalanobis distance


Data as Time Series with Envelopes

Global Standard Deviation
Local Standard Deviation
Windowed Standard Deviation


Data Interpreted as Stochastic Series

Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient
Spearman's rank correlation coefficient


Data Interpreted as a Probability Distribution Function

Kolmogorov–Smirnov test
Cramér–von Mises criterion





Visualization[edit]
Time series can be visualized with two categories of chart: Overlapping Charts and Separated Charts. Overlapping Charts display all-time series on the same layout while Separated Charts presents them on different layouts (but aligned for comparison purpose)[36]
Overlapping charts[edit]

Braided Graphs
Line Charts
Slope Graphs
GapChart

Separated charts[edit]

Horizon Graphs
Reduced Line Charts (small multiples)
Silhouette Graph
Circular Silhouette Graph

Software[edit]
Working with Time Series data is a relatively common use for statistical analysis software. As a result of this, there are many offerings both commercial and open source. Some examples include:

CRAN supplementary statistics package for R[37]
Analysis and Forecasting with Weka[38]
Predictive modeling with GMDH Shell[39]
Functions and Modeling in the Wolfram Language[40]
Time Series Objects in MATLAB[41]
SAS/ETS in SAS software[42]
Expert Modeler in IBM SPSS Statistics and IBM SPSS Modeler
Automatic Time series Forecasting with LDT[43]
EViews is a statistical package for Windows, used mainly for time-series oriented econometric analysis.
bayesloop: Probabilistic programming framework that facilitates objective model selection for time-varying parameter models[44]
Slycat Web-based ensemble analysis and visualization platform, created at Sandia National Laboratoriesl[45]

See also[edit]


Anomaly time series
Chirp
Decomposition of time series
Detrended fluctuation analysis
Digital signal processing
Distributed lag
Estimation theory
Forecasting
Hurst exponent
Monte Carlo method
Panel analysis
Random walk
Scaled correlation
Seasonal adjustment
Sequence analysis
Signal processing
Trend estimation
Unevenly spaced time series
Time series database


References[edit]


^ Imdadullah. "Time Series Analysis". Basic Statistics and Data Analysis. itfeature.com. Retrieved 2 January 2014. 
^ Lin, Jessica; Keogh, Eamonn; Lonardi, Stefano; Chiu, Bill (2003). "A symbolic representation of time series, with implications for streaming algorithms". Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGMOD workshop on Research issues in data mining and knowledge discovery. New York: ACM Press. doi:10.1145/882082.882086. 
^ Bloomfield, P. (1976). Fourier analysis of time series: An introduction. New York: Wiley. ISBN 0471082562. 
^ Shumway, R. H. (1988). Applied statistical time series analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0130415006. 
^ Sandra Lach Arlinghaus, PHB Practical Handbook of Curve Fitting. CRC Press, 1994.
^ William M. Kolb. Curve Fitting for Programmable Calculators. Syntec, Incorporated, 1984.
^ S.S. Halli, K.V. Rao. 1992. Advanced Techniques of Population Analysis. ISBN 0306439972 Page 165 (cf. ... functions are fulfilled if we have a good to moderate fit for the observed data.)
^ The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions Fail-but Some Don't. By Nate Silver
^ Data Preparation for Data Mining: Text. By Dorian Pyle.
^ Numerical Methods in Engineering with MATLAB®. By Jaan Kiusalaas. Page 24.
^ Numerical Methods in Engineering with Python 3. By Jaan Kiusalaas. Page 21.
^ Numerical Methods of Curve Fitting. By P. G. Guest, Philip George Guest. Page 349.
^ See also: Mollifier
^ Fitting Models to Biological Data Using Linear and Nonlinear Regression. By Harvey Motulsky, Arthur Christopoulos.
^ Regression Analysis By Rudolf J. Freund, William J. Wilson, Ping Sa. Page 269.
^ Visual Informatics. Edited by Halimah Badioze Zaman, Peter Robinson, Maria Petrou, Patrick Olivier, Heiko Schröder. Page 689.
^ Numerical Methods for Nonlinear Engineering Models. By John R. Hauser. Page 227.
^ Methods of Experimental Physics: Spectroscopy, Volume 13, Part 1. By Claire Marton. Page 150.
^ Encyclopedia of Research Design, Volume 1. Edited by Neil J. Salkind. Page 266.
^ Community Analysis and Planning Techniques. By Richard E. Klosterman. Page 1.
^ An Introduction to Risk and Uncertainty in the Evaluation of Environmental Investments. DIANE Publishing. Pg 69
^ Hamming, Richard. Numerical methods for scientists and engineers. Courier Corporation, 2012.
^ Friedman, Milton. "The interpolation of time series by related series." Journal of the American Statistical Association 57.300 (1962): 729-757.
^ Gandhi, Sorabh, Luca Foschini, and Subhash Suri. "Space-efficient online approximation of time series data: Streams, amnesia, and out-of-order." Data Engineering (ICDE), 2010 IEEE 26th International Conference on. IEEE, 2010.
^ Gershenfeld, N. (1999). The Nature of Mathematical Modeling. New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 205–208. ISBN 0521570956. 
^ Kantz, Holger; Thomas, Schreiber (2004). Nonlinear Time Series Analysis. London: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521529020. 
^ Abarbanel, Henry (Nov 25, 1997). Analysis of Observed Chaotic Data. New York: Springer. ISBN 978-0387983721. 
^ Boashash, B. (ed.), (2003) Time-Frequency Signal Analysis and Processing: A Comprehensive Reference, Elsevier Science, Oxford, 2003 ISBN 0-08-044335-4
^ Nikolić, D.; Muresan, R. C.; Feng, W.; Singer, W. (2012). "Scaled correlation analysis: a better way to compute a cross-correlogram". European Journal of Neuroscience. 35 (5): 742–762. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07987.x. 
^ a b Sakoe, Hiroaki; Chiba, Seibi (1978). "Dynamic programming algorithm optimization for spoken word recognition". IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. doi:10.1109/TASSP.1978.1163055. 
^ Goutte, Cyril; Toft, Peter; Rostrup, Egill; Nielsen, Finn Å.; Hansen, Lars Kai (1999). "On Clustering fMRI Time Series". NeuroImage. doi:10.1006/nimg.1998.0391. 
^ Mormann, Florian; Andrzejak, Ralph G.; Elger, Christian E.; Lehnertz, Klaus (2007). "Seizure prediction: the long and winding road". Brain. 130 (2): 314–333. doi:10.1093/brain/awl241. PMID 17008335. 
^ Land, Bruce; Elias, Damian. "Measuring the 'Complexity' of a time series". 
^ [1] Chevyrev, I., Kormilitzin, A. (2016) "A Primer on the Signature Method in Machine Learning, arXiv:1603.03788v1"
^ Ropella, G. E. P.; Nag, D. A.; Hunt, C. A. (2003). "Similarity measures for automated comparison of in silico and in vitro experimental results". Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. 3: 2933–2936. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2003.1280532. 
^ Tominski, Christian; Aigner, Wolfgang. "The TimeViz Browser:A Visual Survey of Visualization Techniques for Time-Oriented Data". Retrieved 1 June 2014. 
^ Hyndman, Rob J (2016-01-22). "CRAN Task View: Time Series Analysis". 
^ "Time Series Analysis and Forecasting with Weka - Pentaho Data Mining - Pentaho Wiki". wiki.pentaho.com. Retrieved 2016-07-07. 
^ "Time Series Analysis & Forecasting Software 2016 [Free Download]". Retrieved 2016-07-07. 
^ "Time Series—Wolfram Language Documentation". reference.wolfram.com. Retrieved 2016-07-07. 
^ "Time Series Objects - MATLAB & Simulink". www.mathworks.com. Retrieved 2016-07-07. 
^ "Econometrics and Time Series Analysis, SAS/ETS Software". Retrieved 2016-07-07. 
^ "LDT". SourceForge. Retrieved 2016-09-04. 
^ "bayesloop: Probabilistic programming framework that facilitates objective model selection for time-varying parameter models". Retrieved 2016-12-06. 
^ "Time Slycat Web-based ensemble analysis and visualization platform". Retrieved 2017-10-03. 


Further reading[edit]

Box, George; Jenkins, Gwilym (1976), Time Series Analysis: forecasting and control, rev. ed., Oakland, California: Holden-Day 
Cowpertwait P.S.P., Metcalfe A.V. (2009), Introductory Time Series with R, Springer.
Durbin J., Koopman S.J. (2001), Time Series Analysis by State Space Methods, Oxford University Press.
Gershenfeld, Neil (2000), The Nature of Mathematical Modeling, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-57095-4, OCLC 174825352 
Hamilton, James (1994), Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-04289-6 
Priestley, M. B. (1981), Spectral Analysis and Time Series, Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-12-564901-8
Shasha, D. (2004), High Performance Discovery in Time Series, Springer, ISBN 0-387-00857-8 
Shumway R. H., Stoffer (2011), Time Series Analysis and its Applications, Springer.
Weigend A. S., Gershenfeld N. A. (Eds.) (1994), Time Series Prediction: Forecasting the Future and Understanding the Past. Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Comparative Time Series Analysis (Santa Fe, May 1992), Addison-Wesley.
Wiener, N. (1949), Extrapolation, Interpolation, and Smoothing of Stationary Time Series, MIT Press.
Woodward, W. A., Gray, H. L. & Elliott, A. C. (2012), Applied Time Series Analysis, CRC Press.

External links[edit]

Time series at Encyclopaedia of Mathematics.
A First Course on Time Series Analysis — An open source book on time series analysis with SAS.
Introduction to Time series Analysis (Engineering Statistics Handbook) — A practical guide to Time series analysis.
MATLAB Toolkit for Computation of Multiple Measures on Time Series Data Bases.
A Matlab tutorial on power spectra, wavelet analysis, and coherence on website with many other tutorials.
TimeViz survey
Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning: Book webpage
CRAN Time Series Task View - Time Series in R
TimeSeries Analysis with Pandas







v
t
e


Statistics






Outline
Index










Descriptive statistics







Continuous data




Center



Mean

arithmetic
geometric
harmonic


Median
Mode





Dispersion



Variance
Standard deviation
Coefficient of variation
Percentile
Range
Interquartile range





Shape



Central limit theorem
Moments

Skewness
Kurtosis
L-moments










Count data



Index of dispersion





Summary tables



Grouped data
Frequency distribution
Contingency table





Dependence



Pearson product-moment correlation
Rank correlation

Spearman's rho
Kendall's tau


Partial correlation
Scatter plot





Graphics



Bar chart
Biplot
Box plot
Control chart
Correlogram
Fan chart
Forest plot
Histogram
Pie chart
Q–Q plot
Run chart
Scatter plot
Stem-and-leaf display
Radar chart
















Data collection







Study design



Population
Statistic
Effect size
Statistical power
Sample size determination
Missing data





Survey methodology



Sampling

stratified
cluster


Standard error
Opinion poll
Questionnaire





Controlled experiments



Design

control
optimal


Controlled trial
Randomized
Random assignment
Replication
Blocking
Interaction
Factorial experiment





Uncontrolled studies



Observational study
Natural experiment
Quasi-experiment
















Statistical inference







Statistical theory



Population
Statistic
Probability distribution
Sampling distribution

Order statistic


Empirical distribution

Density estimation


Statistical model

Lp space


Parameter

location
scale
shape


Parametric family

Likelihood (monotone)
Location–scale family
Exponential family


Completeness
Sufficiency
Statistical functional

Bootstrap
U
V


Optimal decision

loss function


Efficiency
Statistical distance

divergence


Asymptotics
Robustness





Frequentist inference




Point estimation



Estimating equations

Maximum likelihood
Method of moments
M-estimator
Minimum distance


Unbiased estimators

Mean-unbiased minimum-variance

Rao–Blackwellization
Lehmann–Scheffé theorem


Median unbiased


Plug-in





Interval estimation



Confidence interval
Pivot
Likelihood interval
Prediction interval
Tolerance interval
Resampling

Bootstrap
Jackknife







Testing hypotheses



1- & 2-tails
Power

Uniformly most powerful test


Permutation test

Randomization test


Multiple comparisons





Parametric tests



Likelihood-ratio
Wald
Score








Specific tests







Z (normal)
Student's t-test
F





Goodness of fit



Chi-squared
Kolmogorov–Smirnov
Anderson–Darling
Lilliefors
Jarque–Bera
Normality (Shapiro–Wilk)
Likelihood-ratio test
Model selection

Cross validation
AIC
BIC







Rank statistics



Sign

Sample median


Signed rank (Wilcoxon)

Hodges–Lehmann estimator


Rank sum (Mann–Whitney)
Nonparametric anova

1-way (Kruskal–Wallis)
2-way (Friedman)
Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra)










Bayesian inference



Bayesian probability

prior
posterior


Credible interval
Bayes factor
Bayesian estimator

Maximum posterior estimator





















Correlation
Regression analysis










Correlation



Pearson product-moment
Partial correlation
Confounding variable
Coefficient of determination





Regression analysis



Errors and residuals
Regression model validation
Mixed effects models
Simultaneous equations models
Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS)





Linear regression



Simple linear regression
Ordinary least squares
General linear model
Bayesian regression





Non-standard predictors



Nonlinear regression
Nonparametric
Semiparametric
Isotonic
Robust
Heteroscedasticity
Homoscedasticity





Generalized linear model



Exponential families
Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions





Partition of variance



Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova)
Analysis of covariance
Multivariate ANOVA
Degrees of freedom
















Categorical / Multivariate / Time-series / Survival analysis







Categorical



Cohen's kappa
Contingency table
Graphical model
Log-linear model
McNemar's test





Multivariate



Regression
Manova
Principal components
Canonical correlation
Discriminant analysis
Cluster analysis
Classification
Structural equation model

Factor analysis


Multivariate distributions

Elliptical distributions

Normal









Time-series




General



Decomposition
Trend
Stationarity
Seasonal adjustment
Exponential smoothing
Cointegration
Structural break
Granger causality





Specific tests



Dickey–Fuller
Johansen
Q-statistic (Ljung–Box)
Durbin–Watson
Breusch–Godfrey





Time domain



Autocorrelation (ACF)

partial (PACF)


Cross-correlation (XCF)
ARMA model
ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins)
Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH)
Vector autoregression (VAR)





Frequency domain



Spectral density estimation
Fourier analysis
Wavelet








Survival




Survival function



Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit)
Proportional hazards models
Accelerated failure time (AFT) model
First hitting time





Hazard function



Nelson–Aalen estimator





Test



Log-rank test



















Applications







Biostatistics



Bioinformatics
Clinical trials / studies
Epidemiology
Medical statistics





Engineering statistics



Chemometrics
Methods engineering
Probabilistic design
Process / quality control
Reliability
System identification





Social statistics



Actuarial science
Census
Crime statistics
Demography
Econometrics
National accounts
Official statistics
Population statistics
Psychometrics





Spatial statistics



Cartography
Environmental statistics
Geographic information system
Geostatistics
Kriging














Category
Portal
Commons
 WikiProject








Statistics portal





Authority control



NDL: 00574724











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Time_series&oldid=815594176"					Categories: Time seriesStatistical data typesMathematical and quantitative methods (economics)Machine learningHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2017Articles needing cleanup from February 2012All pages needing cleanupArticles with sections that need to be turned into prose from February 2012