"Torun" redirects here. For other uses, see Torun (disambiguation).


Toruń






From top, left to right: Leaning Tower of Toruń
Gothic defensive walls
Old Town seen from the Vistula
Św. Ducha Street
Town Hall
Philadelphia riverbanks
Tenement detail
Marketplace
Różana Street










Flag

Coat of arms





Nickname(s): City of Angels, Gingerbread city, Copernicus Town


Motto(s): "Durabo" (["I will endure"] error: {{lang-xx}}: text has italic markup (help))









Toruń








Coordinates: 53°2′N 18°37′E﻿ / ﻿53.033°N 18.617°E﻿ / 53.033; 18.617


Country
Poland


Voivodeship
Kuyavian-Pomeranian


County
city county


Established
13th century


City rights
1233


Government


 • Mayor
Michał Zaleski


Area


 • City
115.75 km2 (44.69 sq mi)


Elevation
65 m (213 ft)


Population (2014)


 • City
203,148


 • Density
1,800/km2 (4,500/sq mi)


 • Metro
297,646


Time zone
CET (UTC+1)


 • Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)


Postal code
87-100 to 87-120


Area code(s)
+48 56


Car plates
CT


Website
http://www.torun.pl/






UNESCO World Heritage Site



Official name
Medieval Town of Toruń


Type
Cultural


Criteria
ii, iv


Designated
1997


Reference no.
[1]


UNESCO region
Europe








Toruń [ˈtɔruɲ] ( listen) (German: Thorn) is a city in northern Poland, on the Vistula River. Its population was 202,591 as of June 2016.[1] Previously it was the capital of the Toruń Voivodeship (1975–98) and the Pomeranian Voivodeship (1921–45). Since 1999, Toruń has been a seat of the self-government of the Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship and, as such, is one of its two capitals (together with Bydgoszcz). The cities and neighboring counties form the Bydgoszcz-Toruń twin city metropolitan area.
Toruń is one of the oldest cities in Poland, with the first settlement dated back to the 8th century and later having been expanded in 1233 by the Teutonic Knights.[2] Over centuries, it was the home for people of diverse backgrounds and religions. At one point, the city was considered the most modern cultural and technological centre in Medieval Europe.[3] From 1264 until 1411 Toruń was part of the Hanseatic League and by the 17th century it was one of the elite trading points, which greatly affected the city's architecture ranging from Brick Gothic to Mannerism and Baroque. Throughout different periods of time, the city was part of Poland, Prussia and Germany; in the early-modern age, the city was a royal city of Poland, it was also considered one of four largest cities of Poland,[4] after the partitions of Poland it was part of Prussia and later on the German Empire. After Poland declared independence in 1918, Toruń was incorporated into Polish territory, and, during World War II, as one of few cities in the country, it sustained no damage. This allowed the Old Town to be fully preserved with its iconic central marketplace.[5]
Believed to be one of the most beautiful cities in Europe,[6] Toruń is renowned for the Museum of Gingerbread, whose baking tradition dates back nearly a millennium, and its large Cathedral. Toruń is noted for its very high standard of living and quality of life.[7] In 1997 the medieval part of the city was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. In 2007 the Old Town in Toruń was added to the list of Seven Wonders of Poland.
Toruń is the birthplace of astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus.



Contents


1 History
2 Sights

2.1 Gothic architecture
2.2 City districts


3 Demographics
4 Transport
5 Economy
6 Culture
7 Education
8 Healthcare
9 Media
10 Sports
11 Notable residents
12 International relations

12.1 Twin towns — Sister cities


13 Gallery
14 See also
15 Notes
16 External links



History[edit]
Further information: History of Toruń
The first settlement in the vicinity of Toruń is dated by archaeologists to 1100 BC (Lusatian culture).[8] During early medieval times, in the 7th through 13th centuries, it was the location of an old Slavonic settlement,[9] at a ford in the Vistula river.
In spring 1231 the Teutonic Knights crossed the river Vistula at the height of Nessau and established a fortress. On 28 December 1233, the Teutonic Knights Hermann von Salza and Hermann Balk,[10] signed the foundation charters for Thorn and Kulm. The original document was lost in 1244. The set of rights in general is known as Kulm law. In 1236, due to frequent flooding,[11] it was relocated to the present site of the Old Town. In 1263 Franciscan monks settled in the city, followed in 1239 by Dominicans. In 1264 the adjacent New Town was founded predominantly to house Torun's growing population of craftsmen and artisans. In 1280, the city (or as it was then, both cities) joined the mercantile Hanseatic League, and thus became an important medieval trade centre.




Gothic City Hall (Ratusz) dates back to the 13th century


The First Peace of Thorn ending the Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War was signed in the city in February 1411 leaving the town in the hands of the Order. In 1440, the gentry of Thorn formed the Prussian Confederation to further oppose the Knights' policies. The Confederation rose against the Monastic state of the Teutonic Knights in 1454 and its delegation submitted a petition to Polish King Casimir IV Jagiellon asking him to regain power over Prussia as the rightful ruler. An act of incorporation was signed in Kraków (6 March 1454), recognizing the region, including Toruń, as part[12] of the Polish Kingdom. These events led to the Thirteen Years' War. The New and the Old Towns amalgamated in 1454. The citizens of Thorn enraged by the Order's ruthless exploitation, conquered the Teutonic castle, and dismantled the fortifications brick by brick, except for the Gdanisko tower, which was used until the 18th century for the gunpowder storage.[13][14] During the war, Toruń financially supported the Polish Army. The Thirteen Years' War ended in 1466 with the Second Peace of Thorn, in which the Teutonic Order ceded their control over the city to Poland. The Polish King granted the town great privileges, similar to those of Gdańsk. In 1501, Polish King John I Albert died in Toruń and his heart was buried in Toruń's St. John's Church. In 1506 Toruń became a royal city of Poland. In 1528, the royal mint started operating in Toruń. A city of great wealth and influence, it enjoyed voting rights during the royal election period.[15] Sejms of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth were held in Toruń in 1576 and 1626.[16]
In 1557, during the Protestant Reformation, the city adopted Protestantism. Under Mayor Heinrich Stroband (1586–1609), the city became centralized. Administrative power passed into the hands of the city council. In 1595 Jesuits arrived to promote the Counter-Reformation, taking control of St. John's Church. The Protestant city officials tried to limit the influx of Catholics into the city, as Catholics (Jesuits and Dominican friars) already controlled most of the churches, leaving only St. Mary's to Protestant citizens.
In 1677 the Prussian historian and educator Christoph Hartknoch was invited to be director of the Thorn Gymnasium, a post which he held until his death in 1687. Hartknoch wrote histories of Prussia, including the cities of Royal Prussia.
During the Great Northern War (1700–21), the city was besieged by Swedish troops. The restoration of Augustus the Strong as King of Poland was prepared in the town in the Treaty of Thorn (1709) by Russian Tsar Peter the Great. In the second half of the 17th century, tensions between Catholics and Protestants grew, similarly to religious wars throughout Europe. In the early 18th century about 50 percent of the populace, especially the gentry and middle class, were German-speaking Protestants, while the other 50 percent were Polish-speaking Roman Catholics.[17] Protestant influence was subsequently pushed back after the Tumult of Thorn of 1724.
After the Second Partition of Poland in 1793, the city was annexed by Prussia (it was regained by Poles as part of the Duchy of Warsaw in years 1807-1815). After World War I, Poland declared independence and regained control over the city. In interwar Poland Toruń was capital of the Pomeranian Voivodeship.
Sights[edit]




City walls and the Leaning Tower






Saint Catherine of Alexandria church in Toruń - a perfect example of Toruń's Gothic Revival architecture






House Under the Star


Listed on the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites since 1997, Toruń has many monuments of architecture dating back to the Middle Ages. The city is famous for having preserved almost intact its medieval spatial layout and many Gothic buildings, all built from brick, including monumental churches, the Town Hall and many burgher houses. The most interesting monuments are:
Gothic architecture[edit]
Toruń has the largest number of preserved Gothic houses in Poland, many with Gothic wall paintings or wood-beam ceilings from the 16th to the 18th centuries.

The Cathedral of SS. John the Evangelist and John the Baptist, an aisled hall church built in the 14th century and extended in the 15th century; outstanding Gothic sculptures and paintings inside (Moses, St. Mary Magdalene, gravestone of Johann von Soest), Renaissance and Baroque epitaphs and altars (among them the epitaph of Copernicus from 1580)
St. Mary's church, a formerly Franciscan aisled hall built in the 14th century
St. James's church (often mistakenly called St Jacob's), a basilica from the 14th century, with monumental wall paintings and Gothic stalls
The Old Town Hall was inaugurated in 1274, than extended and rebuilt between 1391 and 1399, and extended again at the end of the 16th century; considered one of the most monumental town halls in Central Europe
City fortifications, begun in the 13th century, extended between the 14th and 15th centuries, mostly demolished in the 19th century, but partially preserved with a few city gates and watchtowers (among them the so-called Leaning Tower) from the Vistula side. See also: Toruń Fortress
A 15th-century Gothic house (now a museum) where Copernicus was reputedly born
Ruins of 13th-century Teutonic Knights' castle
House at the sign of the Star (Polish: Kamienica Pod Gwiazdą), previously Gothic, briefly owned by Filip Callimachus, then rebuilt in the 16th century and in 1697, with a richly decorated stucco façade and wooden spiral stairs.

Toruń, unlike many other historic cities in Poland, escaped substantial destruction in World War II. Particularly left intact was the Old Town, all of whose important architectural monuments are originals, not reconstructions.
Major renovation projects have been undertaken in recent years to improve the condition and external presentation of the Old Town. Besides the renovation of various buildings, projects such as the reconstruction of the pavement of the streets and squares (reversing them to their historical appearance), and the introduction of new plants, trees and objects of 'small architecture', are underway.
Numerous buildings and other constructions, including the city walls along the boulevard, are illuminated at night, creating an impressive effect - probably unique among Polish cities with respect to the size of Toruń's Old Town and the scale of the illumination project itself.
City districts[edit]
Toruń is divided into 17 administrative districts (dzielnica) or boroughs, each with a degree of autonomy within its own municipal government. The Districts include: Bielany (German: Weißhof), Bielawy (German: Austrieb), Bydgoskie estate (German: Bromberger Vorstadt), Chełmińskie estate (German: Kulmer Vorstadt), Czerniewice (German: Schwarzwalde), Grębocin (German: Gramtschen), Jakubskie (German: Jakobvorstadt), Kaszczorek (German: Kaschorek), Mokre (German: Mocker), Podgórz (German: Amberg), Rubinkowo (German: Bachau), Rudak (German: Rudak), Skarpa, Starówka, Stawki (German: Stewken), Wrzosy (German: Schönwalde), and Wrzosy II.
Demographics[edit]




Old Town Square with Old Town Hall


The most recent statistics show a decrease in the population of the city, to 205,934 in the middle of 2009. This is mainly because quite a large number of citizens have been moving to nearby communities, adjacent to the formal administrative area of Toruń, but still outside it. As a result, Toruń is surrounded by a belt of densely populated settlements, whose inhabitants work, shop and entertain in the city proper, but do not officially live there.
In recent years, a discussion has been taking place as to whether or not these surrounding communities should be incorporated into the city's administrative area. This seems rather inevitable in the longer term, though many say Toruń has almost reached the limit of its development within the city's boundary.




Dąmbski Palace - a baroque residence located on Żeglarska Street


Inside the city itself, most of the population is concentrated on the right (northern) bank of the Vistula river. Two of the most densely populated areas are Rubinkowo and Na Skarpie, housing projects built mostly in the 1970s and 1980s, located between the central and easternmost districts; their total population is about 70,000.
Toruń and Bydgoszcz together make up a bipolar metroplex which, including those cities' counties and a number of smaller towns, may have a population of as much as 800,000. Thus the area contains about one third of the population of the Kuyavia-Pomerania region (which has about 2.1 million inhabitants).
Transport[edit]
The transport network in the city itself has been a subject of much criticism for years. Although the city proper is not very large, the underdeveloped street and road network is a source of problems. It has to deal not only with a traffic generated by Toruń itself, but also with heavy transit and metropolitan traffic. Even the construction of new wide avenues, both by reconstructing existing streets and by construction of others from scratch, has not been enough. The most serious problem, however, is that only a single car traffic bridge crosses the Vistula river inside the city's boundaries.




Main Bus Station in Toruń


The construction of beltways, and thus the reduction of the inflow of vehicles into the city, has helped significantly, but still the existence of only one downtown bridge causes serious transportation difficulties, especially traffic jams. The construction of another bridge, located 4 km (2.49 mi) east of the existing one, has been prepared and was to start in 2009, and most of the necessary funds were to be secured by the end of 2008. Yet, political rivalries and technical difficulties prevented constructions to go on as planned. The construction of the new bridge began in spring 2011 and was completed on 4 July 2013.
The city's public transport system comprises five tram lines and about 40 bus routes, covering the city and some of the neighboring communities.
Toruń is situated at a major road junction, one of the most important in Poland. The A1 highway reaches Toruń, and a southern beltway surrounds the city. Besides these, the European route E75 and a number of domestic roads (numbered 10, 15, and 80) run through the city.




Józef Piłsudski Bridge over the Vistula river - the older of the two road bridges in Toruń


With three main railway stations (Toruń Główny, Toruń Miasto and Toruń Wschodni), the city is a major rail junction, with two important lines crossing there (Warszawa–Bydgoszcz and Wrocław–Olsztyn). Two other lines stem from Toruń, toward Malbork and Sierpc.
The rail connection with Bydgoszcz is run under a name "BiT City" as a "metropolitan rail". Its main purpose is to allow traveling between and within these cities using one ticket. A joint venture of Toruń, Bydgoszcz, Solec Kujawski and the voivodeship, it is considered as important in integrating Bydgoszcz-Toruń metropolitan area. A major modernization of BiT City railroute, as well as a purchase of completely new vehicles to serve the line, is planned for 2008 and 2009. Technically, it will allow to travel between Toruń-East and Bydgoszcz-Airport stations at a speed of 120 km/h (75 mph) in a time of approximately half an hour. In a few years' time "BiT City" will be integrated with local transportation systems of Toruń and Bydgoszcz, thus creating a uniform metropolitan transportation network - with all necessary funds having been secured in 2008.
Since September 2008, the "one-ticket" solution has been introduced also as regards a rail connection with Włocławek, as a "regional ticket". The same is planned for connection with Grudziądz.
Two bus depots serve to connect the city with other towns and cities in Poland.
As of 2008[update], a small sport airfield exists in Toruń; however, a modernization of the airport is seriously considered with a number of investors interested in it. Independently of this, Bydgoszcz Ignacy Jan Paderewski Airport, located about 50 kilometres (31 miles) from Toruń city centre, serves the whole Bydgoszcz-Toruń metropolitan area, with a number of regular flights to European cities.
Economy[edit]
Although a medium-sized city, Toruń is the site of headquarters of some of the largest and most influential companies in Poland, or at least of their subsidiaries. The official unemployment rate, as of September 2008, is 5.4%.
In 2006, construction of new plants owned by Sharp Corporation and other companies of mainly Japanese origin has started in the neighboring community of Łysomice - about 10 kilometres (6 miles) from city centre. The facilities under construction are located in a newly created special economic zone. As a result of cooperation of the companies mentioned above, a vast high-tech complex is to be constructed in the next few years, providing as many as 10,000 jobs (a prediction for 2010) at the cost of about 450 million euros. As of 2008[update], the creation of another special economic zone is being considered, this time inside city limits.
Thanks to its architectural heritage Toruń is visited by more than 1.5 million tourists a year (1.6 million in 2007). This makes tourism an important branch of the local economy, although time spent in the city by individual tourists or the number of hotels, which can serve them, are still not considered satisfactory. Major investments in renovation of the city's monuments, building new hotels (including high-standard ones), improvement in promotion, as well as launching new cultural and scientific events and facilities, give very good prospects for Toruń's tourism.




Toruń's typical renovated Old Town street - Małe Garbary


In recent years Toruń has been a site of intense building construction investments, mainly residential and in its transportation network. The latter has been possible partly due to the use of European Union funds assigned for new member states. Toruń city county generates by far the highest number of new dwellings built each year among all Kuyavian-Pomeranian counties, both relative to its population as well as in absolute values. It has led to almost complete rebuilding of some districts. As of 2008[update], many major constructions are either under development or are to be launched soon - the value of some of them exceeding 100 million euros. They include a new speedway stadium, major shopping and entertainment centres, a commercial complex popularly called a "New Centre of Toruń", a music theater, a centre of contemporary art, hotels, office buildings, facilities for the Nicolaus Copernicus University, roads and tram routes, sewage and fresh water delivery systems, residential projects, the possibility of a new bridge over the Vistula, and more. Construction of the A1 motorway and the BiT City fast metropolitan railway also directly affects the city. About 25,000 local firms are registered in Toruń.
Culture[edit]




Toruń planetarium


Toruń has two drama theatres (Teatr im. Wilama Horzycy with three stages and Teatr Wiczy), two children's theatres (Baj Pomorski and Zaczarowany Świat), two music theatres (Mała Rewia, Studencki Teatr Tańca), and numerous other theatre groups. The city hosts, among others events, the international theatre festival, "Kontakt", annually in May
A building called Baj Pomorski has recently been completely reconstructed. It is now one of the most modern cultural facilities in the city, with its front elevation in the shape of a gigantic chest of drawers. It is located at the south-east edge of the Old Town. Toruń has two cinemas including a Cinema City, which has over 2,000 seats.




Toruń's main stage, the Wilam Horzyca Theatre


Over ten major museums document the history of Toruń and the region. Among others, the "House of Kopernik" and the accompanying museum commemorate Nicolaus Copernicus and his revolutionary work, the university museum reveals the history of the city's academic past.




Toruń's city centre incorporates a large commercial district






Toruń gingerbread


The Tony Halik Travelers' Museum (Muzeum Podróżników im.Tony Halika) was established in 2003 after Elżbieta Dzikowska donated to citizens of Toruń a collection of objects from various countries and cultures following the death of her husband, famous explorer and writer Tony Halik.
The Centre of Contemporary Art (Centrum Sztuki Współczesnej - CSW) opened in June 2008 and is one of the most important cultural facilities of this kind in Poland. The modern building is located in the very centre of the city, adjacent to the Old Town. The Toruń Symphonic Orchestra (formerly the Toruń Chamber Orchestra) is well-rooted in the Toruń cultural landscape.
Toruń is home to a planetarium (located downtown) and an astronomical observatory (located in nearby community of Piwnice). The latter boasts the largest radio telescope in the Eastern part of Central Europe with a diameter of 32 m (104.99 ft), second only to the Effelsberg 100 m (328.08 ft) radio telescope.
Toruń is well known for Toruń gingerbread, a type of pierniki often made in elaborate moulds. Muzeum Piernika in Toruń is the only museum dedicated to gingerbread in Europe.[18]
Education[edit]
Over thirty elementary and primary schools and over ten high schools make up the educational base of Toruń. Besides these, students can also attend a handful of private schools.
The largest institution of higher education in Toruń, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń serves over 40 thousand students and was founded in 1945, based on the Toruń Scientific Society, Stefan Batory University in Wilno, and Jan Kazimierz University in Lviv. The existence of a high-ranked and high-profiled university with so many students plays a great role the city's position and importance in general, as well as in creating an image of Toruń's streets and clubs filled with crowds of young people. It also has a serious influence on local economy.
Other public institutions of higher education:

Wyższe Seminarium Duchowne (a section of the Theological Faculty of the Nicolaus Copernicus University)
The Teacher Training College - Nauczycielskie Kolegium Języków Obcych (affiliated to the Nicolaus Copernicus University)
College of Fashion (Kolegium Mody)
University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn - Faculty of Geodesy and Land Management Department in Toruń
College of Social Work - Kolegium Pracowników Służb Społecznych
University of Gdańsk - College of Language

There are also a number of private higher education facilities:

WSB Universities - WSB University in Toruń[19]
The University of Social & Medial Culture in Toruń - Wyższa Szkoła Kultury Społecznej i Medialnej (affiliate to the Radio Maryja)
Toruńska Szkoła Wyższa
Wyższa Szkoła Filologii Hebrajskiej (Higher School of Hebrew Philology)
Toruń School of Entrepreneurship - Toruńska Wyższa Szkoła Przedsiębiorczości

Healthcare[edit]




Municipal children's hospital


Six hospitals of various specializations provide medical service for Toruń itself, its surrounding area and to the region in general. The two largest of these hospitals, recently run by the voivodeship, are to be taken over by Nicolaus Copernicus University and run as its clinical units. At least one of them is to change its status in 2008, with the formal procedures being very advanced.
In addition, there are a number of other healthcare facilities in the city.
Media[edit]

Press

daily newspapers: Nasz Dziennik, Rzeczpospolita, Gazeta Wyborcza Toruń, Gazeta Pomorska, Nowości, Metro
Weekly magazines: Niedziela, City Toruń, Teraz Toruń,
Other: Undergrunt, Immuniet, Ilustrator, Poza Toruń


Radio Stations:

Polskie Radio Pomorza i Kujaw,
Radio ESKA, - which plays international hits, along with Polish music.
Radio GRA,
Radio ZET Gold,
Radio Sfera,
WAWA,
RMF FM
Radio Maryja - a radio station that broadcasts religious observances such as mass and prayer in Polish


TV Stations:

TVN/TVN24 - regional office,
TVP Info - Oddział w Bydgoszczy, Redakcja Terenowa w Toruniu,[20]
Telewizja Trwam
Podróże TV,
Telewizja Kablowa Toruń
Telewizja TAT Studio Region ,
Telewizja Petrus



Sports[edit]




Toruń's motoarena is one of world's newest speedway stadia



Unibax Toruń - motorcycle speedway who ride in the Speedway Ekstraliga, Polish Champions four times
Toruński Klub Piłkarski (former ZKS Elana Toruń) - football (3rd division in Poland)
Angels Toruń [2] - American football - Polish American Football League First Division
Nesta Toruń - ice hockey (collapse of the financial)
Pomorzanin Toruń - field hockey (premier league in Poland), football (4th division in Poland), box
Nestle-Pacyfic - cycling
Toruński Klub Bowlingowy - bowling
Katarzynki Energa Toruń - basketball (women premier league in Poland)
TKS-T Budowlani Toruń - volleyball (women premier league in Poland)
Twarde Perniki Polski Cukier Toruń - basketball (men premier league in Poland)
UKS Budowlanka Toruń - volleyball
Municipal Stadium (Toruń)
Moto Park Toruń

Notable residents[edit]
Further information: Category:People from Toruń
International relations[edit]
Honouring Toruń's sister relationship with Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the Bulwar Filadelfijski (Philadelphia Boulevard), a 2 km (1.2 mi) long street running mostly between Vistula River and walls of the Old Town and the boulevard itself, bears its name.
The Ślimak Getyński (German: Goettingen Schnecke) is one of the lanes connecting Piłsudski Bridge / John Paul II Avenue with Philadelphia Boulevard at their downtown interchange. It honours the relationship with Göttingen, its name derived from the street's half-circular shape (Polish word ślimak meaning "snail").
Twin towns — Sister cities[edit]




Toruń's twin cities


See also: List of twin towns and sister cities in Poland
Toruń is twinned with:[21]




 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States, since 1977[21]
 Göttingen, Lower Saxony, Germany, since 1978[21]
 Leiden, South Holland, Netherlands, since 1988[21]
 Hämeenlinna, Finland, since 1989[21]




 Kaliningrad, Russian Federation, since 1995[21]
 Čadca, Slovakia, since 1996[21]
 Swindon, Wiltshire, England, United Kingdom, since 2003 [21][22][23]
 Novo Mesto, Slovenia, since 2005[21]
 Lutsk, Ukraine, since 2008[21]
 Guilin, China, since 2010[21]




Gallery[edit]







Toruń Cathedral









City Hall









Toruń Old Town centre









Historic tenement houses along Warszawska Street









Holy Spirit Church









Artus Court









Copernicus House









Caesar's Arch Tenement House









Gothic St. George Guildhall









St. James Church









Former Police Station Building









City tram line









Main Post Office









Baj Pomorski Theatre









Szeroka Street









Gen. Elżbieta Zawacka Bridge









Józef Piłsudski Bridge over the Vistula River









St. Mary's Church









Toruń Planetarium









Castle tower and mill in Toruń









University City









Toruń Arena









Thorn in Christoph Hartknoch's Old and New Prussia (1684)




See also[edit]

Tourism in Poland
Gingerbread Museum

Notes[edit]


^ "Population in Poland. Size and structure by territorial division (ASPX) (in Polish)". stat.gov.pl. stat.gov.pl. 2016. Retrieved 17 November 2016. 
^ "History of Toruń". www.torun.pl. Retrieved 20 August 2017. 
^ Witosławska, Agata. "Torun - the city of many nations". Retrieved 7 April 2017. 
^ Maria Bogucka, Miasto i mieszczanin w społeczeństwie Polski nowożytnej XVI-XVIII w., Warsaw 2009
^ Development, JW Web. "VisitTorun: Torun Guide - Home". Retrieved 7 April 2017. 
^ Witosławska, Agata. "Medieval Town of Toruń". Retrieved 7 April 2017. 
^ "Jakość życia w polskich miastach - ranking - Urbnews.pl". 2 December 2015. Retrieved 7 April 2017. 
^ Hypothetical reconstruction of a Lusatian culture settlement, built using bronze age tools: Wola Radziszowska, Poland, part of a study by scientists from the Jagiellonian University's Institute Of Archaeology.
^ Encyklopedia Powszechna PWN Warsaw 1976
^ "Krzyżacy - założyciele Torunia" (Teutonic Knights — the founders of Thorn). (Internet Archive) Urząd Miasta Torunia. "The foundation charter for Thorn was signed on 28th December 1233 by the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order Hermann von Salza and the National Master for Prussia and the Slavonic Lands Hermann Balka. In that way Thorn was founded by the Teutonic Order and managed by the Knights until 1454." Retrieved 16 June 2013.
^ Max Töppen Historisch-comparative Geographie von Preussen: Nach den Quellen, namentlich auch archivalischen, J. Perthes, 1858; PDF
^ F. Kiryk, J. Ryś, Wielka Historia polski, t. II, 1320-1506, Kraków 1997, p. 160-161.
^ Torun.pl (2017). "Ruiny Zamku Krzyżackiego" [Remnants of the Teutonic Castle]. Toruńskie Serwisy Miejskie. Urząd Miasta Torunia. Retrieved 12 March 2017. 
^ Urząd Miasta Torunia (2012). "Krzyżacy - założyciele Torunia" [Teutonic Nights – the founders of town]. Gotyk na dotyk. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012 – via Internet Archive. 
^ Polska Encyklopedia Szlachecka, t. I, Warsaw 1935, p. 42.
^ Władysław Konopczyński, Chronologia sejmów polskich 1493-1793.
^ Bahlcke, Joachim (2008). Daniel Ernst Jablonski; Religion, Wissenschaft und Politik um 1700 (in German). p. 227. ISBN 978-3-447-05793-6. 
^ "The Living Museum of Gingerbread". Retrieved 7 April 2017. 
^ WSB University in Toruń - WSB Universities
^ "Tvp Bydgoszcz". Ww6.tvp.pl. Retrieved 6 May 2009. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Miasta bliźniacze Torunia" [Toruń's twin towns]. Urząd Miasta Torunia [City of Toruń Council] (in Polish). Retrieved 22 August 2013. 
^ "Heritage Twin Towns". © 2003-2009 Swindon Borough Council. Retrieved 16 February 2009. 
^ "Torun - Twin Town in Poland". www.swindon.gov.uk. Retrieved 7 November 2009. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Toruń.





Wikisource has the text of the 1921 Collier's Encyclopedia article Thorn (town).



Municipal website
 Torun travel guide from Wikivoyage





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Principal cities of Poland



1,000,000+



Warsaw








750,000+



Kraków





500,000+



Łódź
Wrocław
Poznań





200,000+



Gdańsk
Szczecin
Bydgoszcz
Lublin
Katowice
Białystok
Gdynia
Częstochowa
Radom
Sosnowiec
Toruń
Kielce





100,000+



Gliwice
Rzeszów
Zabrze
Olsztyn
Bytom
Bielsko-Biała
Ruda Śląska
Rybnik
Tychy
Dąbrowa Górnicza
Gorzów Wielkopolski
Płock
Elbląg
Opole
Wałbrzych
Zielona Góra
Włocławek
Tarnów
Chorzów
Koszalin
Kalisz
Legnica












v
t
e


Members of the Hanseatic League by Quarter







Chief cities shown in smallcaps.
Free Imperial Cities of the Holy Roman Empire shown in italics.






Wendish




Lübeck



Anklam
Demmin
Greifswald
Hamburg
Kolberg (Kołobrzeg)
Lüneburg
Rostock
Rügenwalde (Darłowo)
Stettin (Szczecin)
Stolp (Słupsk)
Stockholm
Stralsund
Visby
Wismar













Saxon





Brunswick
Magdeburg




Berlin
Bremen
Erfurt
Frankfurt an der Oder
Goslar
Mühlhausen
Nordhausen








Baltic





Danzig
(Gdańsk)




Breslau (Wrocław)
Dorpat (Tartu)
Elbing (Elbląg)
Königsberg (Kaliningrad)
Cracow (Kraków)
Reval (Tallinn)
Riga (Rīga)
Thorn (Toruń)








Westphalian





Cologne 1
Dortmund 1




Deventer
Groningen
Kampen
Münster
Osnabrück
Soest














Kontore




Principal



Bryggen (Bergen)
Hanzekantoor

Bruges
Antwerp2 


Steelyard (London)
Peterhof (Novgorod)





Subsidiary



Bishop's Lynn
Falsterbo
Ipswich
Kaunas
Malmö
Polotsk
Pskov








Other cities



Bristol
Boston
Damme
Leith
Herford
Hull
Newcastle
Stargard
Yarmouth
York
Zutphen
Zwolle









1 Cologne and Dortmund were both capital of the Westphalian Quarter at different times.
2 Antwerp gained importance once Bruges became inaccessible due to the silting of the Zwin channel.













v
t
e


Counties of Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship



City counties



Bydgoszcz (governor's seat)
Toruń (assembly seat)
Grudziądz
Włocławek








Land counties



Aleksandrów
Brodnica
Bydgoszcz
Chełmno
Golub-Dobrzyń
Grudziądz
Inowrocław
Lipno
Mogilno
Nakło
Radziejów
Rypin
Sępólno
Świecie
Toruń
Tuchola
Wąbrzeźno
Włocławek
Żnin












v
t
e


Toruń County




Seat (not part of the county): Toruń



Urban gmina:



Chełmża








Rural gminas



Gmina Chełmża
Gmina Czernikowo
Gmina Łubianka
Gmina Lubicz
Gmina Łysomice
Gmina Obrowo
Gmina Wielka Nieszawka
Gmina Zławieś Wielka












v
t
e


World Heritage Sites in Poland






Auschwitz-Birkenau German Nazi Concentration and Extermination Camp (1940–1945)
Białowieża Forest / Belovezhskaya Pushcha (with Belarus)
Castle of the Teutonic Order in Malbork
Centennial Hall, Wrocław
Churches of Peace in Jawor and Świdnica
Cracow's Historic Centre
Kalwaria Zebrzydowska: the Mannerist Architectural and Park Landscape Complex and Pilgrimage Park
Medieval Town of Toruń
Muskauer Park / Park Mużakowski (with Germany)
Old City of Zamość
Tarnowskie Góry Lead-Silver-Zinc Mine and its Underground Water Management System
Historic Centre of Warsaw
Wieliczka and Bochnia Royal Salt Mines
Wooden churches of Southern Lesser Poland
Wooden tserkvas of the Carpathian region in Poland and Ukraine






Coordinates: 53°01′N 18°37′E﻿ / ﻿53.017°N 18.617°E﻿ / 53.017; 18.617







Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 149128250
GND: 4059950-4











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Toruń&oldid=816113620"					Categories: ToruńCity counties of PolandCities and towns in Kuyavian-Pomeranian VoivodeshipMembers of the Hanseatic LeagueKulm lawPomeranian Voivodeship (1919–39)Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 Polish-language sources (pl)Use dmy dates from August 2017Lang and lang-xx template errorsArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Polish-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2008All articles containing potentially dated statementsCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers