

Part of the Politics series


Basic forms of government


Power structure





Separation




Associated state
Dominion
Chiefdom




Federalism




Federation
Confederation
Devolution




Integration




Empire
Hegemony
Unitary state




Administrative division





Power source





Democracy
power of many




Direct
Representative
Liberal
Social
Demarchy
others




Oligarchy
power of few




Aristocracy
Plutocracy
Kraterocracy
Stratocracy
Timocracy
Meritocracy
Technocracy
Geniocracy
Noocracy
Kritarchy
Particracy
Ergatocracy
Netocracy




Autocracy
power of one




Despotism
Dictatorship
Military dictatorship




Others




Anocracy
Anarchy
Theocracy







Power ideology





Monarchy vs. Republic
socio-political ideologies




Absolute
Legalist
Constitutional
Parliamentary
Directorial
Semi-presidential
Presidential




Authoritarian vs. Libertarian
socio-economic ideologies




Tribalism
Despotism
Feudalism
Colonialism
Minarchism
Distributism
Anarchism
Socialism
Communism
Totalitarianism




Global vs. Local
geo-cultural ideologies




Commune
City-state
National government
Intergovernmental organisation
World government







Politics portal





v
t
e









Adolf Hitler






Joseph Stalin


Totalitarianism is a political system where the state recognizes no limits to its authority and strives to regulate every aspect of public and private life wherever feasible.[1] Totalitarian regimes stay in political power through an all-encompassing propaganda campaign, which is disseminated through the state-controlled mass media, a single party that is often marked by political repression, personality cultism, control over the economy, regulation and restriction of speech, mass surveillance, and widespread use of terror. A distinctive feature of totalitarian governments is an "elaborate ideology, a set of ideas that gives meaning and direction to the whole society."[2]
The concept was first developed in the 1920s by the Weimar German jurist, and later Nazi academic, Carl Schmitt, and Italian fascists. According to Benito Mussolini, this system politicizes everything spiritual and human: "Everything within the state, nothing outside the state, nothing against the state." Schmitt used the term, Totalstaat, in his influential work on the legal basis of an all-powerful state, The Concept of the Political (1927).[3]
Totalitarian regimes are different from authoritarian ones. The latter denotes a state in which the single power holder – an individual "dictator", a committee or a junta or an otherwise small group of political elite – monopolizes political power. "[The] authoritarian state ... is only concerned with political power and as long as that is not contested it gives society a certain degree of liberty."[4] Authoritarianism "does not attempt to change the world and human nature."[4] In contrast, a totalitarian regime attempts to control virtually all aspects of the social life, including the economy, education, art, science, private life, and morals of citizens. "The officially proclaimed ideology penetrates into the deepest reaches of societal structure and the totalitarian government seeks to completely control the thoughts and actions of its citizens."[5] It also mobilizes the whole population in pursuit of its goals. Carl Joachim Friedrich writes that "a totalist ideology, a party reinforced by a secret police, and monopoly control of [...] industrial mass society" are the three features of totalitarian regimes that distinguish them from other autocracies.[4]



Contents


1 Early concepts and use
2 Later research
3 Totalitarianism in architecture
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Early concepts and use[edit]
The notion of totalitarianism as a "total" political power by the state was formulated in 1923 by Giovanni Amendola, who described Italian Fascism as a system fundamentally different from conventional dictatorships.[5] The term was later assigned a positive meaning in the writings of Giovanni Gentile, Italy’s most prominent philosopher and leading theorist of fascism. He used the term “totalitario” to refer to the structure and goals of the new state, which were to provide the “total representation of the nation and total guidance of national goals.”[6] He described totalitarianism as a society in which the ideology of the state had influence, if not power, over most of its citizens.[7] According to Benito Mussolini, this system politicizes everything spiritual and human: "Everything within the state, nothing outside the state, nothing against the state."[5] He stated that "We must finish once and for all with the neutrality of chess. We must condemn once and for all the formula 'chess for the sake of chess', like the formula 'art for art's sake'. We must organize shockbrigades of chess-players, and begin immediate realization of a Five-Year Plan for chess."[8]




Mao Zedong


One of the first to use the term "totalitarianism" in the English language was the Austrian writer Franz Borkenau in his 1938 book The Communist International, in which he commented that it united the Soviet and German dictatorships more than it divided them.[9] The label "totalitarian" was twice affixed to the Hitler regime during Winston Churchill's speech of October 5, 1938[10] before the House of Commons in opposition to the Munich Agreement, by which France and Great Britain consented to Nazi Germany's annexation of the Sudetenland. Churchill was then a backbencher MP representing the Epping constituency. In a radio address two weeks later Churchill again employed the term, this time applying the concept to "a Communist or a Nazi tyranny."[11]
The leader of the historic Spanish reactionary[12] conservative party called the Spanish Confederation of the Autonomous Right declared his intention to "give Spain a true unity, a new spirit, a totalitarian polity..." and went on to say "Democracy is not an end but a means to the conquest of the new state. When the time comes, either parliament submits or we will eliminate it."[13]
George Orwell made frequent use of word totalitarian and its cognates in multiple essays published in 1940, 1941 and 1942. In his essay Why I Write he wrote: "The Spanish war and other events in 1936-37 turned the scale and thereafter I knew where I stood. Every line of serious work that I have written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly, against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism, as I understand it."[14]}}
During a 1945 lecture series entitled The Soviet Impact on the Western World (published as a book in 1946), the pro-Soviet British historian E. H. Carr claimed that "The trend away from individualism and towards totalitarianism is everywhere unmistakable", and that Marxism–Leninism was by far the most successful type of totalitarianism, as proved by Soviet industrial growth and the Red Army's role in defeating Germany. Only the "blind and incurable" could ignore the trend towards totalitarianism, said Carr.[15]
Karl Popper, in The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) and The Poverty of Historicism (1961), articulated an influential critique of totalitarianism: in both works, he contrasted the "open society" of liberal democracy with totalitarianism, and argued that the latter is grounded in the belief that history moves toward an immutable future in accordance with knowable laws.
In The Origins of Totalitarianism, Hannah Arendt argued that Nazi and State communist regimes were new forms of government, and not merely updated versions of the old tyrannies. According to Arendt, the source of the mass appeal of totalitarian regimes is their ideology, which provides a comforting, single answer to the mysteries of the past, present, and future. For Nazism, all history is the history of race struggle; and, for Marxism, all history is the history of class struggle. Once that premise is accepted, all actions of the state can be justified by appeal to Nature or the Law of History, justifying their establishment of authoritarian state apparatus.[16]
In addition to Arendt, many scholars from a variety of academic backgrounds and ideological positions have closely examined totalitarianism. Among the most noted commentators on totalitarianism are Raymond Aron, Lawrence Aronsen, Franz Borkenau, Karl Dietrich Bracher, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Robert Conquest, Carl Joachim Friedrich, Eckhard Jesse, Leopold Labedz, Walter Laqueur, Claude Lefort, Juan Linz, Richard Löwenthal, Karl Popper, Richard Pipes, Leonard Schapiro, and Adam Ulam. Each one of these describes totalitarianism in slightly different ways. They all agree, however, that totalitarianism seeks to mobilize entire populations in support of an official state ideology, and is intolerant of activities which are not directed towards the goals of the state, entailing repression or state control of business, labour unions, non-profit organizations, churches or political parties.
Later research[edit]
The concept became prominent in Western anti-communist political discourse during the Cold War era.[17][18][19][20][21]
The political scientists Carl Friedrich and Zbigniew Brzezinski were primarily responsible for expanding the usage of the term in university social science and professional research, reformulating it as a paradigm for the Soviet Union as well as fascist regimes. Friedrich and Brzezinski argue that a totalitarian system has the following six, mutually supportive, defining characteristics:

Elaborate guiding ideology.
Single mass party, typically led by a dictator.
System of terror, using such instruments as violence and secret police.
Monopoly on weapons.
Monopoly on the means of communication.
Central direction and control of the economy through state planning.

Totalitarian regimes in Germany, Italy and the Soviet Union had initial origins in the chaos that followed in the wake of World War I and allowed totalitarian movements to seize control of the government, while the sophistication of modern weapons and communications enabled them to effectively establish what Friedrich and Brzezinski called a totalitarian dictatorship. Some social scientists have criticized Friedrich and Brzezinski's approach, arguing that the Soviet system, both as a political and as a social entity, was in fact better understood in terms of interest groups, competing elites, or even in class terms (using the concept of the nomenklatura as a vehicle for a new ruling class).[22] These critics pointed to evidence of popular support for the regime and widespread dispersion of power, at least in the implementation of policy, among sectoral and regional authorities. For some followers of this 'pluralist' approach, this was evidence of the ability of the regime to adapt to include new demands. However, proponents of the totalitarian model claimed that the failure of the system to survive showed not only its inability to adapt but the mere formality of supposed popular participation.
The German historian Karl Dietrich Bracher, whose work is primarily concerned with Nazi Germany, argues that the "totalitarian typology" as developed by Friedrich and Brzezinski is an excessively inflexible model, and failed to consider the “revolutionary dynamic” that Bracher asserts is at the heart of totalitarianism.[23] Bracher maintains that the essence of totalitarianism is the total claim to control and remake all aspects of society combined with an all-embracing ideology, the value on authoritarian leadership, and the pretence of the common identity of state and society, which distinguished the totalitarian "closed" understanding of politics from the "open" democratic understanding.[23] Unlike the Friedrich-Brzezinski definition Bracher argued that totalitarian regimes did not require a single leader and could function with a collective leadership, which led the American historian Walter Laqueur to argue that Bracher's definition seemed to fit reality better than the Friedrich-Brzezinski definition.[24]
In his book The True Believer, Eric Hoffer argues that mass movements like Stalinism, fascism, and Nazism had a common trait in picturing Western democracies and their values as decadent, with people "too soft, too pleasure-loving and too selfish" to sacrifice for a higher cause, which for them implies an inner moral and biological decay. He further claims that those movements offered the prospect of a glorious future to frustrated people, enabling them to find a refuge from the lack of personal accomplishments in their individual existence. The individual is then assimilated into a compact collective body and "fact-proof screens from reality" are established.[25]
in 1990s François Furet used the term "totalitarian twins"[26] to link Stalinism[27] and Nazism.[28]
Historians of the Nazi period who are inclined towards a functionalist interpretation of the Third Reich, such as Martin Broszat, Hans Mommsen and Ian Kershaw, have been hostile or lukewarm towards the totalitarianism concept, arguing that the Nazi regime was too disorganized to be considered totalitarian.[29]
In the field of Soviet history, the totalitarian concept has been disparaged by the "revisionist" school, some of whose more prominent members are Sheila Fitzpatrick, Jerry F. Hough, William McCagg, Robert W. Thurston, and J. Arch Getty.[30] Though their individual interpretations differ, the revisionists have argued that the Soviet state under Joseph Stalin was institutionally weak, that the level of terror was much exaggerated, and that—to the extent it occurred—it reflected the weaknesses rather than the strengths of the Soviet state.[30] Fitzpatrick argued that the Stalin's purges in the Soviet Union provided an increased social mobility and therefore a chance for a better life.[31][32]
Writing in 1987, Walter Laqueur said that the revisionists in the field of Soviet history were guilty of confusing popularity with morality, and of making highly embarrassing and not very convincing arguments against the concept of the Soviet Union as a totalitarian state.[33] Laqueur argued that the revisionists' arguments with regard to Soviet history were highly similar to the arguments made by Ernst Nolte regarding German history.[33] Laqueur asserted that concepts such as modernization were inadequate tools for explaining Soviet history while totalitarianism was not.[34]
Totalitarianism in architecture[edit]
Non-political aspects of the culture and motifs of totalitarian countries have themselves often been labeled innately "totalitarian". For example, Theodore Dalrymple, a British author, physician, and political commentator, has written for City Journal that brutalist structures are an expression of totalitarianism given that their grand, concrete-based design involves destroying gentler, more-human places such as gardens.[35] In 1949, author George Orwell described the Ministry of Truth in Nineteen Eighty-Four as an "enormous, pyramidal structure of white concrete, soaring up terrace after terrace, three hundred metres into the air". Columnist Ben Macintyre of The Times wrote that it was "a prescient description of the sort of totalitarian architecture that would soon dominate the Communist bloc".[36]
Another example of totalitarianism in architecture is the Panopticon, a type of institutional building designed by English philosopher and social theorist Jeremy Bentham in the late eighteenth century. The concept of the design is to allow a watchman to observe (-opticon) all (pan-) inmates of an institution without their being able to tell whether or not they are being watched. It was invoked by Michel Foucault, in Discipline and Punish, as metaphor for "disciplinary" societies and their pervasive inclination to observe and normalise.[citation needed]
See also[edit]


Absolute monarchy
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Dictatorship
Fascism
Ideocracy
Imperialism
Inverted totalitarianism
List of totalitarian regimes
One-party state
Police state
State collapse
Strongman (politics)
Total institution
Totalitarian democracy


References[edit]


^ Conquest, Robert (1999). Reflections on a Ravaged Century. p. 74. ISBN 0-393-04818-7. 
^ "Government and Law". Volume Library 1. The Southwestern Company. 2009. p. 11. 
^ Schmitt, Carl (1927). The Concept of the Political (German: Der Begriff des Politischen) (1996 University of Chicago Press ed.). Rutgers University Press. p. 22. ISBN 0-226-73886-8. 
^ a b c Radu Cinpoes, Nationalism and Identity in Romania: A History of Extreme Politics from the Birth of the State to EU Accession, p. 70.
^ a b c Pipes 1995, p. 243
^ Payne, Stanley G., Fascism: Comparison and Definition (UW Press, 1980), p. 73
^ Gentile, Giovanni and Benito Mussolini in "La dottrina del fascismo" (1932)
^ Conquest, Robert, The Great Terror: A Reassessment (Oxford University Press, 1990) ISBN 0-19-507132-8, p. 249
^ Nemoianu, Virgil, "Review of End and Beginnings" pp. 1235–38 from MLN, Volume 97, Issue #5, December 1982, p.1235.
^ Churchill, Winston, Speech to the House of Commons, October 5, 1938: "We in this country, as in other Liberal and democratic countries, have a perfect right to exalt the principle of self-determination, but it comes ill out of the mouths of those in totalitarian states who deny even the smallest element of toleration to every section and creed within their bounds." "Many of those countries, in fear of the rise of the Nazi power, ... loathed the idea of having this arbitrary rule of the totalitarian system thrust upon them, and hoped that a stand would be made."
^ Churchill, Winston, Radio Broadcast to the United States and to London, October 16, 1938
^ Mann, Michael (2004). Fascists. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 331. ISBN 9780521831314. 
^ Paul Preston. The Spanish Civil War: reaction, revolution and revenge. 3rd edition. W. W. New York, New York: Norton & Company, Inc, 2007. 2006 pp. 64.
^ Orwell, George, "Why I Write", Gangrel (Summer) 1946.
^ Laqueur, Walter, The Fate of the Revolution, New York: Scribner, 1987, p. 131.
^ Dana Richard Villa (2000), The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt. Cambridge University Press, pp. 2–3. ISBN 0-521-64571-9
^ Defty, Brook (2007). Britain, America and Anti-Communist Propaganda 1945–1953. Chapters 2–5. The Information Research Department. 
^ Achim Siegel, The totalitarian paradigm after the end of Communism: towards a theoretical reassessment, 1998, p. 200 "Concepts of totalitarianism became most widespread at the height of the Cold War. Since the late 1940s, especially since the Korean War, they were condensed into a far-reaching, even hegemonic, ideology, by which the political elites of the Western world tried to explain and even to justify the Cold War constellation"
^ Nicholas Guilhot, The democracy makers: human rights and international order, 2005, p. 33 "The opposition between the West and Soviet totalitarianism was often presented as an opposition both moral and epistemological between truth and falsehood. The democratic, social, and economic credentials of the Soviet Union were typically seen as "lies" and as the product of a deliberate and multiform propaganda...In this context, the concept of totalitarianism was itself an asset. As it made possible the conversion of prewar anti-fascism into postwar anti-communism
^ David Caute, Politics and the novel during the Cold War, 2009, pp. 95–99
^ George A Reisch, How the Cold War transformed philosophy of science: to the icy slopes of logic, 2005, pp. 153–54
^ Laqueur, Walter, The Fate of the Revolution: Interpretations of Soviet history from 1917 to the Present (New York: Scribner's, 1987) pp. 186–89, 233–34
^ a b Kershaw, Ian The Nazi Dictatorship: Problems and Perspectives of Interpretation, London: Arnold; New York p. 25.
^ Laqueur, Walter The Fate of the Revolution: Interpretations of Soviet history from 1917 to the Present, New York: Scribner's, 1987 p. 241
^ Eric Hoffer, The True Believer: Thoughts on the Nature of Mass Movements, Harper Perennial Modern Classics (2002), ISBN 0-06-050591-5, pp. 61, 163
^ "Furet, borrowing from Hannah Arendt, describes Bolsheviks and Nazis as totalitarian twins, conflicting yet united." Singer, Daniel, The Nation (April 17, 1995)
^ "The totalitarian nature of Stalin's Russia is undeniable." Singer, Singer,The Nation
^ "The government of Nazi Germany was a fascist, totalitarian state." Grobman, Gary M.
^ Lorenz, Chris, "Broszat, Martin" in Boyd, Kelly, ed., The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing, vol. 1 (London: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, 1999) pp. 143–44; Kerhsaw, Ian, The Nazi Dictatorship Problems and Perspectives of Interpretation (London: Arnold Press, 2000) pp. 45–46; Menke, Martin, "Mommsen, Hans" in Boyd, Kelly, ed., The Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing, vol. 2, (London: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishing, 1999) pp. 826–27
^ a b Laqueur, Walter The Fate of the Revolution: Interpretations of Soviet history from 1917 to the Present (New York: Scribner's, 1987) pp. 225–27
^ Laqueur, Walter, The Fate of the Revolution: Interpretations of Soviet history from 1917 to the Present (New York: Scribner's, 1987) pp. 225, 228
^ Fitzpatrick, Sheila, Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary Times: Soviet Russia in the 1930s (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999)
^ a b Laqueur, Walter The Fate of the Revolution: Interpretations of Soviet history from 1917 to the Present (New York: Scribner's, 1987) p. 228
^ Laqueur, Walter The Fate of the Revolution: Interpretations of Soviet history from 1917 to the Present (New York: Scribner's, 1987) p. 233
^ Theodore Dalrymple (Autumn 2009). "The Architect as Totalitarian". City Journal. Retrieved January 5, 2010. 
^ Ben Macintyre (March 30, 2007). "Look on those monuments to megalomania, and despair". The Times. Retrieved January 5, 2010. 


Further reading[edit]


Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (1958, new ed. 1966)
John A. Armstrong, The Politics of Totalitarianism (New York: Random House, 1961)
Peter Bernholz, "Ideocracy and totalitarianism: A formal analysis incorporating ideology." Public Choice 108, 33–75, 2001
Peter Bernholz, "Ideology, sects, state and totalitarianism. A general theory". In: H. Maier and M. Schaefer (eds.): Totalitarianism and Political Religions, Vol. II (Routledge, Abingdon Oxon and New York, 2007), 246–70
Franz Borkenau The Totalitarian Enemy, London, Faber and Faber 1940
Karl Dietrich Bracher “The Disputed Concept of Totalitarianism,” pp. 11–33 from Totalitarianism Reconsidered edited by Ernest A. Menze (Port Washington, N.Y. / London: Kennikat Press, 1981), ISBN 0804692688.
Michel Foucault, The Birth of Biopolitics (in particular March 7, 1979 course)
Carl Friedrich and Z. K. Brzezinski, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy (2nd ed. 1967)
Zhelyu Zhelev, The Fascism, 1982
Guy Hermet, with Pierre Hassner and Jacques Rupnik, Totalitarismes (Paris: Éditions Economica, 1984)
Abbott Gleason Totalitarianism: The Inner History Of The Cold War, New York: Oxford University Press, (1995), ISBN 0195050177
Jeane Kirkpatrick, Dictatorships and Double Standards: Rationalism and reason in politics (1982)
Walter Laqueur The Fate of the Revolution Interpretations of Soviet History From 1917 to the Present, London: Collier Books, (1987) ISBN 002034080X.
Juan Linz and Alfred Stepan, Problems Of Democratic Transition And Consolidation: Southern Europe, South America, And Post-Communist Europe, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, (1996), ISBN 0801851572.
Ludwig von Mises, Omnipotent Government: The Rise of the Total State and Total War (1944)
Ewan Murray. Shut Up: Tale of Totalitarianism (2005)
Stanley G. Payne, A History of Fascism (Routledge, 1996)
Richard Pipes (1995), Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime, New York: Vintage Books, Random House Inc., ISBN 0394502426 .
Robert Jaulin L'Univers des totalitarismes (Paris : Loris Talmart, 1995)
Rudolf Rocker. Nationalism and Culture. 1937
Giovanni Sartori, The Theory of Democracy Revisited (Chatham, N.J: Chatham House, 1987)
Wolfgang Sauer, "National Socialism: totalitarianism or fascism?" The American Historical Review, Volume 73, Issue #2 (December 1967): 404–24.
Leonard Schapiro, Totalitarianism (London: The Pall Mall Press, 1972)
Marcello Sorce Keller, “Why is Music so Ideological, Why Do Totalitarian States Take It So Seriously”, Journal of Musicological Research, XXVI (2007), no. 2–3, pp. 91–122
J. L. Talmon, The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy, (1952)
Slavoj Žižek, Did Somebody Say Totalitarianism? (London: Verso, 2001)


External links[edit]



Look up totalitarianism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Totalitarianism



"Totalitarianism". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Totalitarianism[dead link] – Article on the origin and meaning of the term; gives many 20th century examples and contrasts with authoritarianism.







v
t
e


Authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government



Forms



Absolute monarchy
Benevolent dictatorship
Enlightened absolutism
Fascism
Imperialism
Military dictatorship
Nazism
Ochlocracy
Self-coup
Stalinism
Theocracy





Concepts



Illiberal democracy
Totalitarian democracy
Inverted totalitarianism
Authoritarian democracy
Authoritarian socialism
Autocracy
Constitutional dictatorship
Corporate republic
Despotism
Dictatorship
Dominant-party state
Tsarist autocracy
Tyranny
Oligarchy
One-party state
Police state
Counterintelligence state
Mafia state
Right-wing authoritarianism
Third Positionism
Tyranny of the majority












v
t
e


Fascism








Theory







Core tenets



Nationalism
Imperialism
Authoritarianism
One-party state
Dictatorship
Social Darwinism
Social interventionism
Proletarian nation
Propaganda
Eugenics
Heroism
Militarism
Economic interventionism
Anti-communism





Topics



Definitions
Economics
Fascism and ideology
Fascism worldwide
Symbolism





Ideas



Actual Idealism
Class collaboration
Corporatism
Heroic capitalism
National Socialism
National syndicalism
State capitalism
Supercapitalism
Third Position
Totalitarianism
Social order
















Variants






Italian
National Socialism
Japanese fascism
Islamofascism
Falangism
British
Austrian
Metaxism
National Radicalism
Rexism
Clerical
Legionarism
Integralism













Movements







Africa



Greyshirts
Ossewabrandwag





Asia



Brit HaBirionim
Ganap Party
Sakurakai
Tōhōkai
Blue Shirts Society





Northern / Northwestern Europe



Ailtirí na hAiséirghe
Black Front (Netherlands)
Blueshirts
Breton Social-National Workers' Movement
British Fascists
British People's Party (1939)
British Union of Fascists
La Cagoule
Clerical People's Party
Faisceau
Flemish National Union
French Popular Party
General Dutch Fascist League
Imperial Fascist League
Lapua Movement
Nasjonal Samling
National Corporate Party (Greenshirts)
National Fascisti
Nationalist Party (Iceland)
National Socialist Bloc
National Socialist Dutch Workers Party
National Socialist League
National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands
National Socialist Movement of Norway
National Socialist Workers' Party (Sweden)
New Party (UK)
Patriotic People's Movement (Finland)
Pērkonkrusts
Rexism





Central Europe



Arrow Cross Party
Austrian National Socialism
Fatherland Front (Austria)
Hungarian National Socialist Party
National Front (Switzerland)
Nazism
Nazi Party
Sudeten German Party





Southern Europe



Albanian Fascist Party
Democratic Fascist Party
Falange
Greek National Socialist Party
Italian Fascism
Italian Social Republic
Metaxism
National Fascist Party
National Union (Portugal)
Republican Fascist Party
Sammarinese Fascist Party
Ustaše
ZBOR





Eastern and Southeastern Europe



Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party
Crusade of Romanianism
Iron Guard
National Fascist Community
National Fascist Movement
National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement
National Social Movement (Bulgaria)
National Radical Camp Falanga
National Romanian Fascio
National Renaissance Front
Ratniks (Bulgaria)
Romanian Front
Russian Fascist Party
Russian Women's Fascist Movement
Slovak People's Party
Union of Bulgarian National Legions
Vlajka





North America



Fascism in Canada

Canadian Union of Fascists
Parti national social chrétien


Gold shirts
German American Bund
Silver Legion of America





South America



Falangism in Latin America
Brazilian Integralism
Bolivian Socialist Falange
National Socialist Movement of Chile
Revolutionary Union
















People






Abba Ahimeir
Nimio de Anquín
Sadao Araki
Marc Augier
Maurice Bardèche
Jacques Benoist-Méchin
Henri Béraud
Zoltán Böszörmény
Giuseppe Bottai
Robert Brasillach
Alphonse de Châteaubriant
Corneliu Zelea Codreanu
Gustavs Celmiņš
Enrico Corradini
Carlo Costamagna
Richard Walther Darré
Marcel Déat
Léon Degrelle
Pierre Drieu La Rochelle
Gottfried Feder
Giovanni Gentile
Joseph Goebbels
Hans F. K. Günther
Heinrich Himmler
Adolf Hitler
Ikki Kita
Fumimaro Konoe
Vihtori Kosola
Agostino Lanzillo
Dimitrije Ljotić
Leopoldo Lugones
Curzio Malaparte
Ioannis Metaxas
Robert Michels
Oswald Mosley
Benito Mussolini
Eoin O'Duffy
Gearóid Ó Cuinneagáin
Sergio Panunzio
Giovanni Papini
Ante Pavelić
William Dudley Pelley
Alfred Ploetz
Robert Poulet
Vidkun Quisling
José Antonio Primo de Rivera
Lucien Rebatet
Dionisio Ridruejo
Alfredo Rocco
Konstantin Rodzaevsky
Alfred Rosenberg
Plínio Salgado
Rafael Sánchez Mazas
Margherita Sarfatti
Carl Schmitt
Ardengo Soffici
Othmar Spann
Ugo Spirito
Ferenc Szálasi
Hideki Tojo
Gonzalo Torrente Ballester
Georges Valois
Anastasy Vonsyatsky













Works







Literature



The Doctrine of Fascism
Fascist Manifesto
Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals
Mein Kampf
My Life
The Myth of the Twentieth Century
Zweites Buch
Zaveshchanie russkogo fashista





Periodicals



La Conquista del Estado
Das Reich
Der Angriff
Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung
Deutsche Zeitung in Norwegen
Deutsche Zeitung in den Niederlanden
Figli d'Italia
Fronten
Gândirea
Gioventù Fascista
Je suis partout
La France au travail
Münchener Beobachter
Novopress
NS Månedshefte
Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift
Das Schwarze Korps
Der Stürmer
Il Popolo d'Italia
Sfarmă-Piatră
Signal
Vlajka
Völkischer Beobachter
Nash Put'
Fashist
l'Alba





Film



Der Sieg des Glaubens
Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht
Triumph of the Will





Sculpture



Allach





Related topics



Art of the Third Reich
Fascist architecture
Heroic realism
Nazi architecture
Nazism and cinema
Nazi plunder
Syndicalism
Conservatism
















Organizations







Institutional



Ahnenerbe
Chamber of Fasci and Corporations
Grand Council of Fascism
Imperial Way Faction
Italian Nationalist Association
Nationalsozialistischer Reichsbund für Leibesübungen
Quadrumvirs





Activist



Fascist Union of Youth
German American Bund
National Youth Organisation (Greece)
Russian Fascist Organization
Union of Fascist Little Ones
Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (boys)
Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (girls)





Paramilitary



Albanian Militia
Black Brigades
Blackshirts
Blueshirts
Einsatzgruppen
Gold shirts
Greenshirts
Greyshirts
Hitler Youth
Heimwehr
Iron Wolf (organization)
Lăncieri
Makapili
Silver Legion of America
Schutzstaffel
Sturmabteilung
Waffen-SS
Werwolf





International



Axis powers
NSDAP/AO
ODESSA
















History







1910s



Arditi
Fascio





1920s



Aventine Secession
Acerbo Law
Corfu incident
March on Rome
Beer Hall Putsch
Italian economic battles





1930s



March of the Iron Will
German federal election, November 1932
German federal election, March 1933
Enabling Act
6 February 1934 crisis
1934 Montreux Fascist conference
Spanish Civil War
4th of August Regime
Anti-Comintern Pact





1940s



World War II
The Holocaust
End in Italy
Denazification
Nuremberg Trials
















Lists






Anti-fascists
Books about Hitler
British fascist parties
Fascist movements by country (A-F
G-M
N-T
U-Z)
Nazi ideologues
Nazi leaders
Speeches by Hitler
SS personnel













Related topics






Alt-right
Anti-fascism
Anti-Nazi League
Christofascism
Clerical fascism
Cryptofascism
Esoteric Nazism
Fascist (epithet)
Fascist mysticism
Germanisation
Glossary of Nazi Germany
Hitler salute
Italianization
Italianization of South Tyrol
Islamofascism
Japanization
Ku Klux Klan
Neo-fascism
Neo-Nazism
Roman salute
Social fascism
Synarchism
Unite Against Fascism
Völkisch movement
Women in Nazi Germany











Category
Portal









Authority control



GND: 4060491-3
NDL: 00574613











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Totalitarianism&oldid=817722808"					Categories: Totalitarianism20th century21st centuryAuthoritarianismForms of governmentPolitical philosophyPolitical science terminologyPolitical systemsPolitical theoriesStatismFascismHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2014All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers