A townland (Irish: baile fearainn; Ulster-Scots: toonlann[1]) is a small geographical division of land used in Ireland. The townland system is of Gaelic origin, pre-dating the Norman invasion,[2][3][4][5] and most have names of Irish Gaelic origin.[3] However, some townland names and boundaries come from Norman manors, plantation divisions, or later creations of the Ordnance Survey.[6][7] The total number of inhabited townlands was 60,679 in 1911.[8] The total number recognised by the Irish Place Names database as of 2014 was 61,098, including uninhabited townlands, mainly small islands.[9]



Contents


1 Background

1.1 Etymology
1.2 Historical land divisions and etymology
1.3 Size and value
1.4 Historical use
1.5 Irish Ordnance Survey and standardisation
1.6 Current use


2 See also
3 Footnotes
4 Sources

4.1 References


5 Further reading
6 External links



Background[edit]




Map showing the townlands of the Thurles civil parish, County Tipperary. The townlands of Thurles are typical, being of widely varying shapes and sizes with irregular borders, and forming a patchwork over the countryside. The townlands have a mean area of 64 hectares (160 acres).


In Ireland a townland is generally the smallest administrative division of land, though a few large townlands are further divided into hundreds.[10] The concept of townlands is based on the Gaelic system of land division, and the first official evidence of the existence of this Gaelic land division system can be found in church records from before the 12th century,[11] it was in the 1600s that they began to be mapped and defined by the English administration for the purpose of confiscating land and apportioning it to English investors or planters.[10]
Etymology[edit]
The term "townland" in English is derived from the Old English word tun, denoting an enclosure.[12] The term describes the smallest unit of land division in Ireland, based on various forms of Gaelic land division, many of which had their own names.
The term baile, anglicised as "bally", is the most dominant element used in Irish townland names.[13] Today the term "bally" denotes an urban settlement, but its precise meaning in ancient Ireland is unclear, as towns had no place in Gaelic social organisation.[13] The modern Irish term for a townland is baile fearainn (plural: bailte fearainn). The term fearainn means "land, territory, quarter".
The Normans left no major traces in townland names, but they adapted some of them for their own use, possibly seeing a similarity between the Gaelic baile and the Norman bailey, both of which meant a settlement.[14]
Historical land divisions and etymology[edit]




A road sign in County Antrim, Northern Ireland, noting that this part of the road lies within Teeshan townland






A (rare) townland boundary marker in Inishowen, County Donegal.






Townland sign in Irish for Baile na Coirce (Ballycuirke), Moycullen, County Galway, a Gaeltacht townland.


Throughout most of Ulster townlands were known as "ballyboes" (Irish: baile bó, meaning "cow land"),[15][16] and represented an area of pastoral economic value.[15] In County Cavan similar units were called "polls", and in Counties Fermanagh and Monaghan they were known as "tates" or "taths".[13][15][16] These names appear to be of English origin, but had become naturalised long before 1600.[15] In modern townland names the prefix pol- is widely found throughout western Ireland, its accepted meaning being "hole" or "hollow".[15] In County Cavan, which contains over half of all townlands in Ulster with the prefix pol-, some should probably be better translated as "the poll of ...".[15] Modern townlands with the prefix tat- are confined almost exclusively to the diocese of Clogher, which covers Counties Fermanagh and Monaghan, and the barony of Clogher in County Tyrone),[15] and cannot be confused with any other Irish word.[15]
In County Tyrone the following hierarchy of land divisions was used: "ballybetagh" (Irish: baile biataigh, meaning "victualler's place"), "ballyboe", "sessiagh" (Irish: séú cuid, meaning sixth part of a quarter), "gort" and "quarter" (Irish: ceathrú).[13] In County Fermanagh the divisions were "ballybetagh", "quarter" and "tate".[13] Further subdivisions in Fermanagh appear to be related to liquid or grain measures such as "gallons", "pottles" and "pints".[17]
In Ulster the ballybetagh was the territorial unit controlled by an Irish sept, typically containing around 16 townlands. Fragmentation of ballybetaghs resulted in units consisting of four, eight and twelve townlands. One of these fragmented units, the "quarter", representing a quarter of a ballybetagh, was the universal land denomination recorded in the survey of County Donegal conducted in 1608.[18] In the early 17th century 20 per cent of the total area of western Ulster was under the control of the church. These "termon" lands consisted likewise of ballybetaghs and ballyboes, but were held by erenaghs instead of sept leaders.[18]
Other units of land division used throughout Ireland include:

In County Tipperary, "capell lands" and "quatermeers". A "capell land" consisted of around 20 great acres (one great acre equalled 20 English acres).[13]
In the province of Connacht, "quarters" and "cartrons" (Irish: ceathrú mír, also anglicised as "carrowmeer"), a quarter being reckoned as four cartrons, and each cartron being 30 acres.[13] The quarter has also been anglicised as "carrow", "carhoo" or "caracute" (Irish: ceathrú cuid).[13]
In County Clare, as in Connacht, "quarters", "half-quarters" (Irish: leath-ceathrú), "cartrons" and "sessiagh". Here a "half-quarter" equated to around 60 acres, a "cartron" equated to around 30 acres and a "sessiagh" was around 20 acres.[13]

"Cartrons" were also sometimes called "ploughlands" or "seisreagh" (Irish: seisreach, meaning a team of horses yoked to a plough).[13]
Thomas Larcom, the first Director of the Ordnance Survey of Ireland, made a study of the ancient land divisions of Ireland and summarised the traditional hierarchy of land divisions thus:[10][13]

10 acres – 1 Gneeve; 2 Gneeves – 1 Sessiagh; 3 Sessiaghs – 1 Tate or Ballyboe; 2 Ballyboes – 1 Ploughland, Seisreagh or Carrow; 4 Ploughlands – 1 Ballybetagh, or Townland; 30 Ballybetaghs – Triocha Céad or Barony.

This hierarchy was not applied uniformly across Ireland. For example, a ballybetagh or townland could contain more or less than four ploughlands.[10] Further confusion arises when it is taken into account that, while Larcom used the general term "acres" in his summary, terms such as "great acres", "large acres" and "small acres" were also used in records.[10] Writing in 1846, Larcom remarked that the "large" and "small" acres had no fixed ratio between them, and that there were various other kinds of acre in use in Ireland, including the Irish acre, the English acre, the Cunningham acre, the plantation acre and the statute acre.[10][13] The Ordnance Survey maps used the statute acre measurement.[10] The quality and situation of the land affected the size of these acres.[13] The Cunningham acre is given as intermediate between the Irish and English acres.[13]
Many of these land division terms have been preserved in the names of modern townlands. For example, the term "cartron" in both its English and Irish forms has been preserved in the townland names of Carrowmeer, Cartron and Carrowvere, while the term "sessiagh" survives in the names Shesia, Sheshodonell, Sheshymore and Shessiv.[13] The terms "ballyboe" and "ballybetagh" tend to be preserved in the truncated form of "bally" as a prefix for some townland names, such as Ballymacarattybeg near Poyntzpass, County Down. Less well-known land division terms may be found in other townland names such as Coogulla (Irish: Cuige Uladh, "the Ulster fifth"), Treanmanagh (Irish: an train meánach, "the third middle") and Dehomade (Irish: an deichiú méid, "the tenth part").[13]
A problem with the term "bally" in some townland names is that it can be difficult to distinguish between the Irish terms baile meaning "townland" and béal átha meaning "approach to a ford". An example of the latter is Ballyshannon, County Donegal, which is derived from Béal Átha Seanaidh.[19]
Size and value[edit]
The average area of a townland is about 325 acres (1.32 km2; 132 ha),[20] but they vary widely in size. William Reeves's 1861 survey states that the smallest was Old Church Yard, near Carrickmore, in the parish of Termonmagurk, County Tyrone, at 0.625 acres (0.253 ha)[nb 1][21] and the largest, at 7,500 acres (30 km2), was and is Fionnán (also called Finnaun) in the parish of Killanin, County Galway.[22][23][24] In fact, the townland of Clonskeagh in the barony of Uppercross (abutting the main Clonskeagh townland in the barony of Dublin) was only 0.3 acres (0.12 ha)[nb 2][25] although the area is now urbanised, so that the townlands are unused and their boundaries are uncertain.[26]
The ballyboe, a townland unit used in Ulster, was described in 1608 as containing 60 acres of arable land, meadow, and pasture. However, this was misleading, as the size of townlands under the Gaelic system varied depending upon their quality, situation and economic potential.[13][16] This economic potential varied from the extent of land required to graze cattle to the land required to support several families.[16] The highest density of townland units recorded in Ulster in 1609 corresponds to the areas with the highest land valuations in the 1860s.[16]
It seems that many moorland areas were not divided into townlands until fairly recently. These areas were "formerly shared as a common summer pasturage by the people of a whole parish or barony".[27]
Historical use[edit]
Until the 19th century most townlands were owned by single landlords and occupied by multiple tenants. The cess, used to fund roadworks and other local expenses, was charged at the same rate on each townland in a barony, regardless of its size and productive capacity. Thus, occupiers in a small or poor townland suffered in comparison to those of larger or more fertile townlands. This was reformed by Griffith's Valuation.[28]
Irish Ordnance Survey and standardisation[edit]
During the 19th century an extensive series of maps of Ireland was created by the Irish division of the Ordnance Survey for taxation purposes. These maps both documented and standardised the boundaries of the more than 60,000 townlands in Ireland. The process often involved dividing or amalgamating existing townlands, and defining townland boundaries in areas such as mountain or bog that had previously been outside the townland system.[11] Slight adjustments are still made. There were 60,679 in 1911, compared to 60,462 townlands in 1901.[8]
Current use[edit]




A typical road-sign in County Tyrone, noting that this part of the road passes through the townland of Cavanreagh


Townlands form the building blocks for higher-level administrative units such as parishes and District Electoral Divisions (in the Republic of Ireland) or wards (in Northern Ireland).
Before 1972 townlands were included on all rural postal addresses throughout the island, but in that year the Royal Mail decided that the townland element of the address was obsolete in Northern Ireland.[11] Townland names were not banned, but they were deemed "superfluous information" and people were asked not to include them on addresses.[11] They were to be replaced by house numbers, road names and postcodes.[11] In response the Townlands Campaign emerged to protest against the changes. It was described as a "ground-level community effort". Taking place in the midst of The Troubles, the campaign was a rare example of unity between Catholics and Protestants, nationalists and unionists.[11] Townlands and their names "seem to have been considered as a shared resource and heritage".[11] Those involved in the campaign argued that, in many areas, people still strongly identified with their townlands and that this gave them a sense of belonging. The Royal Mail's changes were seen as a severing of this link.[11]
At the time the county councils were the government bodies responsible for validating the change. However, as local government itself was undergoing changes, the Royal Mail's decision was "allowed ... to become law almost by default".[11] County Fermanagh is the only county in Northern Ireland that managed to resist the change completely.[11] Nevertheless, many newer road signs in parts of Northern Ireland now show townland names (see picture). In 2001 the Northern Ireland Assembly passed a motion requesting government departments to make use of townland addresses in correspondence and publications.
In the Republic of Ireland townlands continue to be used on addresses. In 2005 the Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources announced that a postcode system was to be introduced (see Republic of Ireland postal addresses). The system, known as Eircode, was introduced in 2014, but as of 2016 it is still not widely used and townlands remain the predominant address identifiers in rural areas.
See also[edit]

Lists of townlands in Ireland by county

Footnotes[edit]



^ 2 roods, 10 perches
^ 1 rood, 8 perches



Sources[edit]

Barry, Terry, ed. (2012-11-12). A History of Settlement in Ireland. Routledge. ISBN 9781134674633. 
Muhr, Kay (1999–2001). "Celebrating Ulster's Townlands". Ulster Placename Society. 
Reeves, W. (22 April 1861). "On the Townland Distribution of Ireland". Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy (1836-1869). 7: 473–490. JSTOR 20489906. 
Robinson, Philip (2000). The Plantation of Ulster. Ulster Historical Foundation. ISBN 978-1-903688-00-7. 
"General alphabetical index to the townlands and towns, parishes and baronies of Ireland, 1861". Census > 1861 > Ireland. HISTPOP.ORG. p. 258. Retrieved 20 May 2014. 

References[edit]


^ "Rules o Richt Hannlin fur Uisin Ulstèr-Scotch as Pairt o Wark" (PDF). Norlin Airlann Coort Sarvice. Retrieved 4 May 2017. 
^ Barry, Terry (2000). "Rural Settlement in Medieval Ireland". A History of Settlement in Ireland. Routledge. p. 114. She argued that Ireland's townland system, which pre-dated the Anglo-Norman conquest, worked against the creation of sizeable nucleated settlements. 
^ a b Colfer, Billy (2004). "Prehistoric and Early Christian Landscapes". The Hook Peninsula. Cork University Press. p. 29. The townland network provides the most pervasive landscape survival from the Gaelic era. Most townlands, many retaining their Gaelic names, are believed to pre-date the arrival of the Anglo-Normans. 
^ Graham, Brian (2003). "Ireland: Economy and Society". A companion to Britain in the later Middle Ages. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 149. The manor was the basic unit of settlement throughout the Anglo-Norman colony. Anngret Simms and others have argued that the constraint of the pre-existing Gaelic-Irish network of townlands (the basic subdivision of land in Ireland, a townland was originally the holding of an extended family) pre-empted the formation of large villages on the Anglo-Norman manors of Ireland. 
^ Clarke, Howard; Prunty, Jacinta; Hennessy, Mark (2004). Surveying Ireland's Past. Geography Publications. p. 113. It is clear that the Gaelic townland system of territorial organisation exerted a powerful centripetal force on the evolving settlement pattern. 
^ Connolly, S. J., The Oxford Companion to Irish History, page 577. Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 978-0-19-923483-7
^ Maxwell, Ian, How to Trace Your Irish Ancestors, page 16. howtobooks, 2009. ISBN 978-1-84528-375-9
^ a b "Digitization of Irish 1901 and 1911 Census Records". Census of Ireland 1901/1911 and Census Fragments and Substitutes, 1821-51. National Archives of Ireland. Retrieved 22 May 2014. 
^ "Logainm.ie The Irish Placenames Database". The Irish Placenames Committee/Fiontar. Retrieved 19 September 2014. 
^ a b c d e f g Fossa Historical Society. "Chapter 23 – Of Gneeves" (PDF). Retrieved 3 January 2012. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j Reid, Bryonie (2005). "Identity, Locality and the Townland in Northern Ireland". Senses of Place: Senses of Time. Ashgate Publishing. pp. 47–60. The first official evidence of their existence occurs in church records from before the twelfth century. 
^ Ballymun, A History: Volumes 1 & 2, c. 1600–1997 by Dr. Robert Somerville-Woodward, BRL 2002.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Mac Mahon, Michael. "Townlands". Old Territorial Divisions and Land Measures. Clare County Library. 
^ Canavan, Tony (1991). Every Stoney Acre Has a Name: A Celebration of the Townland in Ulster. Federation for Ulster Local Studies. ISBN 9780951827901. 
^ a b c d e f g h Robinson 2000, p.25
^ a b c d e Robinson 2000, pp. 13–14
^ Robinson 2000, p.26
^ a b Robinson 2000, pp.22-23
^ Toner, Gregory: Place-Names of Northern Ireland, page 120. Queen's University of Belfast, 1996, ISBN 0-85389-613-5
^ Adams, G. Brendan (1978). "Prolegomena to the Study of Irish Place-Names". Nomina. 2: 49–50. ; cited in Dolan, Terence Patrick (2006). "townland". A Dictionary of Hiberno-English: The Irish Use of English (2nd ed.). Dublin: Gill & Macmillan. 
^ Reeves 1861, p.476
^ "Fionnán Townland, Co. Galway". www.townlands.ie. 
^ 1861 townland index, p.462
^ "Galway" (XLS). Categories of Disadvantaged Areas. Department of Agriculture. Retrieved 21 May 2014. 
^ 1861 townland index, p.258
^ "Written Answers, Q.424: County Dublin Townland Populations". Dáil Éireann debates. Oireachtas. 20 February 1980. pp. Vol. 318 No.1 p.41. Retrieved 21 May 2014. 
^ Evans, E Estyn (2000). "Bally and Booley". Irish Folk Ways. Courier Dover Publications. pp. 28–29. Their size varies considerably, since they were based on the fertility of the land rather than its acreage, and it seems that many moorland tracts were not divided until fairly recent times, for they were formerly shared as a common summer pasturage by the people of a whole parish or barony. 
^ Meghen, P. J. (Autumn 1958). "The Administrative Work of the Grand Jury" (PDF). Administration. Institute of Public Administration. 6 (3). 


Further reading[edit]

Crawford, W. H.; Foy, R. H. (1998-01-01). Townlands in Ulster: Local History Studies. Ulster Historical Foundation. ISBN 9780901905840. 
McErlean, Tom (1983). "The Irish townland system of landscape organisation". In Reeves-Smyth, Terence; Hamond, Fred. Landscape Archaeology in Ireland. BAR British Series. 116. pp. 315–39. ISBN 0860542165. 

External links[edit]

All island


Mapviewer (Ordnance Survey Ireland) historical townland, civil parish and barony boundaries (select Historic 6-inch (1830s) or Historic 25-inch (c.1900) layers)
Logainm.ie (Placenames Database of Ireland) search/browse by parish/barony/county, English and Irish names
Goblet, Yann M., ed. (1932). Topographical index of the parishes and townlands of Ireland in Sir William Petty's MSS barony maps (c. 1655-9) and Hiberniae Delineatio (c. 1672). Irish Manuscripts Commission. Retrieved 30 July 2014. 
IreAtlas townland database (John Broderick) searchable database derived from the Index to the 1851 Census
Townland indexes to pre-1921 censuses, digitised from command papers: 1861 index (to 1841/1851 censuses); 1871 index, 1881 supplement, 1891 supplement 1901 index, 1911 supplement
1911 Census details (National Archives of Ireland) Arranged by County>DED>Townland>Household
Townland data from OpenStreetMap Townlands, Baronies and Civil Parishes are being added to OpenStreetMap, making them available as a modern geo format. This is a list of the townlands mapped in OpenStreetMap


Republic


Envision Environmental Protection Agency map tool (select Operational Layers>General Administrative>Townlands)
Categories of Disadvantaged Areas Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine Excel spreadsheet (per county) giving area in hectares, electoral division, and agricultural category of each townland


Northern Ireland


Northern Ireland Place-Name Project Searchable using both maps and lists, with information about placename origins
Ordnance Survey of Northern Ireland:

Mapviewer (select Subjects>Townland)
Six Inch Series (select Map Contents>EHS/SixInchSeries>Townland)


Townland indexes to censuses: 1926 census; 1937 supplement


By county


Parishes of County Mayo (Mayo County Library) list of townlands by parish, with maps and other data
Index of Townlands of County Kildare (Kildare Council Library's local studies department) IreAtlas data updated to 1911







v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Townland&oldid=813057089"					Categories: Types of country subdivisionsTownlands of IrelandTownlands of the Republic of IrelandTownlands in Northern IrelandHidden categories: EngvarB from October 2013Use dmy dates from October 2013Articles containing Irish-language text