Not to be confused with Translation.
"Transliterate" redirects here. For the concept of being literate in all media, see Transliteracy.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of a series on


Translation





Types




Legal
Literary
Bible
Quran
Linguistic validation
Medical
Regulatory
Technical
Interpretation
Cultural
Word-for-word vs. Sense-for-sense




Theory




Translation studies
Skopos theory
Translation project
Translation criticism
Dynamic and formal equivalence
Contrastive linguistics




Technologies




CAT
Machine translation
Mobile (machine) translation
Dubbing
Subtitling
Postediting
Multimedia translation




Localization




Glocalization
Internationalization and localization
Language localisation
Game localization
Dub localization




Institutional




Associations
Awards
Organizations
Schools




Related topics




Transcription
Transliteration
Video relay service (VRS)
Telephone interpreting
Language barrier
Fan translation
Fansub
Fandub
Books and magazines on translation
Bible translations by language
Translated books
Translators
WikiProject Translation Studies







v
t
e





Transliteration is a type of conversion of a text from one script to another[1] that involves swapping letters (thus trans- + liter-) in predictable ways (such as α → a, д → d, χ → ch, ն → n or æ → e).
For instance, for the Modern Greek term "Ελληνική Δημοκρατία", which is usually translated as "Hellenic Republic", the usual transliteration to Latin script is "Ellēnikḗ Dēmokratía", and the name for Russia in Cyrillic script, "Россия", is usually transliterated as "Rossiya".
Transliteration is not primarily concerned with representing the sounds of the original but rather with representing the characters, ideally accurately and unambiguously. Thus, in the above example, λλ is transliterated as 'll', but pronounced /l/; Δ is transliterated as 'D', but pronounced /ð/; and η is transliterated as 'ē', though it is pronounced /i/ (exactly like ι) and is not long.
Conversely, transcription notes the sounds but not necessarily the spelling. So "Ελληνική Δημοκρατία" could be transcribed as "elinikí ðimokratía", which does not specify which of the /i/ sounds are written as η and which as ι.



Contents


1 Definitions
2 Difference from transcription
3 Challenges
4 Adopted
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Definitions[edit]
Systematic transliteration is a mapping from one system of writing into another, typically grapheme to grapheme. Most transliteration systems are one-to-one, so a reader who knows the system can reconstruct the original spelling.
Transliteration is opposed to transcription, which maps the sounds of one language into a writing system. Still, most systems of transliteration map the letters of the source script to letters pronounced similarly in the target script, for some specific pair of source and target language. If the relations between letters and sounds are similar in both languages, a transliteration may be very close to a transcription. In practice, there are some mixed transliteration/transcription systems that transliterate a part of the original script and transcribe the rest.
For many script pairs, there is one or more standard transliteration systems. However, unsystematic transliteration is common.
Difference from transcription[edit]
In Modern Greek (and since the Roman Imperial period), the letters <η> <ι> <υ> and the letter combinations <ει> <oι> <υι> are pronounced [i] (except when pronounced as semivowels), and a modern transcription renders them all as <i>; but a transliteration distinguishes them, for example by transliterating to <ē> <i> <y> and <ei> <oi> <yi>. (As the ancient pronunciation of <η> was [ɛː], it is often transliterated as an <e> with a macron, even for modern texts.) On the other hand, <ευ> is sometimes pronounced [ev] and sometimes [ef], depending on the following sound. A transcription distinguishes them, but this is no requirement for a transliteration. The initial letter 'h' reflecting the historical rough breathing in words such as Ellēnikē should logically be omitted in transcription from Koine Greek on,[2] and from transliteration from 1982 on, but it is nonetheless frequently encountered.


Greek word
Transliteration
Transcription
English translation


Ελληνική Δημοκρατία
Ellēnikē Dēmokratia
Elinikí Dhimokratía
Hellenic Republic


Ελευθερία
Eleutheria
Eleftheria
Freedom


Ευαγγέλιο
Euaggelio
Evangelio
Gospel


των υιών
tōn uiōn
ton ion
of the sons


Challenges[edit]
A simple example of difficulties in transliteration is the voiceless uvular plosive used in Arabic and other languages. It is pronounced approximately like English [k], except that the tongue makes contact not on the soft palate but on the uvula. Pronunciation varies between different languages, and different dialects of the same language. The consonant is sometimes transliterated into "g", sometimes "k", and sometimes "q" in English.[3] Another example is the Russian letter "Х" (kha). It is pronounced as the voiceless velar fricative /x/, like the Scottish pronunciation of ⟨ch⟩ in "loch". This sound is not present in most forms of English, and is often transliterated as "kh", as in Nikita Khrushchev. Many languages have phonemic sounds, such as click consonants, which are quite unlike any phoneme in the language into which they are being transliterated.
Some languages and scripts present particular difficulties to transcribers. These are discussed on separate pages.

Ancient Near East

Transliterating cuneiform languages
Transliteration of Ancient Egyptian (see also Egyptian hieroglyphs)
hieroglyphic Luwian


Armenian language
Avestan
Brahmic family

Devanagari: see Devanagari transliteration
Pali
Tocharian
Malayalam: see Romanization of Malayalam


Chinese language

Transcription into Chinese characters
romanization of Chinese
Cyrillization of Chinese


Click languages of Africa

Khoisan languages
Bantu languages


English language

Hebraization of English


Greek language

Romanization of Greek
Greek alphabet
Linear B
Greeklish


Japanese language

Romanization of Japanese
Cyrillization of Japanese


Korean language

Romanization of Korean


Persian language

Persian alphabet

Cyrillic alphabet
Romanization of Persian
Persian chat alphabet




Semitic languages

Ugaritic alphabet
Hebrew alphabet

Romanization of Hebrew


Arabic alphabet

Romanization of Arabic
Arabic chat alphabet




Slavic languages written in the Cyrillic or Glagolitic alphabets

Romanization of Belarusian
Romanization of Bulgarian
Romanization of Russian
Romanization of Macedonian
Romanization of Serbian
Romanization of Ukrainian
Volapuk encoding


Thai language

Romanization of Thai



Adopted[edit]

Buckwalter transliteration
Devanagari transliteration
Hans Wehr transliteration
International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration
Scientific transliteration of Cyrillic
Transliteration of Ancient Egyptian
Transliterations of Manchu
Wylie transliteration

See also[edit]

International Components for Unicode
Latin script
List of ISO transliterations
Orthographic transcription
Phonemic orthography
Phonetic transcription
Romanization
Spread of the Latin script
Substitution cipher
Transcription (linguistics)

References[edit]



^ Kharusi, N. S. & Salman, A. (2011) The English Transliteration of Place Names in Oman. Journal of Academic and Applied Studies Vol. 1(3) September 2011, pp. 1–27 Available online at www.academians.org
^ See Koine Greek phonology.
^ Language log



External links[edit]



Look up transliteration in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Listen to this article (info/dl)












This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Transliteration" dated 2005-04-13, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles


International Components for Unicode transliteration services ICU User Guide: Transforms
Transliteration history – history of the transliteration of Slavic languages into Latin alphabets.
Transliteration of Non-Latin scripts – Collection of transliteration tables for many non-Latin scripts maintained by Thomas T. Pedersen.
Unicode Transliteration Guidelines
United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names (UNGEGN) – working group on Romanization Systems.
Library of Congress: Romanization Tables




Authority control



LCCN: sh85136977
GND: 4170223-2
BNF: cb11976808q (data)
NDL: 00563411











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transliteration&oldid=817224897"					Categories: TransliterationHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Greek-language textArticles containing Russian-language textSpoken articlesArticles with hAudio microformatsWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers