For other uses, see Transport (disambiguation).
"Transportation" redirects here. For other uses, see Transportation (disambiguation).




French National Police use several modes of transport, each with their distinct advantages and disadvantages.






A bulk carrier BW Fjord






An Air France A380 on approach to Washington Dulles International Airport




Part of a series on


Transport


Modes




Animal-powered
Air
Cable
Human-powered
Land

Rail
Road


Pipeline
Space
Water




Topics




History

Timeline


Outline




 Transport portal





v
t
e





Transport or transportation is the movement of humans, animals and goods from one location to another. Modes of transport include air, land (rail and road), water, cable, pipeline and space. The field can be divided into infrastructure, vehicles and operations. Transport is important because it enables trade between people, which is essential for the development of civilizations.
Transport infrastructure consists of the fixed installations including roads, railways, airways, waterways, canals and pipelines and terminals such as airports, railway stations, bus stations, warehouses, trucking terminals, refueling depots (including fueling docks and fuel stations) and seaports. Terminals may be used both for interchange of passengers and cargo and for maintenance.
Vehicles traveling on these networks may include automobiles, bicycles, buses, trains, trucks, people, helicopters, watercraft, spacecraft and aircraft.
Operations deal with the way the vehicles are operated, and the procedures set for this purpose including financing, legalities, and policies. In the transport industry, operations and ownership of infrastructure can be either public or private, depending on the country and mode.
Passenger transport may be public, where operators provide scheduled services, or private. Freight transport has become focused on containerization, although bulk transport is used for large volumes of durable items. Transport plays an important part in economic growth and globalization, but most types cause air pollution and use large amounts of land. While it is heavily subsidized by governments, good planning of transport is essential to make traffic flow and restrain urban sprawl.



Contents


1 History
2 Mode

2.1 Human-powered
2.2 Animal-powered
2.3 Air
2.4 Land

2.4.1 Rail
2.4.2 Road


2.5 Water
2.6 Other modes


3 Elements

3.1 Infrastructure
3.2 Vehicles
3.3 Operation


4 Functions

4.1 Passenger
4.2 Medical transport
4.3 Freight


5 Impact

5.1 Economic
5.2 Planning
5.3 Environment


6 See also
7 References
8 Bibliography
9 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of transport




Bronocice pot with the earliest known image of a wheeled vehicle in the world, found in Poland






A bullock team hauling wool in Australia


Humans' first means of transport involved walking, running and swimming. The domestication of animals introduced a new way to lay the burden of transport on more powerful creatures, allowing the hauling of heavier loads, or humans riding animals for greater speed and duration. Inventions such as the wheel and the sled helped make animal transport more efficient through the introduction of vehicles. Water transport, including rowed and sailed vessels, dates back to time immemorial, and was the only efficient way to transport large quantities or over large distances prior to the Industrial Revolution.
The first forms of road transport involved animals, such as horses (domesticated in the 4th or 3rd millennium BCE), oxen (from about 8000 BCE)[1] or humans carrying goods over dirt tracks that often followed game trails. Many early civilizations, including Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley Civilization, constructed paved roads. In classical antiquity, the Persian and Roman empires built stone-paved roads to allow armies to travel quickly. Deep roadbeds of crushed stone underneath kept such roads dry. The medieval Caliphate later built tar-paved roads. The first watercraft were canoes cut out from tree trunks. Early water transport was accomplished with ships that were either rowed or used the wind for propulsion, or a combination of the two. The importance of water has led to most cities that grew up as sites for trading being located on rivers or on the sea-shore, often at the intersection of two bodies of water. Until the Industrial Revolution, transport remained slow and costly, and production and consumption gravitated as close to each other as feasible.




The Wright brothers' first flight in 1903


The Industrial Revolution in the 19th century saw a number of inventions fundamentally change transport. With telegraphy, communication became instant and independent of the transport of physical objects. The invention of the steam engine, closely followed by its application in rail transport, made land transport independent of human or animal muscles. Both speed and capacity increased rapidly, allowing specialization through manufacturing being located independently of natural resources. The 19th century also saw the development of the steam ship, which sped up global transport.
With the development of the combustion engine and the automobile around 1900, road transport became more competitive again, and mechanical private transport originated. The first "modern" highways were constructed during the 19th century[citation needed] with macadam. Later, tarmac and concrete became the dominant paving materials. In 1903 the Wright brothers demonstrated the first successful controllable airplane, and after World War I (1914-1918)aircraft became a fast way to transport people and express goods over long distances.[2]
After World War II (1939-1945) the automobile and airlines took higher shares of transport, reducing rail and water to freight and short-haul passenger services.[3] Scientific spaceflight began in the 1950s, with rapid growth until the 1970s, when interest dwindled. In the 1950s the introduction of containerization gave massive efficiency gains in freight transport, fostering globalization.[4] International air travel became much more accessible in the 1960s with the commercialization of the jet engine. Along with the growth in automobiles and motorways, rail and water transport declined in relative importance. After the introduction of the Shinkansen in Japan in 1964, high-speed rail in Asia and Europe started attracting passengers on long-haul routes away from airlines.[3]
Early in U.S. history,[when?] private joint-stock corporations owned most aqueducts, bridges, canals, railroads, roads, and tunnels. Most such transportation infrastructure came under government control in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, culminating in the nationalization of inter-city passenger rail-service with the establishment of Amtrak. Recently,[when?] however, a movement to privatize roads and other infrastructure has gained some[quantify] ground and adherents.[5]
Further information: Timeline of transportation technology
Mode[edit]
Main article: Mode of transport
A mode of transport is a solution that makes use of a particular type of vehicle, infrastructure, and operation. The transport of a person or of cargo may involve one mode or several of the modes, with the latter case being called intermodal or multimodal transport. Each mode has its own advantages and disadvantages, and will be chosen for a trip on the basis of cost, capability, and route.
Human-powered[edit]
Main article: Human-powered transport




Human-powered transport remains common in developing countries.


Human powered transport, a form of sustainable transportation, is the transport of people and/or goods using human muscle-power, in the form of walking, running and swimming. Modern technology has allowed machines to enhance human power. Human-powered transport remains popular for reasons of cost-saving, leisure, physical exercise, and environmentalism; it is sometimes the only type available, especially in underdeveloped or inaccessible regions.
Although humans are able to walk without infrastructure, the transport can be enhanced through the use of roads, especially when using the human power with vehicles, such as bicycles and inline skates. Human-powered vehicles have also been developed for difficult environments, such as snow and water, by watercraft rowing and skiing; even the air can be entered with human-powered aircraft.
Animal-powered[edit]
Main article: Animal-powered transport
Animal-powered transport is the use of working animals for the movement of people and commodities. Humans may ride some of the animals directly, use them as pack animals for carrying goods, or harness them, alone or in teams, to pull sleds or wheeled vehicles.
Air[edit]
Main article: Aviation




An Air France Airbus A318 lands at London Heathrow Airport.


A fixed-wing aircraft, commonly called airplane, is a heavier-than-air craft where movement of the air in relation to the wings is used to generate lift. The term is used to distinguish this from rotary-wing aircraft, where the movement of the lift surfaces relative to the air generates lift. A gyroplane is both fixed-wing and rotary wing. Fixed-wing aircraft range from small trainers and recreational aircraft to large airliners and military cargo aircraft.
Two things necessary for aircraft are air flow over the wings for lift and an area for landing. The majority of aircraft also need an airport with the infrastructure to receive maintenance, restocking, refueling and for the loading and unloading of crew, cargo, and passengers. While the vast majority of aircraft land and take off on land, some are capable of take-off and landing on ice, snow, and calm water.
The aircraft is the second fastest method of transport, after the rocket. Commercial jets can reach up to 955 kilometres per hour (593 mph), single-engine aircraft 555 kilometres per hour (345 mph). Aviation is able to quickly transport people and limited amounts of cargo over longer distances, but incurs high costs and energy use; for short distances or in inaccessible places helicopters can be used.[6] As of April 28, 2009, The Guardian article notes that, "the WHO estimates that up to 500,000 people are on planes at any time."[7]
Land[edit]
Main article: Ground transportation
Land transport covers all land-based transportation systems that provide for the movement of people, goods and services. Land transport plays a vital role in linking communities to each other. Land transport is a key factor in urban planning. It consists of 2 kinds, rail and road.
Rail[edit]
Main article: Rail transport




InterCityExpress, a German high-speed passenger train






The New York City Subway is the world's largest rapid transit system by length of routes and by number of stations.


Rail transport is where a train runs along a set of two parallel steel rails, known as a railway or railroad. The rails are anchored perpendicular to ties (or sleepers) of timber, concrete or steel, to maintain a consistent distance apart, or gauge. The rails and perpendicular beams are placed on a foundation made of concrete or compressed earth and gravel in a bed of ballast. Alternative methods include monorail and maglev.
A train consists of one or more connected vehicles that operate on the rails. Propulsion is commonly provided by a locomotive, that hauls a series of unpowered cars, that can carry passengers or freight. The locomotive can be powered by steam, diesel or by electricity supplied by trackside systems. Alternatively, some or all the cars can be powered, known as a multiple unit. Also, a train can be powered by horses, cables, gravity, pneumatics and gas turbines. Railed vehicles move with much less friction than rubber tires on paved roads, making trains more energy efficient, though not as efficient as ships.
Intercity trains are long-haul services connecting cities;[8] modern high-speed rail is capable of speeds up to 350 km/h (220 mph), but this requires specially built track. Regional and commuter trains feed cities from suburbs and surrounding areas, while intra-urban transport is performed by high-capacity tramways and rapid transits, often making up the backbone of a city's public transport. Freight trains traditionally used box cars, requiring manual loading and unloading of the cargo. Since the 1960s, container trains have become the dominant solution for general freight, while large quantities of bulk are transported by dedicated trains.
Road[edit]
Main article: Road transport




The Harbor Freeway is often heavily congested at rush hour in Downtown Los Angeles.


A road is an identifiable route, way or path between two or more places.[9] Roads are typically smoothed, paved, or otherwise prepared to allow easy travel;[10] though they need not be, and historically many roads were simply recognizable routes without any formal construction or maintenance.[11] In urban areas, roads may pass through a city or village and be named as streets, serving a dual function as urban space easement and route.[12]
The most common road vehicle is the automobile; a wheeled passenger vehicle that carries its own motor. Other users of roads include buses, trucks, motorcycles, bicycles and pedestrians. As of 2010, there were 1.015 billion automobiles worldwide. Road transport offers a complete freedom to road users to transfer the vehicle from one lane to the other and from one road to another according to the need and convenience. This flexibility of changes in location, direction, speed, and timings of travel is not available to other modes of transport. It is possible to provide door to door service only by road transport.
Automobiles provide high flexibility with low capacity, but require high energy and area use, and are the main source of noise and air pollution in cities; buses allow for more efficient travel at the cost of reduced flexibility.[13] Road transport by truck is often the initial and final stage of freight transport.
Water[edit]
Main article: Ship transport




Built by the Dutch to transport spices, now used by the local fishermen to get to the sea, Negombo Dutch canal, Sri Lanka






Automobile ferry in Croatia


Water transport is movement by means of a watercraft—such as a barge, boat, ship or sailboat—over a body of water, such as a sea, ocean, lake, canal or river. The need for buoyancy is common to watercraft, making the hull a dominant aspect of its construction, maintenance and appearance.
In the 19th century, the first steam ships were developed, using a steam engine to drive a paddle wheel or propeller to move the ship. The steam was produced in a boiler using wood or coal and fed through a steam external combustion engine. Now most ships have an internal combustion engine using a slightly refined type of petroleum called bunker fuel. Some ships, such as submarines, use nuclear power to produce the steam. Recreational or educational craft still use wind power, while some smaller craft use internal combustion engines to drive one or more propellers, or in the case of jet boats, an inboard water jet. In shallow draft areas, hovercraft are propelled by large pusher-prop fans. (See Marine propulsion.)
Although it is slow compared to other transportation, modern sea transport is a highly efficient method of transporting large quantities of goods. Commercial vessels, nearly 35,000 in number, carried 7.4 billion tons of cargo in 2007.[14] Transport by water is significantly less costly than air transport for transcontinental shipping;[15] short sea shipping and ferries remain viable in coastal areas.[16][17]
Other modes[edit]




Trans-Alaska Pipeline for crude oil


Pipeline transport sends goods through a pipe; most commonly liquid and gases are sent, but pneumatic tubes can also send solid capsules using compressed air. For liquids/gases, any chemically stable liquid or gas can be sent through a pipeline. Short-distance systems exist for sewage, slurry, water and beer, while long-distance networks are used for petroleum and natural gas.
Cable transport is a broad mode where vehicles are pulled by cables instead of an internal power source. It is most commonly used at steep gradient. Typical solutions include aerial tramway, elevators, escalator and ski lifts; some of these are also categorized as conveyor transport.
Spaceflight is transport out of Earth's atmosphere into outer space by means of a spacecraft. While large amounts of research have gone into technology, it is rarely used except to put satellites into orbit, and conduct scientific experiments. However, man has landed on the moon, and probes have been sent to all the planets of the Solar System.
Suborbital spaceflight is the fastest of the existing and planned transport systems from a place on Earth to a distant "other place" on Earth. Faster transport could be achieved through part of a low Earth orbit, or following that trajectory even faster using the propulsion of the rocket to steer it.
Elements[edit]
Infrastructure[edit]
Main article: Infrastructure




Bridges, such as Golden Gate Bridge, allow roads and railways to cross bodies of water.


Infrastructure is the fixed installations that allow a vehicle to operate. It consists of a roadway, a terminal, and facilities for parking and maintenance. For rail, pipeline, road and cable transport, the entire way the vehicle travels must be constructed. Air and watercraft are able to avoid this, since the airway and seaway do not need to be constructed. However, they require fixed infrastructure at terminals.
Terminals such as airports, ports, and stations, are locations where passengers and freight can be transferred from one vehicle or mode to another. For passenger transport, terminals are integrating different modes to allow riders, who are interchanging between modes, to take advantage of each mode's benefits. For instance, airport rail links connect airports to the city centers and suburbs. The terminals for automobiles are parking lots, while buses and coaches can operate from simple stops.[18] For freight, terminals act as transshipment points, though some cargo is transported directly from the point of production to the point of use.
The financing of infrastructure can either be public or private. Transport is often a natural monopoly and a necessity for the public; roads, and in some countries railways and airports are funded through taxation. New infrastructure projects can have high costs and are often financed through debt. Many infrastructure owners, therefore, impose usage fees, such as landing fees at airports, or toll plazas on roads. Independent of this, authorities may impose taxes on the purchase or use of vehicles. Because of poor forecasting and overestimation of passenger numbers by planners, there is frequently a benefits shortfall for transport infrastructure projects.[19]
Vehicles[edit]
Main article: Vehicle




A Fiat Uno in 2008


A vehicle is a non-living device that is used to move people and goods. Unlike the infrastructure, the vehicle moves along with the cargo and riders. Unless being pulled/pushed by a cable or muscle-power, the vehicle must provide its own propulsion; this is most commonly done through a steam engine, combustion engine, electric motor, a jet engine or a rocket, though other means of propulsion also exist. Vehicles also need a system of converting the energy into movement; this is most commonly done through wheels, propellers and pressure.
Vehicles are most commonly staffed by a driver. However, some systems, such as people movers and some rapid transits, are fully automated. For passenger transport, the vehicle must have a compartment, seat, or platform for the passengers. Simple vehicles, such as automobiles, bicycles or simple aircraft, may have one of the passengers as a driver.
Operation[edit]




Incheon International Airport, South Korea


Private transport is only subject to the owner of the vehicle, who operates the vehicle themselves. For public transport and freight transport, operations are done through private enterprise or by governments. The infrastructure and vehicles may be owned and operated by the same company, or they may be operated by different entities. Traditionally, many countries have had a national airline and national railway. Since the 1980s, many of these have been privatized. International shipping remains a highly competitive industry with little regulation,[20] but ports can be public-owned.[21]
Functions[edit]
Relocation of travelers and cargo are the most common uses of transport. However, other uses exist, such as the strategic and tactical relocation of armed forces during warfare, or the civilian mobility construction or emergency equipment.
Passenger[edit]
Main articles: Travel and Public transit




A local transit bus operated by ACTION in Canberra, Australia


Passenger transport, or travel, is divided into public and private transport. Public transport is scheduled services on fixed routes, while private is vehicles that provide ad hoc services at the riders desire. The latter offers better flexibility, but has lower capacity, and a higher environmental impact. Travel may be as part of daily commuting, for business, leisure or migration.
Short-haul transport is dominated by the automobile and mass transit. The latter consists of buses in rural and small cities, supplemented with commuter rail, trams and rapid transit in larger cities. Long-haul transport involves the use of the automobile, trains, coaches and aircraft, the last of which have become predominantly used for the longest, including intercontinental, travel. Intermodal passenger transport is where a journey is performed through the use of several modes of transport; since all human transport normally starts and ends with walking, all passenger transport can be considered intermodal. Public transport may also involve the intermediate change of vehicle, within or across modes, at a transport hub, such as a bus or railway station.
Taxis and buses can be found on both ends of the public transport spectrum. Buses are the cheaper mode of transport but are not necessarily flexible, and taxis are very flexible but more expensive. In the middle is demand-responsive transport, offering flexibility whilst remaining affordable.
International travel may be restricted for some individuals due to legislation and visa requirements.
Medical transport[edit]




An ambulance from World War I


An ambulance is a vehicle used to transport people from or between places of treatment,[22] and in some instances will also provide out-of-hospital medical care to the patient. The word is often associated with road-going "emergency ambulances", which form part of emergency medical services, administering emergency care to those with acute medical problems.
Air medical services is a comprehensive term covering the use of air transportation to move patients to and from healthcare facilities and accident scenes. Personnel provide comprehensive prehospital and emergency and critical care to all types of patients during aeromedical evacuation or rescue operations, aboard helicopters, propeller aircraft, or jet aircraft.[23][24]
Freight[edit]
Main article: Shipping
Freight transport, or shipping, is a key in the value chain in manufacturing.[25] With increased specialization and globalization, production is being located further away from consumption, rapidly increasing the demand for transport.[26] Transportation creates place utility by moving the goods from the place of production to the place of consumption. While all modes of transport are used for cargo transport, there is high differentiation between the nature of the cargo transport, in which mode is chosen.[27] Logistics refers to the entire process of transferring products from producer to consumer, including storage, transport, transshipment, warehousing, material-handling, and packaging, with associated exchange of information.[28] Incoterm deals with the handling of payment and responsibility of risk during transport.[29]




Freight train with shipping containers in the United Kingdom


Containerization, with the standardization of ISO containers on all vehicles and at all ports, has revolutionized international and domestic trade, offering huge reduction in transshipment costs. Traditionally, all cargo had to be manually loaded and unloaded into the haul of any ship or car; containerization allows for automated handling and transfer between modes, and the standardized sizes allow for gains in economy of scale in vehicle operation. This has been one of the key driving factors in international trade and globalization since the 1950s.[4]
Bulk transport is common with cargo that can be handled roughly without deterioration; typical examples are ore, coal, cereals and petroleum. Because of the uniformity of the product, mechanical handling can allow enormous quantities to be handled quickly and efficiently. The low value of the cargo combined with high volume also means that economies of scale become essential in transport, and gigantic ships and whole trains are commonly used to transport bulk. Liquid products with sufficient volume may also be transported by pipeline.
Air freight has become more common for products of high value; while less than one percent of world transport by volume is by airline, it amounts to forty percent of the value. Time has become especially important in regards to principles such as postponement and just-in-time within the value chain, resulting in a high willingness to pay for quick delivery of key components or items of high value-to-weight ratio.[30] In addition to mail, common items sent by air include electronics and fashion clothing.
Impact[edit]
Main article: Sustainable transport
Economic[edit]
Main article: Transport economics




Transport is a key component of growth and globalization, such as in Seattle, Washington, United States.


Transport is a key necessity for specialization—allowing production and consumption of products to occur at different locations. Transport has throughout history been a spur to expansion; better transport allows more trade and a greater spread of people. Economic growth has always been dependent on increasing the capacity and rationality of transport.[31] But the infrastructure and operation of transport has a great impact on the land and is the largest drainer of energy, making transport sustainability a major issue.
Due to the way modern cities and communities are planned and operated, a physical distinction between home and work is usually created, forcing people to transport themselves to places of work, study, or leisure, as well as to temporarily relocate for other daily activities. Passenger transport is also the essence of tourism, a major part of recreational transport. Commerce requires the transport of people to conduct business, either to allow face-to-face communication for important decisions or to move specialists from their regular place of work to sites where they are needed.
Planning[edit]
Main article: Transport planning
Transport planning allows for high utilization and less impact regarding new infrastructure. Using models of transport forecasting, planners are able to predict future transport patterns. On the operative level, logistics allows owners of cargo to plan transport as part of the supply chain. Transport as a field is also studied through transport economics, a component for the creation of regulation policy by authorities. Transport engineering, a sub-discipline of civil engineering, must take into account trip generation, trip distribution, mode choice and route assignment, while the operative level is handled through traffic engineering.




The engineering of this roundabout in Bristol, United Kingdom, attempts to make traffic flow free-moving.


Because of the negative impacts incurred, transport often becomes the subject of controversy related to choice of mode, as well as increased capacity. Automotive transport can be seen as a tragedy of the commons, where the flexibility and comfort for the individual deteriorate the natural and urban environment for all. Density of development depends on mode of transport, with public transport allowing for better spatial utilization. Good land use keeps common activities close to people's homes and places higher-density development closer to transport lines and hubs, to minimize the need for transport. There are economies of agglomeration. Beyond transportation some land uses are more efficient when clustered. Transportation facilities consume land, and in cities, pavement (devoted to streets and parking) can easily exceed 20 percent of the total land use. An efficient transport system can reduce land waste.
Too much infrastructure and too much smoothing for maximum vehicle throughput means that in many cities there is too much traffic and many—if not all—of the negative impacts that come with it. It is only in recent years that traditional practices have started to be questioned in many places, and as a result of new types of analysis which bring in a much broader range of skills than those traditionally relied on—spanning such areas as environmental impact analysis, public health, sociologists as well as economists—the viability of the old mobility solutions is increasingly being questioned.

Environment[edit]




Traffic congestion persists in São Paulo, Brazil, despite the no-drive days based on license numbers.


Main article: Transport and the environment
Transport is a major use of energy and burns most of the world's petroleum. This creates air pollution, including nitrous oxides and particulates, and is a significant contributor to global warming through emission of carbon dioxide,[32] for which transport is the fastest-growing emission sector.[33] By subsector, road transport is the largest contributor to global warming.[34] Environmental regulations in developed countries have reduced individual vehicles' emissions; however, this has been offset by increases in the numbers of vehicles and in the use of each vehicle.[32] Some pathways to reduce the carbon emissions of road vehicles considerably have been studied.[35][36] Energy use and emissions vary largely between modes, causing environmentalists to call for a transition from air and road to rail and human-powered transport, as well as increased transport electrification and energy efficiency.
Other environmental impacts of transport systems include traffic congestion and automobile-oriented urban sprawl, which can consume natural habitat and agricultural lands. By reducing transportation emissions globally, it is predicted that there will be significant positive effects on Earth's air quality, acid rain, smog and climate change.[37]
See also[edit]


Transport portal




Environmental impact of aviation
Fuel efficiency in transportation
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Society
List of emerging transportation technologies
Journal of Transport and Land Use
Outline of transport
Public transport
Rail transport by country
Speed record
Taxicabs by country
Transportation engineering
Wikipedia Books: Transport


References[edit]


^ Watts, Martin (1999). Working Oxen. Shire Album. 342. Princes Risborough, Buckinghamshire: Osprey Publishing. p. 4. ISBN 9780747804154. Retrieved 2016-02-08. [...] tamed aurochs became the first domestic oxen. The earliest evidence for domestication is found in the Middle East around ten thousand years ago. 
^ Bardi, Coyle and Novack, 2006: 158
^ a b Cooper et al., 1998: 277
^ a b Bardi, Coyle and Novack, 2006: 211–14
^ Clifford Winston, Last Exit: Privatization and Deregulation of the U.S. Transportation System (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 2010).
^ Cooper et al., 1998: 281
^ Swine flu prompts EU warning on travel to US. The Guardian. April 28, 2009.
^ Cooper et al, 1998: 279
^ "Major Roads of the United States". United States Department of the Interior. 2006-03-13. Archived from the original on 13 April 2007. Retrieved 24 March 2007. 
^ "Road Infrastructure Strategic Framework for South Africa". National Department of Transport (South Africa). Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 24 March 2007. 
^ Lay, 1992: 6–7
^ "What is the difference between a road and a street?". Word FAQ. Lexico Publishing Group. 2007. Retrieved 24 March 2007. 
^ Cooper et al., 1998: 278
^ The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) 2007, p. x and p. 32.
^ Stopford, 1997: 4–6
^ Stopford, 1997: 8–9
^ Cooper et al., 1998: 280
^ Cooper et al., 1998: 275–76
^ Bent Flyvbjerg, Mette K. Skamris Holm, and Søren L. Buhl, "How (In)Accurate Are Demand Forecasts in Public Works Projects", Journal of the American Planning Association 71:2, pp. 131–146.
^ Stopford, 1997: 422
^ Stopford, 1997: 29
^ Skinner, Henry Alan. 1949, "The Origin of Medical Terms". Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins
^ Branas CC, MacKenzie EJ, Williams JC, Schwab CW, Teter HM, Flanigan MC, et al. (2005). "Access to trauma centers in the United States". JAMA. 293 (21): 2626–33. doi:10.1001/jama.293.21.2626. PMID 15928284. 
^ Burney RE, Hubert D, Passini L, Maio R (1995). "Variation in air medical outcomes by crew composition: a two-year follow-up". Ann Emerg Med. 25 (2): 187–92. doi:10.1016/s0196-0644(95)70322-5 . PMID 7832345. 
^ Chopra and Meindl, 2007: 3
^ Chopra and Meindl, 2007: 63–64
^ Chopra and Meindl, 2007: 54
^ Bardi, Coyle and Novack, 2006: 4
^ Bardi, Coyle and Novack, 2006: 473
^ Chopra and Meindl, 2007: 328
^ Stopford, 1997: 2
^ a b Fuglestvet et al., Center for International Climate and Environmental Research (2007). "Climate forcing from the transport sectors" (PDF). 
^ Worldwatch Institute (16 January 2008). "Analysis: Nano Hypocrisy?". 
^ Climate forcing from the transport sectors, Jan Fuglestvedt, Terje Berntsen, Gunnar Myhre, Kristin Rypdal, and Ragnhild Bieltvedt Skeie, January 15, 2008, vol. 105, no. 2, PNAS.org
^ "Claverton-Energy.com". Claverton-Energy.com. 2009-02-17. Retrieved 2010-05-23. 
^ Data on the barriers and motivators to more sustainable transport behaviour is available in the UK Department for Transport study "Climate Change and Transport Choices" published in December 2010.
^ Environment Canada. "Transportation". Archived from the original on July 13, 2007. Retrieved 30 July 2008. 


Bibliography[edit]

Bardi, Edward; John Coyle & Robert Novack (2006). Management of Transportation. Thomson South-Western. ISBN 0-324-31443-4. 
Chopra, Sunil & Peter Meindl (2007). Supply Chain Management. Pearson. ISBN 0-13-208608-5. 
Christopher P. Cooper; Rebecca Shepherd (1998). Tourism: Principles and Practice. Financial Times Prent.Int. ISBN 978-0-582-31273-9. Retrieved 22 December 2012. 
Lay, Maxwell G (1992). Ways of the World: A History of the World's Roads and of the Vehicles that Used Them. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 0-8135-2691-4. 
Stopford, Martin (1997). Maritime Economics. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-15310-7. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Transport.





Look up transport or transportation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Transport





Wikivoyage has travel related information for Transportation.



Transportation from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Transportation at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
America On the Move An online transportation exhibition from the National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution
World Transportation Organization The world transportation organization (The Non-Profit Advisory Organization)







v
t
e


Public transport



Bus service



Bus

list


Bus rapid transit
Charabanc
Express bus
Guided bus
Intercity bus

driver


Open top bus
Public light bus
Rail replacement bus
Shuttle bus
Transit bus
Trolleybus





Rail



Cable car
Commuter rail
Funicular
Heavy rail
Heritage railway
Heritage streetcar
High-speed rail
Horsecar
Inter-city rail
Interurban
Light rail
Medium-capacity rail system
Monorail
Rapid transit
Regional rail
Rubber-tyred metro
Street running
Tram
Tram-train





Vehicles for hire



Auto rickshaw
Boda-boda
Cycle rickshaw
Gondola
Hackney carriage
Limousine
Motorcycle taxi
Paratransit
Personal rapid transit
Pulled rickshaw
Share taxi
Taxicab





Carpooling



Car jockey
Flexible carpooling
Real-time ridesharing
Slugging
Vanpool





Ship



Cable ferry
Ferry
Hovercraft
Hydrofoil
Ocean liner
Water taxi





Other transport



Aerial tramway
Airline
Airliner
Bicycle-sharing
Carsharing
Elevator
Escalator
Gondola lift
Horse-drawn vehicle
Maglev
Moving walkway
People mover
Trackless train





Locations



Airport
Bus bulb
Bus garage (bus depot)
Bus lane
Bus stand
Bus station
Bus stop
Bus terminus
Bus turnout (bus bay)
Dry dock
Hangar
Harbor
Interchange station
Kassel kerb
Layover
Metro station
Park and ride
Port
Queue jump
Taxicab stand
Train station
Tram stop
Transit mall
Transport hub





Ticketing and fares



Automated fare collection
Bus advertising
Contract of carriage
Dead mileage
Exit fare
Fare avoidance
Fare evasion
Farebox recovery ratio
Free public transport
Free travel pass
Integrated ticketing
Manual fare collection
Money train
Paid area
Proof-of-payment
Reduced fare program
Smart cards
Ticket machine
Transfer
Transit pass





Routing



Circle route
Cross-city route
Network length
Non-revenue track
Radial route
Transport network





Facilities



Checked baggage
First class
Sleeper
Standing passenger
Travel class





Scheduling



Bus bunching
Clock-face scheduling
Headway
On-time performance
Public transport timetable
Short turn





Politics



Airport security
Rail subsidies
Security
Transit district
Transit police
Transit-oriented development (TOD)
Transportation authority





Other topics



Boarding
Crush load
Destination sign
Hail and ride
Prohibited activities
Request stop
Passenger load factor
Transit map












v
t
e


Tourism



Types



Accessible
Adventure
Agritourism
Alternative
Atomic
Birth
Business
Culinary

Enotourism


Cultural

Archaeological
Bookstore
Heritage

Militarism heritage


Literary

Tolkien


Music
Pop-culture


Dark

Holocaust


Disaster
Domestic
Drug
Ecotourism

Shark


Extreme
Factory Tourism
Garden
Genealogy
Geotourism
Honeymoon
Jihadi
Jungle
Justice
LGBT
Medical

Dental


Moon
Nautical
Rail
Religious

Christian
Halal
Kosher


Rural
Sacred
Safaris
Sex

Child sex
Female sex


Slum
Space
Sports
Stag party
Suicide
Sustainable
Vacation
Volunteer travel
War
Water
Wellness
Wildlife





Hospitality
industry



Bed and breakfast
Boutique hotel
Conference and resort hotels
Convention center
Destination spa
Front desk
General manager
Homestay
Hospitality management studies
Hospitality services
Hostel
Hotel
Hotel manager
Inn
Island resort
Motel
Referral chain
Resort
Resort town
Restaurant
Seaside resort
Ski resort





Terminology



Campus tour
Convention (meeting)
Gift shop
Grand Tour
Holiday (vacation)
Hypermobility
Package tour
Passport
Perpetual traveler
Road trip
Roadside attraction
Souvenir
Staycation
Sunday drive
Tour guide
Tour operator
Tourism geography
Tourism minister
Tourism region
Tourist attraction
Tourist gateway
Tourist trap
Touron
Transport
Travel
Travel agency
Travel behavior
Travel document
Travel insurance
Travel literature
Travel medicine
Travel survey
Travel technology
Travel warning
Travel website
Trip planner
Visa
Visitor center





Industry organizations,
rankings and events



American Bus Association
American Hotel and Lodging Association
American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute
BEST Education Network
Caribbean Tourism Organization
Destination marketing organization
European Travel Commission
Historical archive on tourism
South-East Asian Tourism Organisation
Tourism Radio
Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report
Wikivoyage
World Tourism Day
World Tourism Organization
World Tourism rankings
World Travel and Tourism Council
World Travel Monitor





Lists



Adjectival tourisms
Attractions
Bibliography
Casino hotels
Casinos
Convention and exhibition centers
Hotels
Largest hotels in the world
Motels
Travel magazines
UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists
World Heritage Sites by country








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Supply chain performance drivers






Facilities
Information
Inventory
Pricing
Sourcing
Transportation









Authority control



GND: 4062901-6
NDL: 00566818











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transport&oldid=818202303"					Categories: TransportLogisticsEconomics of transport and utility industriesHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from February 2016Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers