For other uses, see Tribe (disambiguation).


Part of a series on


Political and
legal anthropology




Basic concepts


Status and rank


Ascribed status
Achieved status
Social status
Caste
Age grade/Age set
Leveling mechanism


Leadership


Big man
Patriarchy
Matriarchy
Pantribal sodalities
Chief
Paramount chief


Polities


Band society
Segmentary lineage
Tribe
Chiefdom
House society
Ethnic group
Theatre state


Law and custom


Customary law
Legal culture








Case studies


Acephelous
Societies without hierarchical leaders


African Political Systems
Papuan Big man system
The Art of Not Being Governed


State
Non-western state systems


Negara
Mandala


Technology, Tradition,
and the State in Africa


Legal systems


Kapu


Colonialism and resistance


Europe and the People
Without History
Cargo cult








Related articles


Circumscription theory
Legal anthropology
Left–right paradigm
State formation
Political economy in anthropology
Network Analysis and Ethnographic Problems








Major theorists


E. Adamson Hoebel
Georges Balandier
F. G. Bailey
Fredrik Barth
Jeremy Boissevain
Robert L. Carneiro
Henri J. M. Claessen
Jean Comaroff
John Comaroff
Pierre Clastres
E. E. Evans-Pritchard
Wolfgang Fikentscher
Meyer Fortes
Morton Fried
Ernest Gellner
Lesley Gill
Ulf Hannerz
Thomas Blom Hansen
Ted C. Lewellen
Edmund Leach
Ralph Linton
Elizabeth Mertz
Sidney Mintz
Sally Falk Moore
Rodney Needham
Marshall Sahlins
James C. Scott
Elman Service
Aidan Southall
Jonathan Spencer
Bjorn Thomassen
Douglas R. White
Eric Wolf






Social and cultural anthropology





v
t
e





A tribe is viewed, developmentally or historically, as a social group existing outside of or before the development of states. A tribe is a group of distinct people, dependent on their land for their livelihood, who are largely self-sufficient, and not integrated into the national society. It is perhaps the term most readily understood and used by the general public to describe such communities. Stephen Corry defines tribal people as those who "have followed ways of life for many generations that are largely self-sufficient, and are clearly different from the mainstream and dominant society".[1] This definition, however, would not apply to countries in the Middle East such as Iraq and Yemen, South Asia such as Afghanistan and many African countries such as South Sudan, where the entire population is a member of one tribe or another, and tribalism itself is dominant and mainstream.
There are an estimated one hundred and fifty million tribal individuals worldwide,[2] constituting around forty percent of indigenous individuals. Although nearly all tribal people are indigenous, some are not indigenous to the areas where they now live.
The distinction between tribal and indigenous is important because tribal peoples have a special status acknowledged in international law. They often face particular issues in addition to those faced by the wider category of indigenous peoples.
Many people used the term "tribal society" to refer to societies organized largely on the basis of social, especially familial, descent groups (see clan and kinship). A customary tribe in these terms is a face-to-face community, relatively bound by kinship relations, reciprocal exchange, and strong ties to place.[3]
"Tribe" is a contested term due to its roots of being defined by outsiders during the period of colonialism. The word has no shared referent, whether in political form, kinship relations or shared culture. Some argue that it conveys a negative connotation of a timeless unchanging past.[4][5][6] To avoid these implications, some have chosen to use the terms ethnic group, or nation instead.[4][5][6]
In some places, such as India and North America, tribes are polities that have been granted legal recognition and limited autonomy by the national states.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Tribes and Nations
3 See also
4 Notes
5 References
6 External links



Etymology[edit]




A shaman from a tribe in the Venezuelan Amazon playing a siku


The word tribe first occurs in English in 12th-century Middle English-literature, in reference to the twelve tribes of Israel. The Middle English word is derived from Old French tribu and, in turn, from Latin tribus (plural tribūs), in reference to a supposed tripartite division of the original Roman state along ethnic lines, into tribūs known as the Ramnes (or Ramnenses), Tities (or Titienses), and Luceres, corresponding, according to Marcus Terentius Varro, to the Latins, Sabines and Etruscans respectively. The Ramnes were named after Romulus, leader of the Latins, Tities after Titus Tatius, leader of the Sabines, and Luceres after Lucumo, leader of an Etruscan army that had assisted the Latins. In 242–240 BC, the Tribal Assembly (comitia tributa) in the Roman Republic included 35 tribes (four "urban tribes" and 31 "rural tribes"). According to Livy, the three "tribes" were squadrons of cavalry, rather than ethnic divisions.
The term's ultimate etymology is uncertain, perhaps from the Proto-Indo-European roots tri- ("three") and bhew ("to be"). The classicist Gregory Nagy says,[7] citing the linguist Émile Benveniste,[8] that the Umbrian trifu (equivalent of the Latin tribus) is apparently derived from a combination of *tri- and *bhu-, where the second element is cognate with the Greek root phúō φύω “to bring forth” and the Greek phulē φυλή "clan, race, people" (plural phylai φυλαί). The Greek polis ("state" or "city") was, like the Roman state, divided into three phylai.
In Europe during the late medieval era, the Bible was written mostly in New Latin and instead of tribus the word phyle was used, derived from the Greek phulē. In the historical sense, "tribe", "race" and "clan" have often been used interchangeably.
Tribes and Nations[edit]




Two men from the Andamanese tribe of the Andaman Islands, India


Considerable debate has accompanied efforts to define and characterize tribes. Scholars perceive differences between pre-state tribes and contemporary tribes; there is also general controversy over cultural evolution and colonialism. In the popular imagination, tribes reflect a way of life that predates, and is more natural than that in modern states. Tribes also privilege primordial social ties, are clearly bounded, homogeneous, parochial, and stable. Tribes are an organization among families (including clans and lineages), which generates a social and ideological basis for solidarity that is in some way more limited than that of an "ethnic group" or of a "nation". Anthropological and ethnohistorical research has challenged all of these notions.
Anthropologist Elman Service presented a system of classification for societies in all human cultures, based on the evolution of social inequality and the role of the state. This system of classification contains four categories:

Hunter-gatherer bands that are generally egalitarian
Tribal societies with some limited instances of social rank and prestige
Stratified tribal societies led by chieftains (see Chiefdom)
Civilizations, with complex social hierarchies and organized, institutional governments

In his 1975 study, The Notion of the Tribe, anthropologist Morton H. Fried provided numerous examples of tribes that encompassed members who spoke different languages and practiced different rituals, or who shared languages and rituals with members of other tribes. Similarly, he provided examples of tribes in which people followed different political leaders, or followed the same leaders as members of other tribes. He concluded that tribes in general are characterized by fluid boundaries and heterogeneity, are not parochial, and are dynamic.[9]




Initiation rituals among boys from a tribe of the Yao people in Malawi


Fried proposed that most contemporary tribes do not have their origin in pre-state tribes, but rather in pre-state bands. Such "secondary" tribes, he suggested, developed as modern products of state expansion. Bands comprise small, mobile, and fluid social formations with weak leadership. They do not generate surpluses, pay no taxes, and support no standing army. Fried argued that secondary tribes develop in one of two ways. First, states could set them up as means to extend administrative and economic influence in their hinterland, where direct political control costs too much. States would encourage (or require) people on their frontiers to form more clearly bounded and centralized polities, because such polities could begin producing surpluses and taxes, and would have a leadership responsive to the needs of neighboring states (the so-called "scheduled" tribes of the United States or of British India provide good examples of this). Second, bands could form "secondary" tribes as a means to defend against state expansion. Members of bands would form more clearly bounded and centralized polities, because such polities could begin producing surpluses that could support a standing army that could fight against states, and they would have a leadership that could co-ordinate economic production and military activities.
Archaeologists continue to explore the development of pre-state tribes. Current research suggests that tribal structures constituted one type of adaptation to situations providing plentiful yet unpredictable resources. Such structures proved flexible enough to coordinate production and distribution of food in times of scarcity, without limiting or constraining people during times of surplus.
See also[edit]


Clan
Matrilineality
Neocolonialism
Nomad
Pantribal sodalities
Patrilineality
Segmentary Society
Social group
Stateless society
Band society
Tribal chief
Tribal name
Tribal sovereignty
Tribal warfare
Tribalism
Tribe (Internet)
Micronation
New Tribal Revolution


Notes[edit]



^ Stephen Corry (2011). Tribal peoples for tomorrow's world. Survival International. ISBN 978-1447424130. 
^ International, Survival. "Terminology". 
^ James, Paul (2006). Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism: Bringing Theory Back In. London: Sage Publications. 
^ a b "What is in the word tribe?". Pambazuka. January 22, 2008. Retrieved October 4, 2012. 
^ a b "IC Publications | Opinions". Africasia. Retrieved October 4, 2012. 
^ a b "Talking about "Tribe"". Africa Action. Retrieved 2012-10-04. 
^ Gregory Nagy,Greek Mythology and Poetics,






This article cites its sources but does not provide page references. You can help to improve it by introducing citations that are more precise. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




^ Émile Benveniste, Origines de la formation des noms en indo-européen,






This article cites its sources but does not provide page references. You can help to improve it by introducing citations that are more precise. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




^ Morton H. Fried (1972) The Notion of Tribe. Cummings Publishing Company



References[edit]

Benveniste, Émile. Indo-European Language and Society, translated by Elizabeth Palmer. London: Faber and Faber, 1973. ISBN 0-87024-250-4.
Benveniste, Émile. Origines de la formation des noms en indo-européen, 1935.
Fried, Morton H. The Notion of Tribe. Cummings Publishing Company, 1975. ISBN 0-8465-1548-2.
Helm, June, ed., 1968. Essays on the Problem of Tribe, Proceedings, American Ethnological Society, 1967 (Seattle: University of Washington Press).
James, Paul (2006). Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism: Bringing Theory Back In. London: Sage Publications. 
James, Paul (2001). "Relating Global Tensions: Modern Tribalism and Postmodern Nationalism". Communal/Plural. 9 (1). 
Nagy, Gregory, Greek Mythology and Poetics, Cornell University Press, 1990. In chapter 12, beginning on p. 276, Professor Nagy explores the meaning of the word origin and social context of a tribe in ancient Greece and beyond.
Sutton, Imre, Indian Land Tenure: Bibliographical Essays and a Guide to the Literature (NY: Clearwater, 1975): tribe—pp. 101–02, 180–2, 186–7, 191–3.
Renfrew, Colin, and Paul G. Bahn. Archaeology: Theories, Methods and Practice. New York: Thames and Hudson, 2008.

External links[edit]



Look up tribe or tribal in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Survival International
Korotayev, "Chiefdom: Precursor of the Tribe?"
Moroccan Tribes







v
t
e


Ethnicity



Related
concepts



Clan
Ethnic group

Ethnolinguistic group
Ethnoreligious group


Indigenous peoples
Ingroups and outgroups
Meta-ethnicity
Metroethnicity
Minority group
Monoethnicity
Nation
Nationality
Panethnicity
Polyethnicity
Population
Race
Symbolic ethnicity
Tribe





Ethnology



Anthropology
Ethnic studies
Ethnoarchaeology
Ethnobiology

Ethnobotany
Ethnozoology
Ethnoecology


Ethnocinema
Ethnogeology
Ethnography

Autoethnography
Clinical
Critical
Cyber-
Netnography
Online
Person-centered
Salvage
Transidioethnography
Video


Ethnohistory
Ethnolinguistics
Ethnology
Ethnomathematics
Ethnomethodology
Ethnomuseology
Ethnomusicology
Ethnophilosophy
Ethnopoetics
Ethnoscience
Ethnosemiotics
Ethnotaxonomy





Groups
by region



Africa

Arab League


Americas

Indigenous
Canada
Mexico
United States
Central America
South America


Asia

Central Asia
East Asia
Northern Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
West Asia


Australia

Indigenous


Europe
Oceania

Indigenous
European








Identity and
ethnogenesis




Cross-race effect
Cultural assimilation
Cultural identity
Demonym
Development
Endonym
Ethnic flag
Ethnic option
Ethnic origin
Ethnic religion
Ethnicity in census
Ethnofiction
Ethnonym
Folk religion
Historical
Imagined community
Kinship
Legendary progenitor
Lineage-bonded society
Mores
Nation-building
Nation state
National language
National myth
Origin myth
Pantribal sodality
Tribal name
Tribalism
Urheimat





Multiethnic
society



Consociationalism
Diaspora politics
Dominant minority
Ethnic democracy
Ethnic enclave
Ethnic interest group
Ethnic majority
Ethnic media
Ethnic pornography
Ethnic theme park
Ethnoburb
Ethnocracy
Indigenous rights
Middleman minority
Minority rights
Model minority
Multinational state






Ideology and
ethnic conflict




Ethnic bioweapon
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnic nationalism
Ethnic nepotism
Ethnic penalty
Ethnic slur
Ethnic stereotype
Ethnic violence
Ethnocentrism
Ethnocide
Ethnosymbolism
Indigenism
Separatist movements
Xenophobia









Authority control



GND: 4138634-6











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tribe&oldid=816574606"					Categories: TribesEthnologySelf-sufficiencyHidden categories: Articles lacking page references from December 2017Use mdy dates from August 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers