In biology, a tribe is a taxonomic rank above genus, but below family and subfamily.[1][2] It is sometimes subdivided into subtribes.
In zoology, examples include the tribes Caprini (goat-antelopes), Hominini (hominins), Bombini (bumblebees), and Thunnini (tunas). The standard ending for the name of a zoological tribe is "-ini". The tribe Hominini is divided into subtribes by some scientists; subtribe Hominina then comprises "humans". The standard ending for the name of a zoological subtribe is "-ina".
In botany, examples include the tribes Acalypheae and Hyacintheae. The standard ending for the name of a botanical tribe is "-eae". The tribe Hyacintheae is divided into subtribes, including the subtribe Massoniinae. The standard ending for the name of a botanical subtribe is "-inae".
In bacteriology, the form of tribe names is as in botany, e.g., Pseudomonadeae, based on the genus name Pseudomonas.[3]
See also[edit]

Taxonomy (biology)
Nomenclature codes

References[edit]



^ McNeill, J.; Barrie, F.R.; Buck, W.R.; Demoulin, V.; Greuter, W.; Hawksworth, D.L.; Herendeen, P.S.; Knapp, S.; Marhold, K.; Prado, J.; Prud'homme Van Reine, W.F.; Smith, G.F.; Wiersema, J.H.; Turland, N.J. (2012), International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Melbourne Code) adopted by the Eighteenth International Botanical Congress Melbourne, Australia, July 2011, Regnum Vegetabile 154, A.R.G. Gantner Verlag KG, ISBN 978-3-87429-425-6  Article 4
^ International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature (1999). International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (Fourth ed.). International Trust for Zoological Nomenclature, XXIX. p. 306. 
^ "Chapter 3: Rules of Nomenclature with Recommendations", International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria: Bacteriological Code, 1990 Revision 









v
t
e


Taxonomic ranks









Domain/Superkingdom
Kingdom
Subkingdom
Infrakingdom/Branch




Superphylum/Superdivision
Phylum/Division
Subphylum
Infraphylum
Microphylum




Superclass
Class
Subclass
Infraclass
Parvclass




Legion
Cohort




Magnorder
Superorder
Order
Suborder
Infraorder
Parvorder




Section (zoo.)
Superfamily
Family
Subfamily




Supertribe
Tribe
Subtribe




Genus
Subgenus
Section (bot.)
Series (bot.)




Species
Subspecies
Variety
Form












This biology article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tribe_(biology)&oldid=801024210"					Categories: Bacterial nomenclatureBotanical nomenclaturePlant taxonomyTribes (biology)Zoological nomenclatureBiology stubsHidden categories: All stub articles