

Turkish


Türkçe


Pronunciation
[ˈtyɾct͡ʃɛ] ( listen)


Native to

Turkey (official), Northern Cyprus (official), Cyprus (official), Bulgaria, Macedonia, Greece, Iraq, Syria
Azerbaijan, Kosovo, Romania, Iraq, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Syria


Region
Anatolia, Balkans, Cyprus, Mesopotamia, Levant, Transcaucasia


Ethnicity
Turkish



Native speakers

71 million[1] (2017)
88 million (L1 + L2)[2]



Language family


Turkic

Common Turkic

Oghuz

Western Oghuz

Turkish












Early forms


Old Anatolian Turkish

Ottoman Turkish






Standard forms


Ottoman Turkish (defunct)



Dialects


Karamanli Turkish
Cypriot Turkish





Writing system

Latin (Turkish alphabet)
Turkish Braille


Official status



Official language in

 Turkey
 Northern Cyprus
 Cyprus



Recognised minority
language in


 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Greece
 Iraq
 Kosovo
 Macedonia
 Romania



Regulated by
Turkish Language Association


Language codes


ISO 639-1
tr


ISO 639-2
tur


ISO 639-3
tur


Glottolog
nucl1301[3]


Linguasphere
part of 44-AAB-a




  Countries where Turkish is an official language
  Countries where it is recognized as a minority language




This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.


Turkish ( Türkçe (help·info)), also referred to as Istanbul Turkish,[4] is the most widely spoken of the Turkic languages, with around 10–15 million native speakers in Southeast Europe (mostly in East and Western Thrace) and 60–65 million native speakers in Western Asia (mostly in Anatolia). Outside Turkey, significant smaller groups of speakers exist in Germany, Bulgaria, Macedonia,[5] Northern Cyprus,[6] Greece,[7] the Caucasus, and other parts of Europe and Central Asia. Cyprus has requested that the European Union add Turkish as an official EU language, even though Turkey is not a member state.[8]
To the west, the influence of Ottoman Turkish—the variety of the Turkish language that was used as the administrative and literary language of the Ottoman Empire—spread as the Ottoman Empire expanded. In 1928, as one of Atatürk's Reforms in the early years of the Republic of Turkey, the Ottoman Turkish alphabet was replaced with a Latin alphabet.
The distinctive characteristics of the Turkish language are vowel harmony and extensive agglutination. The basic word order of Turkish is subject–object–verb. Turkish has no noun classes or grammatical gender. The language has a strong T–V distinction and usage of honorifics. Turkish uses second-person pronouns that distinguish varying levels of politeness, social distance, age, courtesy or familiarity toward the addressee. The plural second-person pronoun and verb forms are used referring to a single person out of respect.



Contents


1 Classification
2 History

2.1 Ottoman Turkish
2.2 Language reform and modern Turkish


3 Geographic distribution

3.1 Official status
3.2 Dialects


4 Phonology

4.1 Consonants

4.1.1 Consonant devoicing


4.2 Vowels

4.2.1 Vowel harmony


4.3 Stress


5 Syntax

5.1 Sentence groups

5.1.1 Negation
5.1.2 Yes/no questions


5.2 Word order

5.2.1 Immediately preverbal
5.2.2 Postpredicate
5.2.3 Topic




6 Grammar

6.1 Nouns
6.2 Personal pronouns

6.2.1 Noun phrases (tamlama)


6.3 Adjectives
6.4 Verbs
6.5 Verb tenses

6.5.1 Attributive verbs (participles)




7 Vocabulary

7.1 Word formation


8 Writing system
9 Sample
10 Turkish Whistling Language
11 See also
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Classification
Main article: Turkic languages




Old Turkic inscription with the Old Turkic alphabet (c. 8th century). Kyzyl, Russia


About 40% of all speakers of Turkic languages are native Turkish speakers.[9]The characteristic features of Turkish, such as vowel harmony, agglutination, and lack of grammatical gender, are universal within the Turkic family. The Turkic family comprises some 30 living languages spoken across Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and Siberia.
Turkish is a member of the Oghuz group of languages, a subgroup of the Turkic language family. There is a high degree of mutual intelligibility between Turkish and the other Oghuz Turkic languages, including Azerbaijani, Turkmen, Qashqai, Gagauz, and Balkan Gagauz Turkish.[10]
The Turkic languages were grouped into the now discredited Altaic language group.
History
See also: Turkish people and Turkic peoples § History
The earliest known Old Turkic inscriptions are the three monumental Orkhon inscriptions found in modern Mongolia. Erected in honour of the prince Kul Tigin and his brother Emperor Bilge Khagan, these date back to the second Turk Kaghanate.[11]. After the discovery and excavation of these monuments and associated stone slabs by Russian archaeologists in the wider area surrounding the Orkhon Valley between 1889 and 1893, it became established that the language on the inscriptions was the Old Turkic language written using the Old Turkic alphabet, which has also been referred to as "Turkic runes" or "runiform" due to a superficial similarity to the Germanic runic alphabets.[12]
With the Turkic expansion during Early Middle Ages (c. 6th–11th centuries), peoples speaking Turkic languages spread across Central Asia, covering a vast geographical region stretching from Siberia and to Europe and the Mediterranean. The Seljuqs of the Oghuz Turks, in particular, brought their language, Oghuz—the direct ancestor of today's Turkish language—into Anatolia during the 11th century.[13] Also during the 11th century, an early linguist of the Turkic languages, Mahmud al-Kashgari from the Kara-Khanid Khanate, published the first comprehensive Turkic language dictionary and map of the geographical distribution of Turkic speakers in the Compendium of the Turkic Dialects (Ottoman Turkish: Divânü Lügati't-Türk).[14]
Before their adoption of the Turkish language, Anatolian Turks are believed to have originally spoken the Anatolian languages.[disputed – discuss] This extinct group of languages, which belongs to the Indo-European family, was natively spoken by the Ancient Anatolians.[15]
Ottoman Turkish
Main article: Ottoman Turkish language
Following the adoption of Islam c. 950 by the Kara-Khanid Khanate and the Seljuq Turks, who are both regarded as the ethnic and cultural ancestors of the Ottomans, the administrative language of these states acquired a large collection of loanwords from Arabic and Persian. Turkish literature during the Ottoman period, particularly Divan poetry, was heavily influenced by Persian, including the adoption of poetic meters and a great quantity of imported words. The literary and official language during the Ottoman Empire period (c. 1299–1922) is termed Ottoman Turkish, which was a mixture of Turkish, Persian, and Arabic that differed considerably and was largely unintelligible to the period's everyday Turkish. The everyday Turkish, known as kaba Türkçe or "rough Turkish", spoken by the less-educated lower and also rural members of society, contained a higher percentage of native vocabulary and served as basis for the modern Turkish language.[16]
Language reform and modern Turkish
After the foundation of the modern state of Turkey and the script reform, the Turkish Language Association (TDK) was established in 1932 under the patronage of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, with the aim of conducting research on Turkish. One of the tasks of the newly established association was to initiate a language reform to replace loanwords of Arabic and Persian origin with Turkish equivalents.[17] By banning the usage of imported words in the press, the association succeeded in removing several hundred foreign words from the language. While most of the words introduced to the language by the TDK were newly derived from Turkic roots, it also opted for reviving Old Turkish words which had not been used for centuries.[18]
Owing to this sudden change in the language, older and younger people in Turkey started to differ in their vocabularies. While the generations born before the 1940s tend to use the older terms of Arabic or Persian origin, the younger generations favor new expressions. It is considered particularly ironic that Atatürk himself, in his lengthy speech to the new Parliament in 1927, used a style of Ottoman which sounded so alien to later listeners that it had to be "translated" three times into modern Turkish: first in 1963, again in 1986, and most recently in 1995.[19]
The past few decades have seen the continuing work of the TDK to coin new Turkish words to express new concepts and technologies as they enter the language, mostly from English. Many of these new words, particularly information technology terms, have received widespread acceptance. However, the TDK is occasionally criticized for coining words which sound contrived and artificial. Some earlier changes—such as bölem to replace fırka, "political party"—also failed to meet with popular approval (fırka has been replaced by the French loanword parti). Some words restored from Old Turkic have taken on specialized meanings; for example betik (originally meaning "book") is now used to mean "script" in computer science.[20]
Many of the words derived by TDK coexist with their older counterparts.[citation needed] This usually happens when a loanword changes its original meaning. For instance, dert, derived from the Persian dard (درد "pain"), means "problem" or "trouble" in Turkish; whereas the native Turkish word ağrı is used for physical pain. Sometimes the loanword has a slightly different meaning from the native Turkish word, creating a situation similar to the coexistence of Germanic and Romance words in English.[citation needed] Some examples of modern Turkish words and the old loanwords are:


Ottoman Turkish
Modern Turkish
English translation
Comments


müselles
üçgen
triangle
Compound of the noun üç the suffix -gen


tayyare
uçak
aeroplane
Derived from the verb uçmak ("to fly"). The word was first proposed to mean "airport".


nispet
oran
ratio
The old word is still used in the language today together with the new one. The modern word is from the Old Turkic verb or- (to cut).


şimal
kuzey
north
Derived from the Old Turkic noun kuz ("cold and dark place", "shadow"). The word is restored from Middle Turkic usage.[21]


teşrinievvel
ekim
October
The noun ekim means "the action of planting", referring to the planting of cereal seeds in autumn, which is widespread in Turkey


For a more comprehensive list, see List of replaced loanwords in Turkish.
Geographic distribution
See also: Turkish diaspora
Turkish is natively spoken by the Turkish people in Turkey and by the Turkish diaspora in some 30 other countries. Turkish language is mutually intelligible with Azerbaijani and other Turkic languages. In particular, Turkish-speaking minorities exist in countries that formerly (in whole or part) belonged to the Ottoman Empire, such as Iraq[22], Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece (primarily in Western Thrace), the Republic of Macedonia, Romania, and Serbia. More than two million Turkish speakers live in Germany; and there are significant Turkish-speaking communities in the United States, France, The Netherlands, Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.[23] Due to the cultural assimilation of Turkish immigrants in host countries, not all ethnic Turkish immigrants speak the language with native fluency.[24]
In 2005, 93% of the population of Turkey were native speakers of Turkish,[25] about 67 million at the time, with Kurdish languages making up most of the remainder.[26] However, most linguistic minorities in Turkey are bilingual, speaking Turkish with native-like fluency.[citation needed]
Official status




Road signs in Prizren, Kosovo. Official languages are: Albanian (top), Serbian (middle) and Turkish (bottom).


Turkish is the official language of Turkey and is one of the official languages of Cyprus. Under the 2008 constitution, Turkish has official status in 38 of Kosovo's municipalities, including Mamusha [27][28]. and three municipalities of the Republic of Macedonia, based on the concentration of Turkish-speaking local population.[citation needed]
In Turkey, the regulatory body for Turkish is the Turkish Language Association (Türk Dil Kurumu or TDK), which was founded in 1932 under the name Türk Dili Tetkik Cemiyeti ("Society for Research on the Turkish Language"). The Turkish Language Association was influenced by the ideology of linguistic purism: indeed one of its primary tasks was the replacement of loanwords and foreign grammatical constructions with equivalents of Turkish origin.[29] These changes, together with the adoption of the new Turkish alphabet in 1928, shaped the modern Turkish language spoken today. TDK became an independent body in 1951, with the lifting of the requirement that it should be presided over by the Minister of Education. This status continued until August 1983, when it was again made into a governmental body in the constitution of 1982, following the military coup d'état of 1980.[18]
Dialects
Main article: Turkish dialects




Map of the main subgroups of Turkish dialects across Southeast Europe and the Middle East.


Modern standard Turkish is based on the dialect of Istanbul.[30] This "Istanbul Turkish" (İstanbul Türkçesi) constitutes the model of written and spoken Turkish, as recommended by Ziya Gökalp, Ömer Seyfettin and others.[31]
Dialectal variation persists, in spite of the levelling influence of the standard used in mass media and the Turkish education system since the 1930s.[32] Academically, researchers from Turkey often refer to Turkish dialects as ağız or şive, leading to an ambiguity with the linguistic concept of accent, which is also covered with these words. Projects investigating Turkish dialects are being carried out by several universities, as well as a dedicated work group of the Turkish Language Association. Work is currently in progress for the compilation and publication of their research as a comprehensive dialect atlas of the Turkish language.[33][34]
Rumelice is spoken by immigrants from Rumelia, and includes the distinct dialects of Ludogorie, Dinler, and Adakale, which are influenced by the theoretized Balkan sprachbund. Kıbrıs Türkçesi is the name for Cypriot Turkish and is spoken by the Turkish Cypriots. Edirne is the dialect of Edirne. Ege is spoken in the Aegean region, with its usage extending to Antalya. The nomadic Yörüks of the Mediterranean Region of Turkey also have their own dialect of Turkish.[35] This group is not to be confused with the Yuruk nomads of Macedonia, Greece, and European Turkey who speak Balkan Gagauz Turkish.
Güneydoğu is spoken in the southeast, to the east of Mersin. Doğu, a dialect in the Eastern Anatolia Region, has a dialect continuum. The Meskhetian Turks who live in Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Russia as well as in several Central Asian countries, also speak an Eastern Anatolian dialect of Turkish, originating in the areas of Kars, Ardahan, and Artvin and sharing similarities with Azerbaijani, the language of Azerbaijan.[36]
The Central Anatolia Region speaks Orta Anadolu. Karadeniz, spoken in the Eastern Black Sea Region and represented primarily by the Trabzon dialect, exhibits substratum influence from Greek in phonology and syntax;[37] it is also known as Laz dialect (not to be confused with the Laz language). Kastamonu is spoken in Kastamonu and its surrounding areas. Karamanli Turkish is spoken in Greece, where it is called Kαραμανλήδικα. It is the literary standard for the Karamanlides.[citation needed]
Phonology



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.


Main article: Turkish phonology
See Turkish alphabet for a pronunciation guide
Consonants

Consonant phonemes of Standard Turkish


Labial
Dental
Alveolar
Postalveolar
Palatal
Velar
Glottal


Nasal
m

n






Stop
p
b
t
d


(c)
(ɟ)
k
ɡ



Affricate



t͡ʃ
d͡ʒ





Fricative
f
v

s
z
ʃ
ʒ


h


Approximant


(ɫ)
l
j




Flap


ɾ






The phoneme that is usually referred to as yumuşak g ("soft g"), written ⟨ğ⟩ in Turkish orthography, represents a vowel sequence or a rather weak bilabial approximant between rounded vowels, a weak palatal approximant between unrounded front vowels, and a vowel sequence elsewhere. It never occurs at the beginning of a word or a syllable, but always follows a vowel. When word-final or preceding another consonant, it lengthens the preceding vowel.[38]
In native Turkic words, the sounds [c], [ɟ], and [l] are in complementary distribution with [k], [ɡ], and [ɫ]; the former set occurs adjacent to front vowels and the latter adjacent to back vowels. The distribution of these phonemes is often unpredictable, however, in foreign borrowings and proper nouns. In such words, [c], [ɟ], and [l] often occur with back vowels:[39] some examples are given below.
Consonant devoicing
Main article: Final-obstruent devoicing
Turkish orthography reflects final-obstruent devoicing, whereby a voiced obstruent, such as /b d dʒ ɡ/, is devoiced to [p t tʃ k] at the end of a word or before a consonant, but retains its voicing before a vowel. In loan words, the voiced equivalent of /k/ is /g/; in native words, it is /ğ/.[40]

Obstruent devoicing in nouns

Underlying
consonant
Devoiced
form
Underlying
morpheme
Dictionary form
Dative case /
1sg present
Meaning


b
p
*kitab
kitap
kitaba
book (loan)


c
ç
*uc
uç
uca
tip


d
t
*bud
but
buda
thigh


g
k
*reng
renk
renge
color (loan)


ğ
k
*ekmeğ
ekmek
ekmeğe
bread


This is analogous to languages such as German and Russian, but in the case of Turkish, the spelling is usually made to match the sound. However, in a few cases, such as ad /at/ 'name' (dative ada), the underlying form is retained in the spelling (cf. at /at/ 'horse', dative ata). Other exceptions are od 'fire' vs. ot 'herb', sac 'sheet metal', saç 'hair'. Most loanwords, such as kitap above, are spelled as pronounced, but a few such as hac 'hajj', şad 'happy', and yad 'strange(r)' also show their underlying forms.[citation needed]
Native nouns of two or more syllables that end in /k/ in dictionary form are nearly all //ğ// in underlying form. However, most verbs and monosyllabic nouns are underlyingly //k//.[41]
Vowels




Vowels of Turkish. From Zimmer & Orgun (1999:155)


The vowels of the Turkish language are, in their alphabetical order, ⟨a⟩, ⟨e⟩, ⟨ı⟩, ⟨i⟩, ⟨o⟩, ⟨ö⟩, ⟨u⟩, ⟨ü⟩.[42] The Turkish vowel system can be considered as being three-dimensional, where vowels are characterised by how and where they are articulated focusing on three key features: front and back, rounded and unrounded and vowel height.[43] Vowels are classified [±back], [±round] and [±high].[44]
The only diphthongs in the language are found in loanwords and may be categorised as falling diphthongs usually analyzed as a sequence of /j/ and a vowel.[38]
Vowel harmony
For more details on this topic, see Vowel harmony.


Turkish Vowel Harmony
Front Vowels
Back Vowels


Unrounded
Rounded
Unrounded
Rounded


Vowel
e /e/
i /i/
ü /y/
ö /ø/
a /a/
ı /ɯ/
u /u/
o /o/


Twofold (Simple system)
e
a


Fourfold (Complex system)
i
ü
ı
u






Road sign at the European end of the Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul. (Photo taken during the 28th Istanbul Marathon in 2006)


Turkish is an agglutinative language where a series of suffixes are added to the stem word; vowel harmony is a phonological process which ensures a smooth flow, requiring the least amount of oral movement as possible. Vowel harmony can be viewed as a process of assimilation, whereby following vowels take on the characteristics of the preceding vowel.[45] It may be useful to think of Turkish vowels as two symmetrical sets: the a-undotted (a, ı, o, u) which are all back vowels, articulated at the back of the mouth; and the e-dotted (e, i, ö, ü) vowels which are articulated at the front of the mouth. The place and manner of articulation of the vowels will determine which pattern of vowel harmony a word will adopt. The pattern of vowels is shown in the table above.[46]
Grammatical affixes have "a chameleon-like quality",[47] and obey one of the following patterns of vowel harmony:

twofold (-e/-a):[48] the locative case suffix, for example, is -de after front vowels and -da after back vowels. The notation -de² is a convenient shorthand for this pattern.
fourfold (-i/-ı/-ü/-u): the genitive case suffix, for example, is -in or -ın after unrounded vowels (front or back respectively); and -ün or -un after the corresponding rounded vowels. In this case, the shorthand notation -in4 is used.

Practically, the twofold pattern (also referred to as the e-type vowel harmony) means that in the environment where the vowel in the word stem is formed in the front of the mouth, the suffix will take the e-form, while if it is formed in the back it will take the a-form. The fourfold pattern (also called the i-type) accounts for rounding as well as for front/back.[45] The following examples, based on the copula -dir4 ("[it] is"), illustrate the principles of i-type vowel harmony in practice: Türkiye'dir ("it is Turkey"),[49] kapıdır ("it is the door"), but gündür ("it is the day"), paltodur ("it is the coat").[50]
There are several exceptions to the vowel harmony rules, which can be categorised as follows:

A few native root words such as anne (mother), elma (apple) and kardeş (brother). In these cases the suffixes harmonise with the final vowel.
Compounds such as the bu-gün (today) and baş-kent (capital). In these cases vowels are not required to harmonise between the constituent words.
Loanwords often don't harmonise, however, in some cases the suffixes will harmonise with the front vowel even in words that may not have a front vowel in the final syllable. Usually this occurs when the words end in a palatal [l], for example halsiz < hal + -siz "listless", meçhuldür < meçhul + -dir "it is unknown". However, affixes borrowed from foreign languages do not harmonise, such as -izm (ateizm "atheism"), -en (derived from French -ment as in taxmen "completely), anti- (antidemokratik "antidemocratic").
A few native suffixes are also invariable (or at least partially so) such as the second vowel in the bound auxiliary -abil, or in the marker -ken as well as in the imperfect suffix -yor. There are also a few derivational suffixes that do not harmonise such as -gen in uçgen (triangle) or altigen (hexagon). [43]

The road sign in the photograph above illustrates several of these features:

a native compound which does not obey vowel harmony: Orta+köy ("middle village"—a place name)
a loanword also violating vowel harmony: viyadük (< French viaduc "viaduct")
the possessive suffix -i4 harmonizing with the final vowel (and softening the k by consonant alternation): viyadüğü[citation needed]

Stress
For more details on this topic, see Turkish phonology § Stress.
Stress is usually on the last syllable in most root words.[38] There are however, several exceptions. Exceptions include some suffix combinations and loanwords, particularly from Italian and Greek, as well as interjections, certain question words, adverbs (although not adjectives functioning as adverbs), and many proper names. While the aforementioned loanwords are usually stressed on the penultimate syllable ([ɫoˈkanta] lokanta "restaurant" or [isˈcele] iskele "quay"), the stress of proper names is less predictable ([isˈtanbuɫ] İstanbul, [ˈaŋkaɾa] Ankara) see Sezer stress.
Syntax
Sentence groups
Turkish has two groups of sentences: verbal and nominal sentences. In the case of a verbal sentence, the predicate is a finite verb, while the predicate in nominal sentence will have either no overt verb or a verb in the form of the copula ol or y (variants of "be"). Examples of both are given below:[51]


Sentence type
Turkish
English



Subject
Predicate



Verbal
Necla
okula gitti
Necla went to school


Nominal (no verb)
Necla
oğretmen
Necla is a teacher


(copula)
Necla
ev-de-y-miş (hyphens delineate suffixes)
Apparently Necla is at home


Negation
The two groups of sentences have different ways of forming negation. A nominal sentence can be negated with the addition of the word değil, for example the sentence above would become Necla oğretmen değil (Necla is not a teacher). However, the verbal sentence requires the addition of a negative suffix -me to the verb (the suffix comes after the stem but before the tense): Necla okula gitmedi (Necla did not go to school).[52]
Yes/no questions
In the case of a verbal sentence, a interrogative morpheme -mi is added to the end of the sentence and stands alone, for example Necla okula gitti mi? (Did Necla go to school?). In the case of a nominal sentence, then the -mi comes after the predicate but before the personal ending, so for example Necla, siz oğretmen misiniz? (Necla, are you a teacher? using the formal 2nd person plural).[52]
Word order
Word order in simple Turkish sentences is generally subject–object–verb, as in Korean and Latin, but unlike English, for verbal sentences and subject-predicate for nominal sentences. However, as Turkish possesses a case-marking system, and most grammatical relations are shown using morphological markers, often the SOV structure has diminished relevance, in fact it may be considered a "pragmatic word order" type of language, one that does not rely on word order for grammatical purposes.[53] While the basic word order in Turkish is firmly SOV, the word order may vary in particular conditions.
Immediately preverbal
Consider the following simple sentence which demonstrates that the focus in Turkish is on the element that immediately precedes the verb:[54]


Word order



Focus


SOV
Ahmet
Ahmet

yumurta-yı
egg (accusative)

yedi
ate

unmarked: Ahmet ate the egg


SVO
Ahmet
yedi
yumurta-yı
the focus is on the subject: Ahmet (it was Ahmet who ate the egg)


OVS
Yumurta-yı
yedi
Ahmet
the focus is on the object: egg (it was an egg that Ahmet ate)


Postpredicate
The postpredicate position signifies what is referred to as background information in Turkish- information that is assumed to be known to both the speaker and the listener, or information that is included in the context. Consider the following examples:[51]


Sentence type
Word order




Nominal
S-predicate
Bu ev güzelmiş (apparently this house is beautiful)
unmarked



Predicate-s
Güzelmiş bu ev (it is apparently beautiful, this house)
it is understood that the sentence is about this house


Verbal
SOV
Bana da bir kahve getir (get me a coffee too)
unmarked




Bana da getir bir kahve (get me one too, a coffee)
it is understood that it is a coffee that the speaker wants


Topic
There has been some debate among linguists whether Turkish is a subject-prominent (like English) or topic-prominent (like Japanese and Korean) language, with recent scholarship implying that it is indeed both subject and topic-prominent.[55] This has direct implications for word order as it is possible for the subject to be included in the verb-phrase in Turkish. There can be S/O inversion in sentences where the topic is of greater importance than the subject.
Grammar
Main article: Turkish grammar
Turkish is an agglutinative language and frequently uses affixes, and specifically suffixes, or endings.[56] One word can have many affixes and these can also be used to create new words, such as creating a verb from a noun, or a noun from a verbal root (see the section on Word formation). Most affixes indicate the grammatical function of the word.[57] The only native prefixes are alliterative intensifying syllables used with adjectives or adverbs: for example sımsıcak ("boiling hot" < sıcak) and masmavi ("bright blue" < mavi).[58]
The extensive use of affixes can give rise to long words, e.g. Çekoslovakyalılaştıramadıklarımızdanmışsınızcasına, meaning "Just like you are said to be one of those that we couldn't manage to convert to a Czechoslovak". While this case is contrived, long words frequently occur in normal Turkish, as in this heading of a newspaper obituary column: Bayramlaşamadıklarımız (Bayram [festival]-Recipr-Impot-Partic-Plur-PossPl1; "Those of our number with whom we cannot exchange the season's greetings").[59] Another example can be seen in the final word of this heading of the online Turkish Spelling Guide (İmlâ Kılavuzu): Dilde birlik, ulusal birliğin vazgeçilemezlerindendir ("Unity in language is among the indispensables [dispense-Pass-Impot-Plur-PossS3-Abl-Copula] of national unity ~ Linguistic unity is a sine qua non of national unity").[60]
Nouns
There is no definite article in Turkish, but definiteness of the object is implied when the accusative ending is used (see below). Turkish nouns decline by taking case endings. There are six noun cases in Turkish, with all the endings following vowel harmony (shown in the table using the shorthand superscript notation. The plural marker -ler ² immediately follows the noun before any case or other affixes (e.g. köylerin "of the villages").[citation needed]


Case
Ending
Examples
Meaning


köy "village"
ağaç "tree"


Nominative
Ø (none)
köy
ağaç
(the) village/tree


Genitive
-in 4
köyün
ağacın
the village's/tree's
of the village/tree


Dative
-e ²
köye
ağaca
to the village/tree


Accusative
-i 4
köyü
ağacı
the village/tree


Ablative
-den ²
köyden
ağaçtan
from the village/tree


Locative
-de ²
köyde
ağaçta
in the village/on the tree


The accusative case marker is used only for definite objects; compare (bir) ağaç gördük "we saw a tree" with ağacı gördük "we saw the tree".[61] The plural marker -ler ² is generally not used when a class or category is meant: ağaç gördük can equally well mean "we saw trees [as we walked through the forest]"—as opposed to ağaçları gördük "we saw the trees [in question]".[citation needed]
The declension of ağaç illustrates two important features of Turkish phonology: consonant assimilation in suffixes (ağaçtan, ağaçta) and voicing of final consonants before vowels (ağacın, ağaca, ağacı).[citation needed]
Additionally, nouns can take suffixes that assign person: for example -imiz 4, "our". With the addition of the copula (for example -im 4, "I am") complete sentences can be formed. The interrogative particle mi 4 immediately follows the word being questioned: köye mi? "[going] to the village?", ağaç mı? "[is it a] tree?".[citation needed]


Turkish
English


ev
(the) house


evler
(the) houses


evin
your (sing.) house


eviniz
your (pl./formal) house


evim
my house


evimde
at my house


evlerinizin
of your houses


evlerinizden
from your houses


evlerinizdendi
(he/she/it) was from your houses


evlerinizdenmiş
(he/she/it) was (apparently/said to be) from your houses


Evinizdeyim.
I am at your house.


Evinizdeymişim.
I was (apparently) at your house.


Evinizde miyim?
Am I at your house?


Personal pronouns
The Turkish personal pronouns in the nominative case are ben (1s), sen (2s), o (3s), biz (1pl), siz (2pl, or formal/polite 2s), and onlar (3pl). They are declined regularly with some exceptions: benim (1s gen.); bizim (1pl gen.); bana (1s dat.); sana (2s dat.); and the oblique forms of o use the root on. All other pronouns (reflexive kendi and so on) are declined regularly.[citation needed]
Noun phrases (tamlama)
Two nouns, or groups of nouns, may be joined in either of two ways:

definite (possessive) compound (belirtili tamlama). E.g. Türkiye'nin sesi "the voice of Turkey (radio station)": the voice belonging to Turkey. Here the relationship is shown by the genitive ending -in4 added to the first noun; the second noun has the third-person suffix of possession -(s)i4.
indefinite (qualifying) compound (belirtisiz tamlama). E.g. Türkiye Cumhuriyeti "Turkey-Republic[62] = the Republic of Turkey": not the republic belonging to Turkey, but the Republic that is Turkey. Here the first noun has no ending; but the second noun has the ending -(s)i4—the same as in definite compounds.[citation needed]

The following table illustrates these principles.[63] In some cases the constituents of the compounds are themselves compounds; for clarity these subsidiary compounds are marked with [square brackets]. The suffixes involved in the linking are underlined. Note that if the second noun group already had a possessive suffix (because it is a compound by itself), no further suffix is added.

Linked nouns and noun groups

Definite (possessive)
Indefinite (qualifier)
Complement
Meaning


kimsenin

yanıtı
nobody's answer



"kimse"
yanıtı
the answer "nobody"


Atatürk'ün

evi
Atatürk's house



Atatürk
Bulvarı
Atatürk Boulevard (named after, not belonging to Atatürk)


Orhan'ın

adı
Orhan's name



"Orhan"
adı
the name "Orhan"



r
sessizi
the consonant r


[r sessizi]nin

söylenişi
pronunciation of the consonant r



Türk
[Dil Kurumu]
Turkish language-association



[Türk Dili]
Dergisi
Turkish-language magazine



Ford
[aile arabası]
Ford family car


Ford'un

[aile arabası]
(Mr) Ford's family car


[Ford ailesi]nin

arabası
the Ford family's car[64]



Ankara
[Kız Lisesi][65]
Ankara Girls' School



[yıl sonu]
sınavları
year-end examinations


Bulgaristan'ın

[İstanbul Başkonsolosluğu]
the Istanbul Consulate-General of Bulgaria (located in Istanbul, but belonging to Bulgaria)



[ [İstanbul Üniversitesi] [Edebiyat Fakültesi] ]
[ [Türk Edebiyatı] Profesörü]
Professor of Turkish Literature in the Faculty of Literature of the University of Istanbul



ne oldum
delisi
"what-have-I-become!"[66] madman = parvenu who gives himself airs


As the last example shows, the qualifying expression may be a substantival sentence rather than a noun or noun group.[67]
There is a third way of linking the nouns where both nouns take no suffixes (takısız tamlama). However, in this case the first noun acts as an adjective,[68] e.g. Demir kapı (iron gate), elma yanak ("apple cheek", i.e. red cheek), kömür göz ("coal eye", i.e. black eye) :
Adjectives
Turkish adjectives are not declined. However most adjectives can also be used as nouns, in which case they are declined: e.g. güzel ("beautiful") → güzeller ("(the) beautiful ones / people"). Used attributively, adjectives precede the nouns they modify. The adjectives var ("existent") and yok ("non-existent") are used in many cases where English would use "there is" or "have", e.g. süt yok ("there is no milk", lit. "(the) milk (is) non-existent"); the construction "noun 1-GEN noun 2-POSS var/yok" can be translated "noun 1 has/doesn't have noun 2"; imparatorun elbisesi yok "the emperor has no clothes" ("(the) emperor-of clothes-his non-existent"); kedimin ayakkabıları yoktu ("my cat had no shoes", lit. "cat-my-of shoe-plur.-its non-existent-past tense").[citation needed]
Verbs
See also: Turkish copula
Turkish verbs indicate person. They can be made negative, potential ("can"), or impotential ("cannot"). Furthermore, Turkish verbs show tense (present, past, future, and aorist), mood (conditional, imperative, inferential, necessitative, and optative), and aspect. Negation is expressed by the infix -me²- immediately following the stem.


Turkish
English


gel-
(to) come


gelebil-
(to) be able to come


gelme-
not (to) come


geleme-
(to) be unable to come


gelememiş
Apparently (s)he couldn't come


gelebilecek
(s)he'll be able to come


gelmeyebilir
(s)he may (possibly) not come


gelebilirsen
if thou can come


gelinir
(passive) one comes, people come


gelebilmeliydin
thou shouldst have been able to come


gelebilseydin
if thou could have come


gelmeliydin
thou shouldst have come


Almost all Turkish verbs are conjugated in the same way, most notable exception being the irregular and defective verb i-, the Turkish copula (corresponding to English to be), which can be used in compound forms (the shortened form is called an enclitic): Gelememişti = Gelememiş idi = Gelememiş + i- + -di.[citation needed]
Verb tenses
There are 9 simple and 20 compound tenses in Turkish. 9 simple tenses are simple past (di'li geçmiş), inferential past (miş'li geçmiş), present continuous, simple present (aorist), future, wish, demand, necessitative ("must") and order.[69] There are three groups of compound forms. Story (hikaye) is the witnessed past of the above forms (except command), rumor (rivayet) is the unwitnessed past of the above forms (except inferential past and command), conditional wish (koşul) is the conditional form of the first five basic tenses.[70] In the example below the second person singular of the verb git ("go") is shown.


English of the basic form
Basic tense
Story (hikaye)
Rumor (rivayet)
Condition (koşul)


you went
gittin
gittiydin
–
gittiysen


you have gone
gitmişsin
gitmiştin
gitmişmişsin
gitmişsen


you are going
gidiyorsun
gidiyordun
gidiyormuşsun
gidiyorsan


you (always) go
gidersin
giderdin
gidermişsin
gidersen


you will go
gideceksin
gidecektin
gidecekmişsin
gideceksen


(I wish) you go
gitsen
gitseydin
gitseymişsin
–


go
gidesin
gideydin
gideymişsin
–


you must go
gitmelisin
gitmeliydin
gitmeliymişin
–


go (command)
git
–
–
–


There are also so-called combined verbs, which are created by adding certain verbs (like bil or ver) to the stem of the verb. Bil is the sufficiency mood. It is the equivalent of English auxiliary verbs "able to", "can" or "may". Ver is the swiftness, kal is the perpetuity and yaz is the approach ("almost") moods.[71] Thus while gittin is "you went", gidebildin is "you could go" and gidiverdin is "you went swiftly". The tenses of the combined verbs are the same as the other verbs.
Attributive verbs (participles)
Turkish verbs have attributive forms, including present (with the ending -en²), future (-ecek²), indirect/inferential past (-miş4), and aorist (-er² or -ir4). These forms can function as either adjectives or nouns: oynamayan çocuklar "children who do not play", oynamayanlar "those who do not play"; okur yazar "reader-writer = literate", okur yazarlar "literates".[citation needed]
The most important function of attributive verbs is to form modifying phrases equivalent to the relative clauses found in most European languages. The attributive forms used in these constructions are the future (-ecek²) and an older form (-dik4), which covers both present and past meanings.[72] The use of these "personal or relative participles" is illustrated in the following table, in which the examples are presented according to the grammatical case which would be seen in the equivalent English relative clause.[73]


English equivalent
Example
Translation


Case of relative pronoun
Pronoun
Literal
Idiomatic


Nominative
who, which/that
şimdi konuşan adam
"now speaking man"
the man (who is) now speaking


Genitive
whose (nom.)
babası şimdi konuşan adam
"father-is now speaking man"
the man whose father is now speaking



whose (acc.)
babasını dün gördüğüm adam
"father-is-ACC yesterday seen-my man"
the man whose father I saw yesterday



at whose
resimlerine baktığımız ressam
"pictures-is-to looked-our artist"
the artist whose pictures we looked at



of which
muhtarı seçildiği köy
"mayor-its been-chosen-his village"
the village of which he was elected mayor



of which
muhtarı seçilmek istediği köy

the village of which he wishes to be elected mayor


Remaining cases (incl. prepositions)
whom, which
yazdığım mektup
"written-my letter"
the letter (which) I wrote



from which
çıktığımız kapı
"emerged-our door"
the door from which we emerged



on which
geldikleri vapur
"come-their ship"
the ship they came on



which + subordinate clause
yaklaştığını anladığı hapishane günleri
"approach-their-ACC understood-his prison days-its"
the prison days (which) he knew were approaching[74][75]


Vocabulary
Main article: Turkish vocabulary




Origin of the words in Turkish vocabulary, which contains 104,481 words, of which about 86% are Turkish and 14% are of foreign origin


Latest 2010 edition of Büyük Türkçe Sözlük (Great Turkish Dictionary), the official dictionary of the Turkish language published by Turkish Language Association, contains 616,767 words, expressions, terms and nouns.[76]
The 2005 edition of Güncel Türkçe Sözlük, the official dictionary of the Turkish language published by Turkish Language Association, contains 104,481 words, of which about 86% are Turkish and 14% are of foreign origin.[77] Among the most significant foreign contributors to Turkish vocabulary are Arabic, French, Persian, Italian, English, and Greek.[78]
Word formation
Turkish extensively uses agglutination to form new words from nouns and verbal stems. The majority of Turkish words originate from the application of derivative suffixes to a relatively small set of core vocabulary.[79]
Turkish obeys certain principles when it comes to suffixation. Most suffixes in Turkish will have more than one form, depending on the vowels and consonants in the root- vowel harmony rules will apply; consonant-initial suffixes will follow the voiced/ voiceless character of the consonant in the final unit of the root; and in the case of vowel-initial suffixes an additional consonant may be inserted if the root ends in a vowel, or the suffix may lose its initial vowel. There is also a prescribed order of affixation of suffixes- as a rule of thumb, derivative suffixes precede inflectional suffixes which are followed by clitics, as can be seen in the example set of words derived from a substantive root below:


Turkish
Components
English
Word class


göz
göz
eye
Noun


gözlük
göz + -lük
eyeglasses
Noun


gözlükçü
göz + -lük + -çü
optician
Noun


gözlükçülük
göz + -lük + -çü + -lük
optician's trade
Noun


gözlem
göz + -lem
observation
Noun


gözlemci
göz + -lem + -ci
observer
Noun


gözle-
göz + -le
observe
Verb (order)


gözlemek
göz + -le + -mek
to observe
Verb (infinitive)


gözetlemek
göz + -et + -le + -mek
to peep
Verb (infinitive)


Another example, starting from a verbal root:


Turkish
Components
English
Word class


yat-
yat-
lie down
Verb (order)


yatmak
yat-mak
to lie down
Verb (infinitive)


yatık
yat- + -(ı)k
leaning
Adjective


yatak
yat- + -ak
bed, place to sleep
Noun


yatay
yat- + -ay
horizontal
Adjective


yatkın
yat- + -gın
inclined to; stale (from lying too long)
Adjective


yatır-
yat- + -(ı)r-
lay down
Verb (order)


yatırmak
yat- + -(ı)r-mak
to lay down something/someone
Verb (infinitive)


yatırım
yat- + -(ı)r- + -(ı)m
laying down; deposit, investment
Noun


yatırımcı
yat- + -(ı)r- + -(ı)m + -cı
depositor, investor
Noun


New words are also frequently formed by compounding two existing words into a new one, as in German. Compounds can be of two types- bare and (s)I. The bare compounds, both nouns and adjectives are effectively two words juxtaposed without the addition of suffixes for example the word for girlfriend kizarkadaş (kiz+arkadaş) or black pepper karabiber (kara+biber). A few examples of compound words are given below:


Turkish
English
Constituent words
Literal meaning


pazartesi
Monday
pazar ("Sunday") and ertesi ("after")
after Sunday


bilgisayar
computer
bilgi ("information") and say- ("to count")
information counter


gökdelen
skyscraper
gök ("sky") and del- ("to pierce")
sky piercer


başparmak
thumb
baş ("prime") and parmak ("finger")
primary finger


önyargı
prejudice
ön ("before") and yargı ("splitting; judgement")
fore-judging


However, the majority of compound words in Turkish are (s)I compounds, which means that the second word will be marked by the 3rd person possessive suffix. A few such examples are given in the table below (note vowel harmony):


Turkish
English
Constituent words
Possesive Suffix


el çantası
handbag
el (hand) and çanta (bag)
+sı


masa örtüsü
tablecloth
masa (table) and örtü (cover)
+sü


çay bardağı
tea glass
çay (tea) and bardak (glass)
+ı (the k changes to ğ)


Writing system
Main articles: Turkish alphabet and Turkish Braille




Atatürk introducing the new Turkish alphabet to the people of Kayseri. September 20, 1928. (Cover of the French L'Illustration magazine)


Turkish is written using a Latin alphabet introduced in 1928 by Atatürk to replace the Ottoman Turkish alphabet, a version of Perso-Arabic alphabet. The Ottoman alphabet marked only three different vowels—long ā, ū and ī—and included several redundant consonants, such as variants of z (which were distinguished in Arabic but not in Turkish). The omission of short vowels in the Arabic script was claimed to make it particularly unsuitable for Turkish, which has eight vowels.[citation needed]
The reform of the script was an important step in the cultural reforms of the period. The task of preparing the new alphabet and selecting the necessary modifications for sounds specific to Turkish was entrusted to a Language Commission composed of prominent linguists, academics, and writers. The introduction of the new Turkish alphabet was supported by public education centers opened throughout the country, cooperation with publishing companies, and encouragement by Atatürk himself, who toured the country teaching the new letters to the public.[80] As a result, there was a dramatic increase in literacy from its original Third World levels.[81]
The Latin alphabet was applied to the Turkish language for educational purposes even before the 20th-century reform. Instances include a 1635 Latin-Albanian dictionary by Frang Bardhi, who also incorporated several sayings in the Turkish language, as an appendix to his work (e.g. alma agatsdan irak duschamas[82]—"An apple does not fall far from its tree").
Turkish now has an alphabet suited to the sounds of the language: the spelling is largely phonemic, with one letter corresponding to each phoneme.[citation needed] Most of the letters are used approximately as in English, the main exceptions being ⟨c⟩, which denotes [dʒ] (⟨j⟩ being used for the [ʒ] found in Persian and European loans); and the undotted ⟨ı⟩, representing [ɯ]. As in German, ⟨ö⟩ and ⟨ü⟩ represent [ø] and [y]. The letter ⟨ğ⟩, in principle, denotes [ɣ] but has the property of lengthening the preceding vowel and assimilating any subsequent vowel. The letters ⟨ş⟩ and ⟨ç⟩ represent [ʃ] and [tʃ], respectively. A circumflex is written over back vowels following ⟨k⟩, ⟨g⟩, or ⟨l⟩ when these consonants represent [c], [ɟ], and [l]—almost exclusively in Arabic and Persian loans.[83] An apostrophe is used to separate proper nouns from inflectional suffixes: e.g. İstanbul'da "in Istanbul"' (but not from derivational suffixes, e.g. İstanbullu "from/of Istanbul").[citation needed]
The Turkish alphabet consists of 29 letters (q, x, w omitted and ç, ş, ğ, ı, ö, ü added); the complete list is:

a, b, c, ç, d, e, f, g, ğ, h, ı, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, ö, p, r, s, ş, t, u, ü, v, y, and z (Note that capital of i is İ and lowercase I is ı.)

The specifically Turkish letters and spellings described above are illustrated in this table:


Turkish spelling
Pronunciation
Meaning


Cağaloğlu
ˈdʒaːɫoːɫu
[İstanbul district]


çalıştığı
tʃaɫɯʃtɯˈɣɯ
where/that (s)he works/worked


müjde
myʒˈde
good news


lazım
laˈzɯm
necessary


mahkûm
mahˈcum
condemned


Sample
Dostlar Beni Hatırlasın by Aşık Veysel Şatıroğlu (1894–1973), a minstrel and highly regarded poet in the Turkish folk literature tradition.


Orthography
IPA
Translation


Ben giderim adım kalır
bæn ɟid̪e̞ɾim äd̪ɯm käɫɯɾ
I depart, my name remains


Dostlar beni hatırlasın
d̪o̞st̪ɫäɾ be̞ni hätɯɾɫäsɯn
May friends remember me


Düğün olur bayram gelir
d̪yjyn o̞ɫuɾ bäjɾäm ɟe̞liɾ
There are weddings, there are feasts


Dostlar beni hatırlasın
d̪o̞st̪ɫäɾ be̞ni hätɯɾɫäsɯn
May friends remember me





Can kafeste durmaz uçar
d͡ʒäŋ käfe̞st̪e̞ d̪uɾmäz ut͡ʃäɾ
The soul won't stay caged, it flies away


Dünya bir han konan göçer
d̪ynjä biɾ häŋ ko̞nän ɟø̞t͡ʃæɾ
The world is an inn, residents depart


Ay dolanır yıllar geçer
äj d̪o̞ɫänɯɾ jɯɫːäɾ ɟe̞t͡ʃæɾ
The moon wanders, years pass by


Dostlar beni hatırlasın
d̪o̞st̪ɫäɾ be̞ni hätɯɾɫäsɯn
May friends remember me





Can bedenden ayrılacak
d͡ʒän be̞d̪ænd̪æn äjɾɯɫäd͡ʒäk
The soul will leave the body


Tütmez baca yanmaz ocak
t̪yt̪mæz bäd͡ʒä jänmäz o̞d͡ʒäk
The chimney won't smoke, furnace won't burn


Selam olsun kucak kucak
se̞läːm o̞ɫsuŋ kud͡ʒäk kud͡ʒäk
Goodbye goodbye to you all


Dostlar beni hatırlasın
d̪o̞st̪ɫäɾ be̞ni hätɯɾɫäsɯn
May friends remember me





Açar solar türlü çiçek
ät͡ʃäɾ so̞läɾ t̪yɾly t͡ʃit͡ʃe̞c
Various flowers bloom and fade


Kimler gülmüş kim gülecek
cimlæɾ ɟylmyʃ cim ɟyle̞d͡ʒe̞c
Someone laughed, someone will laugh


Murat yalan ölüm gerçek
muɾät jäɫän ø̞lym ɟæɾt͡ʃe̞c
Wishes are lies, death is real


Dostlar beni hatırlasın
d̪o̞st̪ɫäɾ be̞ni hätɯɾɫäsɯn
May friends remember me





Gün ikindi akşam olur
ɟyn icindi äkʃäm o̞ɫuɾ
Morning and afternoon turn to night


Gör ki başa neler gelir
ɟø̞ɾ ci bäʃä ne̞læɾ ɟe̞liɾ
And many things happen to a person anyway


Veysel gider adı kalır
ʋe̞jsæl ɟidæɾ äd̪ɯ käɫɯɾ
Veysel departs, his name remains


Dostlar beni hatırlasın
d̪o̞st̪ɫäɾ be̞ni hätɯɾɫäsɯn
May friends remember me


Turkish Whistling Language
For more details on whistling as a language, see Whistled language.
In the Turkish province of Giresun, the locals in the village of Kuşköy have communicated using a whistled version of Turkish for over 400 years. The region consists of a series of deep valleys and the unusual mode of communication allows for conversation over distances of up to 5 kilometres. Turkish authorities estimate that there are still around 10,000 people using the whistled language. However, in 2011 UNESCO found whistling Turkish to be a dying language and included it in its intangible cultural heritage list. Since then the local education directorate has introduced it as a course in schools in the region, hoping to revive its use.
A study was conducted by a German scientist of origin Onur Güntürkün at Ruhr University, observing 31 "speakers" of kuş dili ("bird's tongue") from Kuşköy, and he found that the whistled language mirrored the lexical and syntactical structure of Turkish language.[84]
See also


Turkey portal



List of English words of Turkic origin
Sun Language Theory
Turkish name
Turkish Sign Language

References



^ "Enthnologue Turkish". 
^ "Transitivity in Turkish, A study of valence orientation" (PDF). Okayama University. 2012. 
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Nuclear Turkish". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ [1] "İstanbul Türkçesi" konulu deneme yarışması ödül töreni Turkish Language Association
^ Boeschoten, Henrik. Turkic Languages in Contact. 
^ "Cyprus". Encyclopedia Britannica. 2016. 
^ "The Muslim Minority of Greek Thrace". Archived from the original on 2017-07-01. 
^ "As the E.U.'s Language Roster Swells, So Does the Burden", New York Times, 4 January 2017, retrieved 17 March 2017 
^ Katzner, Kenneth (March 2002). Languages of the World, Third Edition. Routledge, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Books Ltd. ISBN 978-0-415-25004-7. 
^ "Language Materials Project: Turkish". UCLA International Institute, Center for World Languages. February 2007. Retrieved 2007-04-26. 
^ Erdal, Marcel (March 2004). A Grammar Of Old Turkic. 
^ "A Database of Turkic Runiform Inscriptions". 
^ Findley[full citation needed]
^ Soucek[full citation needed]
^ Z. Rosser et al. (2000). "Y-Chromosomal Diversity in Europe is Clinal and Influenced Primarily by Geography, Rather than by Language" (PDF). American Journal of Human Genetics. 67 (6): 1526–1543. doi:10.1086/316890. PMC 1287948 . PMID 11078479. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al. (link)
^ Glenny 2001: 99
^ See Lewis (2002) for a thorough treatment of the Turkish language reform.
^ a b Turkish Language Association. "Türk Dil Kurumu – Tarihçe (History of the Turkish Language Association)" (in Turkish). Archived from the original on March 16, 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-18. 
^ See Lewis (2002): 2–3 for the first two translations. For the third see Bedi Yazıcı. "Nutuk: Özgün metin ve çeviri (Atatürk's Speech: original text and translation)" (in Turkish). Retrieved 2007-09-28. 
^ "Öz Türkçeleştirme Çalışmaları". Çok Bilgi. Retrieved 29 May 2014. 
^ Mütercim Asım (1799). Burhân-ı Katı Tercemesi (in Turkish). İstanbul. 
^ "Iraq". Encyclopedia Britannica. 2016. 
^ Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.) (2005). "Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Fifteenth edition. Report for language code:tur (Turkish)". Retrieved 2011-09-04. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ e.g. citations given in Cindark, Ibrahim/Aslan, Sema (2004): Deutschlandtürkisch?. Institut für Deutsche Sprache, page 3.
^ European Commission (2006). "Special Eurobarometer 243: Europeans and their Languages (Survey)" (PDF). Europa. Retrieved 2010-02-14. 
^ Gordon, Raymond G., Jr. (ed.) (2005). "Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Fifteenth edition. Report for language code:kmr (Kurdish)". Retrieved 2007-03-18. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ "Kosovo". Encyclopedia Britannica. 2016. 
^ "Kosovo starts using Turkish as fifth official language in documents". 
^ The name TDK itself exemplifies this process. The words tetkik and cemiyet in the original name are both Arabic loanwords (the final -i of cemiyeti being a Turkish possessive suffix); kurum is a native Turkish word based on the verb kurmak, "set up, found".[citation needed]
^ Campbell, George (1995). "Turkish". Concise compendium of the world's languages. London: Routledge. p. 547. 
^ "En iyi İstanbul Türkçesini kim konuşur?". Milliyet. Retrieved 2017-12-30. 
^ Johanson, Lars (2001). "Discoveries on the Turkic linguistic map" (PDF). Swedish Research Institute in Istanbul. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 5, 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-18. 
^ Özsoy
^ Akalın, Şükrü Halûk (January 2003). "Türk Dil Kurumu'nun 2002 yılı çalışmaları (Turkish Language Association progress report for 2002)" (PDF). Türk Dili (in Turkish). 85 (613). ISSN 1301-465X. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 27, 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-18. 
^ Shashi, Shyam Singh (1992). Encyclopaedia of Humanities and Social Sciences. Anmol Publications. p. 47. Retrieved 2008-03-26. 
^ Aydıngün, Ayşegül; Harding, Çiğdem Balım; Hoover, Matthew; Kuznetsov, Igor; Swerdlow, Steve (2006), Meskhetian Turks: An Introduction to their History, Culture, and Resettelment Experiences (PDF), Center for Applied Linguistics, archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-07-14 
^ Brendemoen, B. (1996). "Conference on Turkish in Contact, Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study (NIAS) in the Humanities and Social Sciences, Wassenaar, 5–6 February 1996".  |contribution= ignored (help)
^ a b c Handbook of the IPA, p. 155
^ Lewis (2001):3–4,6.
^ "Sesler ve ses uyumları "Sounds and Vovel karmony"" (in Turkish). Turkish Language Association. Retrieved 2013-01-13. 
^ Lewis (2001):10.
^ The vowel represented by ⟨ı⟩ is also commonly transcribed as ⟨ɨ⟩ in linguistic literature.
^ a b Goksel, Asli; Kerslake, Celia (2005). Turkish: A Comprehensive Grammar. Routledge. pp. 24–25. ISBN 0-415-11494-2. 
^ Khalilzadeh, Amir (Winter 2010). "Vowel Harmony in Turkish". Karadeniz Araştırmaları: Balkan, Kafkas, Doğu Avrupa ve Anadolu İncelemeleri Dergisi. 6(24): 141–150 – via Central and Eastern European Online Library. 
^ a b Underhill, Robert (1976). Turkish Grammar. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. p. 25. ISBN 0-262-21006-1. 
^ Note that this table is essentially the same as the IPA vowel chart shown above: both table and chart indicate the physical location and quality of each vowel. However, the second table includes additional information on how Turkish harmonies vowels sounds across syllables based on the physical location and quality of the initial syllable.
^ Lewis (1953):21
^ For the terms twofold and fourfold, as well as the superscript notation, see Lewis (1953):21–22. In his more recent works Lewis prefers to omit the superscripts, on the grounds that "there is no need for this once the principle has been grasped" (Lewis [2001]:18).
^ In modern Turkish orthography, an apostrophe is used to separate proper names from any suffixes.
^ Husby, Olaf. "Diagnostic use of nonword repetition for detection of language impairment among Turkish speaking minority children in Norway". Working Papers Department of Language and Communication Studies NTNV. 3/2006: 139–149 – via Academia.edu. 
^ a b Goksel, Asli; Kerslake, Celia (2005). Turkish: A Comprehensive Grammar. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-11494-2. 
^ a b Underhill, Robert (1976). Turkish Grammar. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-21006-1. 
^ Thompson, Sandra (April 1978). "Modern English from a Typological Point of View: Some Implications of the Function of Word Order". Linguistische Berlichte. 1978(54): 19–35 – via ProQuest. 
^ Erguvanlı, Eser Emine (1984). The Function of Word Order in Turkish Grammar. Linguistics Vol. 106. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-09955-9. 
^ Kiliçasaslan, Yılmaz. "A Typological Approach to Sentence Structure in Turkish" (PDF). 
^ This section draws heavily on Lewis (2001) and, to a lesser extent, Lewis (1953). Only the most important references are specifically flagged with footnotes.
^ see Lewis (2001) Ch XIV.
^ "The prefix, which is accented, is modelled on the first syllable of the simple adjective or adverb but with the substitution of m, p, r, or s for the last consonant of that syllable." Lewis (2001):55. The prefix retains the first vowel of the base form and thus exhibits a form of reverse vowel harmony.
^ This "splendid word" appeared at the time of Bayram, the festival marking the end of the month of fasting. Lewis (2001):287.
^ "İmlâ Kilavuzu". Dilimiz.com. Retrieved 2011-11-03. 
^ Because it is also used for the indefinite accusative, Lewis uses the term "absolute case" in preference to "nominative". Lewis (2001):28.
^ Lewis points out that "an indefinite izafet group can be turned into intelligible (though not necessarily normal) English by the use of a hyphen". Lewis (2001): 42.
^ The examples are taken from Lewis (2001): 41–47.
^ For other possible permutations of this vehicle, see Lewis (2001):46.
^ "It is most important to note that the third-person suffix is not repeated though theoretically one might have expected Ankara [Kız Lisesi]si." Lewis (2001): 45 footnote.
^ Note the similarity with the French phrase un m'as-tu-vu "a have-you-seen-me?", i.e., a vain and pretentious person.
^ The term substantival sentence is Lewis's. Lewis(2001:257).
^ "Journal of Turkish World Studies (be celal Demir)" (PDF) (in Turkish). Retrieved 2013-03-29. 
^ [2] Yüksel Göknel:Turkish Grammar][full citation needed]
^ "Turkish Studies Vol 7/3" (PDF) (in Turkish). Retrieved 2013-03-29. 
^ "Dersimiz Edebiyat Online course" (in Turkish). Dersimizedebiyat.com. Retrieved 2013-03-29. 
^ See Lewis (2001):163–165, 260–262 for an exhaustive treatment.
^ For the terms personal and relative participle see Lewis (1958):98 and Lewis (2001):163 respectively. Most of the examples are taken from Lewis (2001).
^ This more complex example from Orhan Pamuk's Kar (Snow) contains a nested structure: [which he knew [were approaching]]. Maureen Freely's more succinct and idiomatic translation is the days in prison he knew lay ahead. Note that Pamuk uses the spelling hapisane.
^ From the perspective of Turkish grammar yaklaştığını anladığı is exactly parallel to babasını gördüğüm ("whose father I saw"), and could therefore be paraphrased as "whose approaching he understood".
^ "Büyük Türkçe Sözlük Turkish Language Association" (in Turkish). Tdkterim.gov.tr. Archived from the original on 2013-03-28. Retrieved 2013-03-29. 
^ "Güncel Türkçe Sözlük" (in Turkish). Turkish Language Association. 2005. Archived from the original on March 21, 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-21. 
^ "Türkçe Sözlük (2005)'teki Sözlerin Kökenlerine Ait Sayısal Döküm (Numerical list on the origin of words in Türkçe Sözlük (2005))" (in Turkish). Turkish Language Association. 2005. Archived from the original on March 1, 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-21. 
^ Goksel, Asli; Kerslake, Celia (2005). Turkish: A Comprehensive Grammar. Routledge. pp. 43–48. ISBN 0-415-11494-2. 
^ Dilaçar, Agop (1977). "Atatürk ve Yazım". Türk Dili (in Turkish). 35 (307). ISSN 1301-465X. Retrieved 2007-03-19. 
^ Coulmas, pp. 243–244
^ In modern Turkish spelling: elma ağaçtan ırak düşmez.
^ Lewis (2001):3–7. Note that in these cases the circumflex conveys information about the preceding consonant rather than the vowel over which it is written.
^ "Northern village of Kuşköy still communicates with amazing Turkish whistling language". The Daily Sabah. February 16, 2016. 



Akalın, Şükrü Haluk (January 2003). "Türk Dil Kurumu'nun 2002 yılı çalışmaları (Turkish Language Association progress report for 2002)" (PDF). Türk_Dili (in Turkish). 85 (613). ISSN 1301-465X. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 27, 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-18. 

Bazin, Louis (1975). "Turcs et Sogdiens: Les Enseignements de L'Inscription de Bugut (Mongolie), Mélanges Linguistiques Offerts à Émile Benveniste". Collection Linguistique, publiée par la Société de Linguistique de Paris (in French) (LXX): 37–45. 
Brendemoen, B. (1996). "Conference on Turkish in Contact, Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study (NIAS) in the Humanities and Social Sciences, Wassenaar, 5–6 February 1996".  |contribution= ignored (help)
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Expo 70 Edition Vol 12. William Benton. 1970. 
Coulmas, Florian (1989). Writing Systems of the World. Blackwell Publishers Ltd, Oxford. ISBN 0-631-18028-1. 
Dilaçar, Agop (1977). "Atatürk ve Yazım". Türk Dili (in Turkish). 35 (307). ISSN 1301-465X. Retrieved 2007-03-19. 
Ergin, Muharrem (1980). Orhun Abideleri (in Turkish). Boğaziçi Yayınları. ISBN 0-19-517726-6. 
Findley, Carter V. (October 2004). The Turks in World History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-517726-6. 
Glenny, Misha. The Balkans – Nationalism, War, and the Great Powers, 1804–1999, Penguin, New York 2001.
Johanson, Lars (2001). "Discoveries on the Turkic linguistic map" (PDF). Swedish Research Institute in Istanbul. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 5, 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-18. 
Ishjatms, N. (October 1996). "Nomads In Eastern Central Asia". History of civilizations of Central Asia. 2. UNESCO Publishing. ISBN 92-3-102846-4. 
Lewis, Geoffrey (1953). Teach Yourself Turkish. English Universities Press. ISBN 978-0-340-49231-4.  (2nd edition 1989)
Lewis, Geoffrey (2001). Turkish Grammar. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-870036-9. 
Lewis, Geoffrey (2002). The Turkish Language Reform: A Catastrophic Success. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-925669-1. 
Özsoy, A. Sumru; Taylan, Eser E., eds. (2000). Türkçe’nin ağızları çalıştayı bildirileri [Workshop on the dialects of Turkish] (in Turkish). Boğaziçi Üniversitesi Yayınevi. ISBN 975-518-140-7. 
Soucek, Svat (March 2000). A History of Inner Asia. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65169-1. 
Vaux, Bert (2001). "Hemshinli: The Forgotten Black Sea Armenians" (PDF). Harvard University. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 15, 2007. Retrieved 2007-04-24. 
Zimmer, Karl; Orgun, Orhan (1999). "Turkish". Handbook of the International Phonetic Association: A guide to the use of the International Phonetic Alphabet (PDF). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 154–158. ISBN 0-521-65236-7. 

On-line sources

Center for Studies on Turkey, University of Essen (2003). "The European Turks: Gross Domestic Product, Working Population, Entrepreneurs and Household Data" (PDF). Turkish Industrialists' and Businessmen's Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 4, 2005. Retrieved 2007-01-06. 
"CIA Factbook:Iraq". 2013. 
"Güncel Türkçe Sözlük" (in Turkish). Turkish Language Association. 2005. Archived from the original on 2007-03-12. Retrieved 2007-03-21. 
"Turkish Etymological Dictionary online" (in Turkish). Sevan Nişanyan. 2006. Retrieved 2007-09-11. 
"Language Materials Project: Turkish". UCLA International Institute, Center for World Languages. February 2007. Retrieved 2007-04-26. 
TNS Opinion & Social (February 2006). Special Eurobarometer 243 / Wave 64.3: Europeans and their Languages (PDF). European Commission Directorate of General Press and Communication. Retrieved 2007-03-28. 
"Turkish Language Association: Sesler ve ses uyumları "Sounds and Vovel karmony"" (in Turkish). Turkish Language Association. Retrieved 2013-01-13. 
Göknel, Yüksel (2012). "Turkish Grammar Updated Academic edition". Retrieved 2013-01-16. 
Turkish Language Association. "Türk Dil Kurumu – Tarihçe (History of the Turkish Language Association)" (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 2007-03-16. Retrieved 2007-03-18. 
"Türkçe Sözlük (2005)'teki Sözlerin Kökenlerine Ait Sayısal Döküm (Numerical list on the origin of words in Türkçe Sözlük (2005))" (in Turkish). Turkish Language Association. 2005. Archived from the original on March 1, 2007. Retrieved 2007-03-21. 
"Spartak KADIU : Türkçede zaman ve kip kavramı ve i-ek eylemin fonksiyonu üzerine" (PDF) (in Turkish). Turkish Studies: International Periodical For The Languages, Literature and History of Turkish or Turkic Volume 7/3,. Retrieved 2013-01-15. 

Further reading


Eyüboğlu, İsmet Zeki (1991). Türk Dilinin Etimoloji Sözlüğü [Etymological Dictionary of the Turkish Language] (in Turkish). Sosyal Yayınları, İstanbul. ISBN 978975-7384-72-4. 
Özel, Sevgi; Haldun Özen; Ali Püsküllüoğlu, eds. (1986). Atatürk'ün Türk Dil Kurumu ve Sonrası [Atatürk's Turkish Language Association and its Legacy] (in Turkish). Bilgi Yayınevi, Ankara. OCLC 18836678. 
Püsküllüoğlu, Ali (2004). Arkadaş Türkçe Sözlük [Arkadaş Turkish Dictionary] (in Turkish). Arkadaş Yayınevi, Ankara. ISBN 975-509-053-3. 


External links



Turkish edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Find more aboutTurkish languageat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage



Turkish dictionaries at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Turkish language at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Swadesh list of Turkish basic vocabulary words (from Wiktionary's Swadesh-list appendix)
Turkish Language: Resources – University of Michigan
LT: LearningTurkish (non-commercial)
LT: Automatic Turkish Verb Declinations (non-commercial)







v
t
e


Turkish language






Latin alphabet
Arabic alphabet
Braille
Phonology
Vocabulary
Grammar

Copula







History and reform



Ottoman Turkish
Replaced loanwords












v
t
e


 Languages of Turkey



Official language



Turkish





Minority languages



Arabic
Armenian
Bulgarian
Georgian
Greek
Kurdish (Kurmanji)
Laz
Zaza(ki)





Sign languages



Turkish Sign Language
Mardin Sign Language












v
t
e


 Languages of Cyprus



Official languages



Greek
Turkish





Semiofficial language



English





Vernacular languages



Cypriot Greek
Cypriot Turkish





Minority languages



Armenian
Cypriot Maronite Arabic
Russian





Sign languages



Cypriot Sign Language












v
t
e


Turkic languages




Italics indicate extinct languages



Proto-language



Proto-Altaic
Proto-Turkic





Common Turkic




Arghu



Khalaj





Karluk



Äynu1
Chagatai
Ili Turki
Lop
Uyghur
Uzbek





Kipchak




Ponto-Caspian



Cuman
Crimean Tatar
Karachay-Balkar
Karaim
Kipchak
Krymchak
Kumyk
Urum2





Aralo-Caspian



Siberian Tatar
Fergana Kipchak
Karakalpak
Kazakh
Kyrgyz
Nogai





Uralo-Caspian



Bashkir
Old Tatar
Tatar








Oghuz



Afshar
Azerbaijani
Crimean Turkish
Gagauz
Balkan Gagauz Turkish
Khorasani Turkic
Old Anatolian Turkish
Ottoman Turkish
Pecheneg2
Qashqai
Salar
(Anatolian) Turkish
Turkmen
Urum2





Siberian



Altai
Chulym
Dolgan
Fuyu Kyrgyz
Khakas
Old Turkic
Old Uyghur
Shor
Tofa
Tuvan
Yakut (Sakha)
Western Yugur2








Oghur



Bulgar
Chuvash
Khazar








1 Mixed language.
2 Classification disputed.












v
t
e


Languages of the Caucasus



Caucasian
(areal)




Caspian




Avar–Andic



Andic

Akhvakh
Bagvalal–Tindi
Botlix–Godoberi
Chamalal
Karata
Literary Andi


Avar





Dargic



Literary Dargwa and dialects

Chirag
Itsari
Kajtak
Kubachi







Didoic



Bezhta–Hunzib–Khwarshi
Hinukh–Literary Tsez





Lezgic



Aghul
Archi
Budukh
Kryts
Lezgian
Rutul
Tabasaran
Tsakhur
Udi





Nakh



Bats
Chechen–Ingush





Other



Khinalug
Lak








Kartvelian




Karto-Zan–Svan



Georgian
Svan
Zan

Laz
Mingrelian










Pontic




Abazgi–Adyghe



Abkhaz–Abaza
Circassian














Indo-European




Armenian



Armenian





Germanic



German





Hellenic



Pontic Greek





Iranic




Northern



Ossetian





Western



Judæo-Tat
Kurdish
Persian
Talysh
Tat








Slavic



Russian
Ukrainian








Mongolic



Kalmyk





Turkic




Kipchak–Cuman



Karachay–Balkar
Kumyk
Urum





Kipchak–Nogai



Nogai





Oghuz



Azerbaijani
Turkish
Turkmen








Afro-Asiatic




Semitic



Assyrian Neo-Aramaic
Bohtan Neo-Aramaic











 See also: Languages of Armenia
 Languages of Azerbaijan
 Languages of Georgia
 Languages of Russia












v
t
e


Turkey articles



History




Pre-Turkish era



Prehistory of Anatolia & Thrace
Classical Anatolia & Thrace
Neo-Assyrian Empire
Byzantine Anatolia





Seljuq era



Sultanate of Rum
Mongol invasions of Anatolia
Ilkhanate





Ottoman era



Osman's Dream
Rise

Interregnum
Conquest of Constantinople


Classical Age
Transformation

Sultanate of Women
Köprülü era


Old Regime

Tulip period


Decline and modernization

Tanzimat
First Constitutional Era


Defeat and dissolution

Second Constitutional Era
Partitioning







Republican era



War of Independence
One-party period
Multi-party period





By topic




Ancient Anatolians
Constitutional
Economic
Military
Thracians
Timeline of Turkish history
Turkic migration








Geography











Capes
Cities
Districts
Earthquakes
Environmental issues
Gulfs and bays
Islands
Lakes
Metropolitan municipalities
Mountains
Peninsulas
Provinces
Regions
Rivers





Places



Anatolia
Thrace (Eastern)
Turkish Riviera
Çukurova











Politics











Cabinet
Elections
Foreign relations
Military
Parliament
President
Prime Minister





Legal system



Constitution
Constitutional Court
Law enforcement
Official gazette





Controversies



Deep state
Conspiracy theories in Turkey
EU accession
Kemalism
Neo-Ottomanism
Ottomanism
Political parties
Secularism
Northern Syria Security Belt
Northern Cyprus











Economy







Banks

central bank


Borsa Istanbul (stock exchange)
Companies
EU Customs Union
Industries
Lira (currency)
Southeastern Anatolia Project
Tourism
Transport

aviation
railways


Rankings








Society







Crime
Education
Languages

Turkish







Culture



Architecture

Ottoman architecture


Art
Cinema
Cuisine

wine


Dance
Drama (TV)
Festivals
Folklore
Human rights

LGBT


Literature
Media

newspapers
radio stations
TV


Music
Names
Public holidays
Religion

Islam


Smoking
Sport
Theatre





Demographics



Turkish people

list


Population

diaspora
immigration
Muhacir


Minorities

Arabs
Armenians
Bosniaks
Circassians
Kurds







Symbols



Anthem
Emblem
Flag
Motto
Presidential seal












Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal









Authority control



LCCN: sh85138883
GND: 4120079-2
BNF: cb11955194j (data)
NDL: 00573335
BNE: XX534899











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Turkish_language&oldid=817795476"					Categories: Turkish languageTurkic languagesAgglutinative languagesLanguages of AzerbaijanLanguages of BulgariaLanguages of CyprusLanguages of GermanyLanguages of KosovoLanguages of RussiaLanguages of the Republic of MacedoniaLanguages of TurkeySubject–object–verb languagesVowel-harmony languagesHidden categories: Articles needing more detailed referencesCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 maint: Explicit use of et al.CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr)CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2014CS1 errors: chapter ignoredArticles containing Turkish-language textWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles with hAudio microformatsLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeLanguage articles without reference fieldAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from October 2017Articles containing Persian-language textArticles containing Ottoman Turkish-language textArticles containing Old Turkic-language textArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles with unsourced statements from February 2013CS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers