This article is about the U.S. television channel. For other countries' versions, see List of international Turner Classic Movies channels.


Turner Classic Movies





Launched
April 14, 1994; 23 years ago (1994-04-14)


Owned by
Turner Broadcasting System


Picture format



1080i (HDTV)
480i (SDTV)





Slogan
Let's Movie.


Country
United States


Language
English (imported feature films are broadcast in their native languages, provided with English subtitling)


Broadcast area
Nationwide (also available in Canada with substitutions; international versions in Latin America, Africa, Middle East, Nordic countries, Asia-Pacific, Spain, France, U.K. and Ireland, Malta)


Headquarters
Atlanta, Georgia, United States


Sister channel(s)



TBS
TNT
Cartoon Network
Adult Swim
Boomerang
CNN
HLN
CNN International
TruTV
HBO
Cinemax





Website
www.tcm.com



Availability



Satellite


DirecTV



Channel 256 (HD/SD)
Channel 1256 (VOD)





Dish Network
Channel 132 (HD/SD)


Shaw Direct (Canada)



Channel 178 / 531 (SD)
Channel 138 / 638 (HD)





Cable


Spectrum
Channel 631 (HD/SD)


Available on most American and Canadian cable providers
Check local listings for channels


IPTV


AT&T U-verse



Channel 1790 (HD)
Channel 790 (SD)





Verizon FiOS

Channel 230 (SD only)
Unavailable in HD


Bell Fibe TV (Canada)
Channel 292


VMedia (Canada)
327 (HD)


Streaming media


Watch TCM


Sling TV
Internet Protocol television


PlayStation Vue
Internet Protocol television


Turner Classic Movies (TCM) is an American movie-oriented basic cable and satellite television network owned by the Turner Broadcasting System subsidiary of Time Warner. Launched in 1994, TCM is headquartered at Turner's Techwood broadcasting campus in the Midtown business district of Atlanta, Georgia.
Historically, the channel's programming consisted mainly of featured classic theatrically released feature films from the Turner Entertainment film library – which comprises films from Warner Bros. Pictures (covering films released before 1950) and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (covering films released before May 1986). However, TCM now has licensing deals with other Hollywood film studios as well as its Time Warner sister company, Warner Bros. (which now controls the Turner Entertainment library and its own later films), and occasionally shows more recent films. The channel is available in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Malta, Latin America, France, Spain, the Nordic countries, the Middle East, Africa and the Asia.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Origins
1.2 Launch and contributions
1.3 Acquisition of Time Warner by AT&T


2 Programming

2.1 Movie library
2.2 Hosted and special programming

2.2.1 Regular features
2.2.2 Seasonal blocks


2.3 Documentaries


3 TCM Remembers

3.1 TCM Remembers soundtracks


4 Turner Classic Movies HD
5 Merchandising

5.1 TCM Vault Collection


6 International versions
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



History[edit]
Origins[edit]
In 1986, eight years before the launch of Turner Classic Movies, Ted Turner acquired the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film studio for $1.5 billion. Concerns over Turner Entertainment's corporate debt load resulted in Turner selling the studio that October back to Kirk Kerkorian, from whom Turner had purchased the studio less than a year before.[1] As part of the deal, Turner Entertainment retained ownership of MGM's library of films released up to May 9, 1986. Turner Broadcasting System was split into two companies; Turner Broadcasting System and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and reincorporated as MGM/UA Communications Co.[citation needed]
The film library of Turner Entertainment would serve as the base form of programming for TCM upon the network's launch. Before the creation of Turner Classic Movies, films from Turner's library of movies aired on the Turner Broadcasting System's advertiser-supported cable network TNT – along with colorized versions of black-and-white classics such as The Maltese Falcon. After the library was acquired, MGM/UA signed a deal with Turner to continue distributing the pre-May 1986 MGM and to begin distributing the pre-1950 Warner Bros. film libraries for video release (the rest of the library went to Turner Home Entertainment).
Launch and contributions[edit]
Turner Classic Movies debuted on April 14, 1994, at 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time, with Ted Turner launching the channel at a ceremony in New York City's Times Square district.[2][3] The date and time were chosen for their historical significance as "the exact centennial anniversary of the first public movie showing in New York City." The first movie broadcast on TCM was the 1939 film Gone with the Wind, the same film that served as the debut broadcast of its sister channel TNT six years earlier in October 1988.[citation needed]
At the time of its launch, TCM was available to approximately one million cable television subscribers.[4] The network originally served as a competitor to AMC – which at the time was known as "American Movie Classics" and maintained a virtually identical format to TCM, as both networks largely focused on films released prior to 1970 and aired them in an uncut, uncolorized, and commercial-free format. AMC had broadened its film content to feature colorized and more recent films by 2002. In the early 2000s, AMC abandoned its commercial-free format. This led to TCM being the only movie-oriented cable channel to devote its programming entirely to classic films without commercial interruption.
In 1996, Turner Broadcasting System merged with Time Warner, which besides placing Turner Classic Movies and Warner Bros. Entertainment under the same corporate umbrella, also gave TCM access to Warner Bros.' library of films released after 1949 (which itself includes other acquired entities such as the Lorimar, Saul Zaentz and National General Pictures libraries); incidentally, TCM had already been running select Warner Bros. film titles through a licensing agreement with the studio that was signed prior to the launch of the channel.[5] In March 1999, MGM paid Warner Bros. and gave up the home video rights to the MGM/UA films owned by Turner to Warner Home Video.
In 2000, TCM started the annual Young Composers Film Competition, inviting aspiring composers to participate in a judged competition that offers the winner of each year's competition the opportunity to score a restored, feature-length silent film as a grand prize, mentored by a well-known composer, with the new work subsequently premiering on the network. As of 2006, films that have been rescored include the 1921 Rudolph Valentino film Camille, two Lon Chaney films: 1921's The Ace of Hearts and 1928's Laugh, Clown, Laugh, and Greta Garbo's 1926 film The Temptress.




Robert Osborne and Charles Tabesh at the 68th Annual Peabody Awards for Turner Classic Movies


In 2008, TCM won a Peabody Award for excellence in broadcasting.[6] In April 2010, Turner Classic Movies held the first TCM Classic Film Festival, an event – now held annually – at the Grauman's Chinese Theater and the Grauman's Egyptian Theater in Hollywood. Hosted by Robert Osborne, the four-day long annual festival celebrates Hollywood and its movies, and features celebrity appearances, special events, and screenings of around 50 classic movies including several newly restored by The Film Foundation, an organization devoted to preserving Hollywood's classic film legacy.[7]
Acquisition of Time Warner by AT&T[edit]
On October 22, 2016, AT&T reached a deal to buy Time Warner for $108.7 billion. If approved by federal regulators, the merger would bring Time Warner's properties, including Turner Classic Movies, under the same umbrella as AT&T's telecommunication holdings, including satellite provider DirecTV.[8][9] On February 15, 2017, Time Warner shareholders approved the merger,[10] which is still pending regulatory approval. On February 28, FCC Chairman Ajit Pai announced that his agency will not review the deal, leaving the review to the US Department of Justice.[11] On March 15, 2017, the merger, which is still pending approval from U.S. regulators, was approved by the European Commission.[12] On August 22, 2017, the merger was approved by Mexican authorities.[13]On September 5, 2017, the merger was approved by Chilean authorities.[14]US is the last country needed for its approval as Brazil approved the merger.[15] On October 23, 2017, the deadline was extended for a short period of time to finalize the deal. The original deadline was on Oct. 22.[16]
Programming[edit]
Turner Classic Movies essentially operates as a commercial-free service, with the only advertisements on the network being shown between features – which advertise TCM products, network promotions for upcoming special programs and the original trailers for films that are scheduled to be broadcast on TCM (particularly those that will air during the primetime hours), and featurettes about classic film actors and actresses. In addition to this, extended breaks between features are filled with theatrically released movie trailers and classic short subjects – from series such as The Passing Parade, Crime Does Not Pay, Pete Smith Specialties, and Robert Benchley – under the banner name TCM Extras (formerly One Reel Wonders). In 2007, some of the short films featured on TCM were made available for streaming on TCM's website. Partly to allow these interstitials, Turner Classic Movies schedules its feature films either at the top of the hour or at :15, :30 or :45 minutes past the hour, instead of in timeslots of varying five-minute increments.
TCM's film content has remained mostly uncut and uncolorized (with films natively filmed or post-produced in the format being those only ones presented in color), depending upon the original content of movies, particularly movies released after the 1968 implementation of the Motion Picture Association of America's ratings system and the concurrent disestablishment of the Motion Picture Production Code. Because of this, TCM is formatted similarly to a premium channel with certain films – particularly those made from the 1960s onward – sometimes featuring nudity, sexual content, violence and/or strong profanity; the network also features rating bumpers prior to the start of a program (most programs on TCM, especially films, are rated for content using the TV Parental Guidelines, in lieu of the MPAA's rating system).
The network's programming season runs from February until the following March of each year when a retrospective of Oscar-winning and Oscar-nominated movies is shown, called 31 Days of Oscar. As a result of its devoted format to classic feature films, viewers who are interested in tracing the career development of actresses such as Barbara Stanwyck or Greta Garbo or actors like Cary Grant or Humphrey Bogart have the unique opportunity to see most of the films that were made during their careers, from beginning to end. Turner Classic Movies presents many of its features in their original aspect ratio (widescreen or full screen) whenever possible – widescreen films broadcast on TCM are letterboxed on the network's standard definition feed. TCM also regularly presents widescreen presentations of films not available in the format on any home video release.
Occasionally, TCM shows restored versions of films, particularly old silent films with newly commissioned musical soundtracks. Turner Classic Movies is also a major backer of the Descriptive Video Service (created by Boston PBS member station WGBH-TV), with many of the films aired on the network offering visual description for the blind and visually impaired, which is accessible through the second audio program option through most television sets, or a cable or satellite receiver.
TCM publishes NOW PLAYING, a monthly viewer's guide to the entire time schedule and description of films for the month. The little magazine highlights a featured actor on the cover, essays about the "guest programmer," and a movie-and-actor themed crossword puzzle inside. The May 2017 issue, following the death in March 2017 of host Robert Osborne, contained "Remembering Robert Osborne" by Ben Mankiewicz.[17] TCM ceased print publication of NOW PLAYING with the August 2017 issue, moving it to an electronic format available via email free of charge. [18]
During the prime time hours, an ident for the "Watch TCM" app is shown after every movie.
Movie library[edit]
TCM's library of films spans several decades of cinema and includes thousands of film titles. Besides its deals to broadcast film releases from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer[19] and Warner Bros. Entertainment, Turner Classic Movies also maintains movie licensing rights agreements with Universal Studios, Paramount Pictures,[20] 20th Century Fox as FX Movie Channel,[21] Walt Disney Studios (primarily film content from Walt Disney Pictures), as well as most of the Selznick International Pictures library,[22] Sony Pictures Entertainment (primarily film content from Columbia Pictures), StudioCanal, and Janus Films.
Most Paramount sound releases made prior to 1950 are owned by EMKA, Ltd./NBCUniversal Television Distribution, while Paramount (currently owned by Viacom) holds on to most of its post-1949 releases, which are distributed for television by Trifecta Entertainment & Media. Columbia's film output is owned by Sony (through Sony Pictures Television); distribution of 20th Century Fox's film library is handled for television by its 21st Century Fox subsidiary 20th Television, and the Walt Disney Studios (owned by The Walt Disney Company) has its library film output handled for television by Disney-ABC Domestic Television. Classic films released by 20th Century Fox, Paramount Pictures, Universal Studios, and Columbia Pictures are licensed individually for broadcast on Turner Classic Movies.
Also TCM has aired movies from the 1900s, 1910s and the 1920s. Although most movies shown on TCM are releases from the 1930s to the 1960s, some are more contemporary – Turner Classic Movies sometimes airs films from the 1970s and 1980s, and occasionally broadcasts movies released during the 1990s and the early 2000s.
Hosted and special programming[edit]
Regular features[edit]




TCM prime time host Robert Osborne at the 73rd Annual Peabody Awards.


Most feature movies shown during the prime time and early overnight hours (8:00 p.m. to 2:30 a.m. Eastern Time) were presented by the late film historian Robert Osborne (who had been with the network since its 1994 launch until 2016, except for a five-month medical leave from July to December 2011, when guest hosts presented each night's films)[23] on Sunday through Wednesday evenings – with Osborne only presenting primetime films on weekends – and Ben Mankiewicz presenting only late evening films on Thursdays, and the "Silent Sunday Nights" and "TCM Imports" blocks on Sundays.
TCM regularly airs a "Star of the Month" throughout the year on Wednesdays starting at 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time, in which most, if not all, feature films from a classic film star are shown during that night's schedule. February and August are the only months to not have a "Star of the Month". The network also marks the occurrence of a film actor's birthday (either antemortem or posthumously) or recent death with day- or evening-long festivals showcasing several of that artist's best, earliest or least-known pictures; by effect, marathons scheduled in honor of an actor's passing (which are scheduled within a month after their death) pre-empt films originally scheduled to air on that date. TCM also features a monthly program block called the "TCM Guest Programmer", in which Osborne is joined by celebrity guests responsible for choosing that evening's films (examples of such programmers during 2012 include Jules Feiffer, Anthony Bourdain, Debra Winger, Ellen Barkin, Spike Lee, Regis Philbin and Jim Lehrer);[24] an offshoot of this block featuring Turner Classic Movies employees aired during February 2011.
Turner Classic Movies also airs regularly scheduled weekly film blocks, which are periodically preempted for special themed month-long or seasonal scheduling events, such as the "31 Days of Oscar" film series in the month preceding the Academy Awards and the month-long "Summer Under the Stars" in August; all featured programming has their own distinctive feature presentation bumper for the particular scheduled presentation. The Essentials, with various hosts from 2001 through 2015, was a weekly film showcase airing on Saturday evenings (with a replay on the following Sunday at 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time), which spotlighted a different movie and contained a special introduction and post-movie discussion.
The channel also broadcasts two movie blocks during the late evening hours each Sunday: "Silent Sunday Nights", which features silent films from the United States and abroad, usually in the latest restored version and often with new musical scores; and "TCM Imports" (which previously ran on Saturdays until the early 2000s[specify]), a weekly presentation of films originally released in foreign countries. TCM Underground – which debuted in October 2006 – is a Saturday late night block which focuses on cult films, the block was originally hosted by rocker/filmmaker Rob Zombie until December 2006 (though as of 2014[update], it is the only regular film presentation block on the channel that does not have a host).
Seasonal blocks[edit]
Each August, Turner Classic Movies suspends its regular schedule for a special month of film marathons called "Summer Under the Stars", which features entire daily schedules devoted to the work of a particular actor, with movies and specials that pertain to the star of the day. In the summer of 2007, the channel debuted "Funday Night at the Movies", a block hosted by actor Tom Kenny (best known as the voice of SpongeBob SquarePants). This summer block featured classic feature films (such as The Wizard of Oz, Sounder, Bringing Up Baby, Singin' in the Rain, Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, The Adventures of Robin Hood, and 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea) aimed at introducing these movies to new generations of children, and their families.
"Funday Night at the Movies" was replaced in 2008 by "Essentials Jr.", a youth-oriented version of its weekly series, The Essentials (originally hosted by actors Abigail Breslin, and Chris O'Donnell, then by John Lithgow from 2009 to 2011, and then by Bill Hader, starting with the 2011 season), which included such family-themed films as National Velvet, Captains Courageous, and Yours, Mine and Ours, as well as more eclectic selections, such as Sherlock, Jr., The Music Box, Harvey, Mutiny on the Bounty, and The Man Who Knew Too Much.
In 2014, the channel debuted "Treasures from the Disney Vault", hosted by Leonard Maltin. This block showcases a compilation of vintage Disney feature films, cartoons, documentaries, episodes of the Walt Disney anthology television series, and episodes of The Mickey Mouse Club.[25][26][27][28]
Documentaries[edit]
In addition to films, Turner Classic Movies also airs original content, mostly documentaries about classic movie personalities, the world of filmmaking and particularly notable films. An occasional month-long series, Race and Hollywood, showcases films by and about people of non-white races, featuring discussions of how these pictures influenced white people's image of said races, as well as how people of those races viewed themselves. Previous installments have included "Asian Images on Film" in 2008,[29] "Native American Images on Film" in 2010,[30] "Black Images on Film" in 2006[31] "Latino Images on Film" in 2009[32] and "Arab Images on Film" in 2011.[33] The network aired the film series Screened Out (which explored the history and depiction of homosexuality in film) in 2007 and Religion on Film (focusing on the role of religion in cinematic works) in 2005. In 2011, TCM debuted a new series entitled AFI's Master Class: The Art of Collaboration.[34][35]
TCM Remembers[edit]
Most of the actors appearing in most TCM films are deceased. In December 1994, TCM debuted "TCM Remembers", a tribute to recently deceased notable film personalities (including actors, producers, composers, directors, writers and cinematographers) that occasionally airs during promotional breaks between films. The segments appear in two forms: individual tributes and a longer end-of-year compilation. Following the recent death of an especially famous classic film personality (usually an actor, producer, filmmaker or director), the segment will feature a montage of select shots of the deceased's work.
Every December, a longer, more inclusive "TCM Remembers" interstitial is produced that honors all of the noted film personalities who died during the past year, interspersed with scenes from settings such as an abandoned drive-in (2012) or a theatre which is closing down and is being dismantled (2013). Since 2001, the soundtracks for these clipreels have been introspective melodies by indie artists and/or singer-songwriters such as Badly Drawn Boy (2007) or Steve Earle (2009).[36]
TCM Remembers soundtracks[edit]


Year
Artist
Song


2002
Rickie Lee Jones
"Cycles"


2003
Sarah McLachlan
"I Will Remember You"


2004
Ryan Adams
"Goodnight, Hollywood Blvd."


2005
Joe Henry
"Flesh and Blood"


2006
Robinella
"Press On"


2007
Badly Drawn Boy
"Promises"


2008
Joe Henry
"God Only Knows"


2009
Steve Earle
"To Live is To Fly"


2010
Sophie Hunger
"Headlights"


2011
OK Sweetheart
"Before You Go"


2012
M83
"Wait"


2013
Sleeping at Last
"In the Embers"


2014
Kodaline
"All I Want"


2015
Eryn McHugh
"Quickly Now"


2016
Dan Auerbach
"Goin' Home"


2017
The Cardigans
"Lead Me Into The Night"


Turner Classic Movies HD[edit]
Turner Classic Movies operates a high definition simulcast feed, with programs broadcast in HD presented in an upconverted 1080i resolution format; the HD feed of the network was launched in June 2009. Initial programming was not available in native high definition and was instead upconverted from standard definition, but benefited from the greater bandwidth allocated to the channel. By November 2014, film masters meant for high definition presentation, along with Osborne and Mankiewicz-hosted continuity had transitioned to the format (though films meant to be presented in the Academy ratio or other anamorphic formats lower than 16:9 are presented as intended by the director or studio with the appropriate black boxing around the frame).
Merchandising[edit]
TCM Vault Collection[edit]
The TCM Vault Collection consists of several different DVD collections of rare classic films that have been licensed, remastered and released by Turner Classic Movies (through corporate sister Warner Home Video). These boxed set releases are of films by notable actors, directors or studios that were previously unreleased on DVD or VHS. The sets often include bonus discs including documentaries and shorts from the TCM library. The initial batch of DVDs are printed in limited quantities and subsequent batches are made-on-demand (MOD).

Universal Collection – Featuring films licensed by TCM from the Universal Studios vault.
The Lost RKO Collection – Featuring RKO films from the 1930s.
TCM Archives – A series of DVD boxsets released by Warner Home Video featuring Pre-Code and Silent Films which includes the Forbidden Hollywood series.
TCM Spotlight – A series of DVD boxsets released by Warner Home Video featuring Charlie Chan and stars such as Esther Williams, Errol Flynn, Jean Arthur, Deanna Durbin, and Doris Day.

In October 2015, TCM announced the launch of the TCM Wineclub, in which they teamed up with Laithwaite to provide a line of mail-order wines from famous vineyards such as famed writer-director-producer Francis Ford Coppola's winery. Wines are available in 3 month subscriptions, and can be selected as reds, whites, or a mixture of both. From the wines chosen, TCM also includes recommended movies to watch with each, such as a "True Grit" wine, to be paired with the John Wayne film of the same name.[37]
International versions[edit]
Main article: List of international Turner Classic Movies channels
Turner Classic Movies is available in many other countries around the world. In Canada, TCM began to be carried on Shaw Cable and satellite provider Shaw Direct in 2005. Rogers Cable started offering TCM in December 2006 as a free preview for subscribers of its digital cable tier, and was added to its analogue tier in February 2007. While the schedule for the Canadian feed is generally the same as that of the U.S. network, some films are replaced for broadcast in Canada due to rights issues and other reasons. Other versions of TCM are available in France, Middle East, Africa, Spain, Asia, Latin America, Nordic countries, the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta. The UK version operates two channels, including a spinoff called TCM 2.
See also[edit]

The Great Movie Ride – a TCM-sponsored theme park attraction at Disney's Hollywood Studios.
TCM 2 – a British pay television network that operates as a sister network to the UK & Ireland version of Turner Classic Movies.
GetTV – an American digital multicast television network owned by Sony Pictures Entertainment, which specializes in classic movies sourced mainly from the Columbia Pictures library.
Movies! – an American digital multicast television network operated as a joint venture between Weigel Broadcasting and the Fox Television Stations, specializing in classic feature films primarily sourced from the 20th Century Fox library.
This TV – an American digital broadcast television network owned by Tribune Broadcasting and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, specializing in feature films (including many classic films) with limited classic television series, including those from the MGM library not owned by Turner.

References[edit]


^ Fabrikant, Geraldine. "Turner to Sell MGM Assets." The New York Times. June 7, 1986.
^ Mitchell, Kim; Rod Granger. "Turner launches TCM", Multichannel News, April 18, 1994. Retrieved February 28, 2011 from HighBeam Research.
^ Lon Grahnke. "Classic Films Find New Cable Outlet In Turner Empire", Chicago Sun-Times, April 10, 1994. Retrieved February 28, 2011 from HighBeam Research.
^ Brown, Rich. "Few tickets for Turner Classic Movies", Broadcasting & Cable, April 18, 1994. Retrieved February 28, 2011 from HighBeam Research.
^ "Turner picks up Warner films", Broadcasting & Cable, December 6, 1993. Retrieved February 28, 2011 from HighBeam Research:
^ "Winners - 2000's". Grady College of Journalism and Mass Communication. 2008. Archived from the original on 2011-10-31. Retrieved 2012-03-16. 
^ Lumenick, Lou (November 5, 2009). "New TCM Film Festival goes head-to-head with Tribeca". New York Post. Retrieved 2012-03-16. 
^ Yu, Roger (October 22, 2016). "AT&T agrees to buy Time Warner for more than $80B". USA Today. Retrieved October 22, 2016. 
^ Gryta, Thomas; Hagey, Keach; Cimmiluca, Dana (October 22, 2016). "AT&T Reaches Deal to Buy Time Warner for $86 Billion". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 22, 2016. 
^ Kludt, Tom (February 15, 2017). "Time Warner shareholders vote to approve AT&T merger". CNNMoney. Retrieved February 15, 2017. 
^ Snider, Mike (February 27, 2017). "FCC chief: AT&T-Time Warner deal won't face agency's scrutiny". USA Today. Retrieved February 27, 2017. 
^ Szalai, Georg (March 15, 2017). "European Commission Approves AT&T Acquisition of Time Warner". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 15, 2017. 
^ Aycock, Jason (August 22, 2017). "AT&T's $85B Time Warner deal gets Mexico's approval". Seeking Alpha. 
^ "AT&T-Time Warner merger approved with conditions by Chilean regulators - FierceCable". www.fiercecable.com. 
^ James, Meg (Oct 18, 2017) With consent from Brazil, AT&T has only one regulatory hurdle left before it can gobble Time Warner LA Times.
^ Post Staff Report (Oct 23, 2017) AT&T extends Time Warner merger deadline NY Post.
^ "TCM:NOW PLAYING: A Viewer's Guide to Turner Classic Movies". Palm Coast, Florida: Turner Classic Movies. May 2017. p. 46. 
^ "TCM To Cease Printing the Now Playing Guide" http://mercurie.blogspot.com/2017/04/tcm-to-cease-printing-now-playing-guide.html
^ Katz, Richard. "TCM purchases large MGM/UA film package", Multichannel News, November 21, 1994. Retrieved February 28, 2011 from HighBeam Research.
^ Brown, Rich. "Turner signs Paramount titles for $30M: new classic movie channel seeks additional packages to supplement MGM/RKO library", Broadcasting & Cable, August 16, 1993. Retrieved February 28, 2011 from HighBeam Research.
^ Dempsey, John. "TCM lands passel of pix from Fox", Daily Variety, August 13, 2004. Retrieved February 28, 2011 from HighBeam Research.
^ Elliot, Stuart (November 25, 2014). "Disney Pairs Up With Turner to Promote TCM and Great Movie Ride". The New York Times. Retrieved November 26, 2014. 
^ Lumenick, Lou (July 11, 2011). "Robert Osborne taking leave from TCM". The New York Post. 
^ Bibel, Sara (February 22, 2012). "TCM Announces Guest Programmers for 2012, Including Jules Feiffer, Anthony Bourdain, Debra Winger, Ellen Barkin, Spike Lee, Regis Philbin and Jim Lehrer". Press release. Archived from the original on February 27, 2012. Retrieved 2012-03-16. 
^ "Disney". TCM.com. 
^ "Treasures from The Disney Vault" (PDF). Turner.com. 
^ "Disney Ride". TCM.com. 
^ "TCM Disney Partnership" (PDF). Turner.com. 
^ Asian Images on Film, article on TCM website.
^ Native American Images on Film, article on TCM website.
^ Black Images On Film, article on TCM website.
^ Latino Images on Film, Hispanic actors talk about casting.
^ Arab Images on Film, article on TCM website.
^ David Hinckley (2011-11-14). "Steven Spielberg and John Williams tell stories by the score about 'Jaws' & 'E.T.' in 'AFI Master Class'". Daily News. 
^ Maçek III, J.C. (2013-01-14). "'AFI Master Class': Zemeckis and Burgess Break It Down". PopMatters. 
^ TCM Remembers 2009 at the TCM Website.
^ "About TCM Wine Club". Tcmwineclub.com. 


External links[edit]

Official website
Official UK website
Turner Media Innovations (UK Sales house for Turner Classic Movies)
Turner Classic Movies Europe
Turner Classic Movies Africa
TCM Movie Database (TCMDb)
Interviews with Robert Osborne about TCM's Classic Film Archive by Cinema Retro







v
t
e


Turner Broadcasting System



North American television



Boomerang
Cartoon Network (Adult Swim; Toonami)
CNN
CNN Airport
CNN International
HLN
NBA TV1
TBS
TNT
truTV
Turner Classic Movies





TBS Europe




Boing



Africa
France
Italy
Spain





Boomerang



Central and Eastern Europe
Arab World, Africa, Greece and Cyprus
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Nordic
Portugal
Turkey
UK & Ireland





Cartoon Network



Arabic
Arab World and Africa
Central & Eastern Europe
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Nordic
Poland
Portugal
Russia and Southeastern Europe
Turkey
UK & Ireland





Turner Classic Movies



Africa
TCM Cinéma
Middle East
Nordic
Spain
UK & Ireland





TNT



Comedy
Film
Serie
Nordic
Poland
Romania
Spain





CNN



CNN International
CNN Türk





Others



Cartoonito
Toonami (France)








TBS Asia Pacific




Cartoon Network



Australia and New Zealand
China (on demand)
India
Japan
Pakistan
Philippines3
Southeast Asia
South Korea
Taiwan





CNN



CNN-News18
CNN International Asia Pacific
CNN International South Asia
Indonesia2
Philippines 3





HBO



Cinemax
HBO
HBO Family
HBO Hits
HBO Signature
RED by HBO





Boomerang



Australia and New Zealand
Southeast Asia
South Korea
Thailand





Toonami



Asia
India





Others



Oh!K
Pogo
truTV
Turner Classic Movies
WB Channel
Warner Channel
World Heritage Channel








TBS Latin America



Boomerang
Cartoon Network
CDF
Chilevisión
CNN Chile
CNN en Español
CNN International
Esporte Interativo
Glitz
HispanicTV
I.Sat
Space
TBS
TNT Series
Tooncast
Warner Channel
truTV
TNT Sports





TV production/distribution



Cartoon Network Development Studio Europe
Cartoon Network Studios
Cartoon Network Productions
CNN Films
Turner Sports
World Championship Wrestling4
Williams Street
Hulu (10%)





Internet assets



Bleacher Report
CNNMoney
FilmStruck
Super Deluxe





Former



Boomerang Spain
Cable Music Channel
Cartoon Network Spain
Cartoon Network Too
China Entertainment Television
CNN Checkout Channel
CNNfn
CNN/SI
CNX
CNN+
Crime Library
Gameloft
Imagine TV
Infinito
Lumiere Movies
Nuts TV
Real
Retro
Showtime Scandinavia
Silver
Star! Scandinavia
The Smoking Gun
Toonami (UK & Ireland)
Toonami Jetstream (50% with Viz Media)
truTV (UK and Ireland) (sold to Sony Pictures Television)
Turner Entertainment Co.
Turner Program Services
Turner South (now Fox Sports Southeast)
Voom HD International
WPCH-TV
WRET (now WCNC-TV)









^1 Owned by the NBA, operated by Turner.
^2 Co-owned by Trans Media.
^3 Co-owned with Nine Media Corporation and Radio Philippines Network through a brand licensing agreement.
^4 Assets now owned by WWE, Inc. through WCW, Inc.













v
t
e


Movie-oriented television services in the United States



Over-the-air
digital television



Escape
GetTV
Grit
Movies!
This TV





Cable television




Cable and satellite
television only



AMC
Cinelatino
FX Movie Channel
HDNet Movies
Hallmark Movies & Mysteries
IFC
LMN
MGM HD
PixL
ShortsHD
Sony Movie Channel
Sundance TV
Turner Classic Movies
ViendoMovies





Premium television



HBO (Multiplex)
Cinemax (Multiplex)
Showtime (Multiplex)
The Movie Channel (Multiplex)
Flix
Starz (Multiplex)
Starz Encore (Multiplex)
MoviePlex (Multiplex)
Epix (Multiplex)








Defunct




Cable, satellite
and terrestrial TV



Chiller
Documentary Channel
Fearnet
Festival
Home Theater Network
Spotlight
Star Channel
Take 2
White Springs TV





Subscription TV



MovieBeam
ONTV
Phonevision
Preview
PRISM
SelecTV
Spectrum
SuperTV
VEU
Wometco Home Theater
Z Channel















v
t
e


Additional resources on North American television



North America



List of local television stations in North America
DTV transition
North American TV mini-template





Canada



Canadian networks
List of Canadian television networks
List of Canadian television channels
List of Canadian specialty channels
Local Canadian TV stations
List of United States stations available in Canada
2001 Vancouver TV realignment
2007 Canada broadcast TV realignment





Mexico



Mexican networks
Local Mexican TV stations





United States



American networks
List of American cable and satellite networks
List of American over-the-air networks
Local American TV stations (W)
Local American TV stations (K)
Spanish-language TV networks
1994 United States broadcast TV realignment
2006 United States broadcast TV realignment
List of Canadian television stations available in the United States
Insular Areas TV











See also
U.S. premium channels
Canadian movie channels
Canadian premium channels












v
t
e


Movie television channels in Canada



Specialty channels




English



Documentary
Hollywood Suite 70s Movies
Hollywood Suite 80s Movies
Hollywood Suite 90s Movies
Hollywood Suite 00s Movies
IFC
MovieTime
Rewind
Silver Screen Classics
Sundance Channel
The Cult Movie Network





Multicultural



ATN B4U Movies
ATN Movies OK
ATN Sony Aath
Bollywood Times
Filmy
LS Times TV
Melody Aflam
Rotana Aflam
Rotana Cinema
Rotana Classic
Russian Illuzion
Zee Cinema





Pornographic



AOV Adult Movie Channel
Exxxtasy TV
Hustler TV Canada
Maleflixxx Television
Penthouse TV
Playmen TV
Red Hot TV
Skinemax HD
Vivid TV Canada (English & French)
XXX Action Clips Channel








Premium channels




English



The Movie Network Encore (Multiplex)
The Movie Network (Multiplex)
Super Channel (Multiplex)





French



Cinépop
Super Écran








Foreign



Africa Box Office
AMC (USA)
Cine Bangla (USA)
CineLatino (Mexico)
Cinema One Global (Philippines)
Greek Cinema (Greece)
KTV (India)
SET Max (India)
STAR Chinese Movies USA (Hong Kong)
STAR Gold (India)
Turner Classic Movies (USA)
UTV Movies International (India)





Defunct



Aim Pay-TV Corp.
C Channel
Dusk
Encore Avenue
First Choice
Movie Central
Superchannel












v
t
e


Additional resources on North American television



North America



List of local television stations in North America
DTV transition
North American TV mini-template





Canada



Canadian networks
List of Canadian television networks
List of Canadian television channels
List of Canadian specialty channels
Local Canadian TV stations
List of United States stations available in Canada
2001 Vancouver TV realignment
2007 Canada broadcast TV realignment





Mexico



Mexican networks
Local Mexican TV stations





United States



American networks
List of American cable and satellite networks
List of American over-the-air networks
Local American TV stations (W)
Local American TV stations (K)
Spanish-language TV networks
1994 United States broadcast TV realignment
2006 United States broadcast TV realignment
List of Canadian television stations available in the United States
Insular Areas TV











See also
U.S. premium channels
U.S. movie channels
Canadian premium channels











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Turner_Classic_Movies&oldid=817450539"					Categories: Turner Television networksTime Warner subsidiariesCommercial-free television networksTelevision channels and stations established in 1994English-language television stations in the United StatesMovie channelsMovie channels in the United StatesTurner Classic Movies1994 establishments in the United StatesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2017Articles needing more detailed referencesArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2014All articles containing potentially dated statements