"Text formatting" redirects here. For other uses, see Formatted text.
For a broader coverage related to this topic, see Typography.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Movable type on a composing stick on a type case.






A specimen sheet issued by William Caslon, letter founder, from the 1728 edition of Cyclopaedia.






Diagram of a cast metal sort.


Typesetting is the composition of text by means of arranging physical types[1] or the digital equivalents. Stored letters and other symbols (called sorts in mechanical systems and glyphs in digital systems) are retrieved and ordered according to a language's orthography for visual display. Typesetting requires the prior process of designing a font (which is widely but erroneously confused with and substituted for typeface). One significant effect of typesetting was that authorship of works could be spotted more easily, making it difficult for copiers who have not gained permission.[2]



Contents


1 Pre-digital era

1.1 Manual typesetting
1.2 Hot metal typesetting
1.3 Phototypesetting


2 Digital era

2.1 SCRIPT variants
2.2 SGML and XML systems
2.3 Troff and successors
2.4 TeX and LaTeX


3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Pre-digital era[edit]
Manual typesetting[edit]
Main article: Movable type
During much of the letterpress era, movable type was composed by hand for each page. Cast metal sorts were composed into words, then lines, then paragraphs, then pages of text and tightly bound together to make up a form, with all letter faces exactly the same “height to paper”, creating an even surface of type. The form was placed in a press, inked, and an impression made on paper.
During typesetting, individual sorts are picked from a type case with the right hand, and set into a composing stick held in the left hand from left to right, and as viewed by the setter upside down. As seen in the photo of the composing stick, a lower case 'q' looks like a 'd', a lower case 'b' looks like a 'p', a lower case 'p' looks like a 'b' and a lower case 'd' looks like a 'q'. This is reputed to be the origin of the expression "mind your p's and q's". It might just as easily have been “mind your b's and d's”.
The diagram at right illustrates a cast metal sort: a face, b body or shank, c point size, 1 shoulder, 2 nick, 3 groove, 4 foot. Wooden printing sorts were in use for centuries in combination with metal type. Not shown, and more the concern of the casterman, is the “set”, or width of each sort. Set width, like body size, is measured in points.
In order to extend the working life of type, and to account for the finite sorts in a case of type, copies of forms were cast when anticipating subsequent printings of a text, freeing the costly type for other work. This was particularly prevalent in book and newspaper work where rotary presses required type forms to wrap an impression cylinder rather than set in the bed of a press. In this process, called stereotyping, the entire form is pressed into a fine matrix such as plaster of Paris or papier mâché called a flong to create a positive, from which the stereotype form was electrotyped, cast of type metal.
Advances such as the typewriter and computer would push the state of the art even farther ahead. Still, hand composition and letterpress printing have not fallen completely out of use, and since the introduction of digital typesetting, it has seen a revival as an artisanal pursuit. However, it is a very small niche within the larger typesetting market.
Hot metal typesetting[edit]
Main article: Hot metal typesetting
The time and effort required to manually compose the text led to several efforts in the 19th century to produce mechanical typesetting. While some, such as the Paige compositor, met with limited success, by the end of the 19th century, several methods had been devised whereby an operator working a keyboard or other devices could produce the desired text. Most of the successful systems involved the in-house casting of the type to be used, hence are termed "hot metal" typesetting. The Linotype machine, invented in 1884, used a keyboard to assemble the casting matrices, and cast an entire line of type at a time (hence its name). In the Monotype System, a keyboard was used to punch a paper tape, which was then fed to control a casting machine. The Ludlow Typograph involved hand-set matrices, but otherwise used hot metal. By the early 20th century, the various systems were nearly universal in large newspapers and publishing houses.
Phototypesetting[edit]
Main article: Phototypesetting




Linotype CRTronic 360 phototypesetting terminal


Phototypesetting or "cold type" systems first appeared in the early 1960s and rapidly displaced continuous casting machines. These devices consisted of glass disks (one per font) that spun in front of a light source to selectively expose characters onto light-sensitive paper. Originally they were driven by pre-punched paper tapes. Later they were hooked up to computer front ends.
One of the earliest electronic photocomposition systems was introduced by Fairchild Semiconductor. The typesetter typed a line of text on a Fairchild keyboard that had no display. To verify correct content of the line it was typed a second time. If the two lines were identical a bell rang and the machine produced a punched paper tape corresponding to the text. With the completion of a block of lines the typesetter fed the corresponding paper tapes into a phototypesetting device that mechanically set type outlines printed on glass sheets into place for exposure onto a negative film. Photosensitive paper was exposed to light through the negative film, resulting in a column of black type on white paper, or a galley. The galley was then cut up and used to create a mechanical drawing or paste up of a whole page. A large film negative of the page is shot and used to make plates for offset printing.
Digital era[edit]


Play media


Dutch newsreel from 1977 about the transition to computer typesetting


The next generation of phototypesetting machines to emerge were those that generated characters on a cathode ray tube. Typical of the type were the Alphanumeric APS2 (1963),[3] IBM 2680 (1967), I.I.I. VideoComp (1973?), Autologic APS5 (1975),[4] and Linotron 202 (1978).[5] These machines were the mainstay of phototypesetting for much of the 1970s and 1980s. Such machines could be "driven online" by a computer front-end system or took their data from magnetic tape. Type fonts were stored digitally on conventional magnetic disk drives.
Computers excel at automatically typesetting and correcting documents.[6] Character-by-character, computer-aided phototypesetting was, in turn, rapidly rendered obsolete in the 1980s by fully digital systems employing a raster image processor to render an entire page to a single high-resolution digital image, now known as imagesetting.
The first commercially successful laser imagesetter, able to make use of a raster image processor was the Monotype Lasercomp. ECRM, Compugraphic (later purchased by Agfa) and others rapidly followed suit with machines of their own.
Early minicomputer-based typesetting software introduced in the 1970s and early 1980s, such as Datalogics Pager, Penta, Atex, Miles 33, Xyvision, troff from Bell Labs, and IBM's Script product with CRT terminals, were better able to drive these electromechanical devices, and used text markup languages to describe type and other page formatting information. The descendants of these text markup languages include SGML, XML and HTML.
The minicomputer systems output columns of text on film for paste-up and eventually produced entire pages and signatures of 4, 8, 16 or more pages using imposition software on devices such as the Israeli-made Scitex Dolev. The data stream used by these systems to drive page layout on printers and imagesetters, often proprietary or specific to a manufacturer or device, drove development of generalized printer control languages, such as Adobe Systems' PostScript and Hewlett-Packard's PCL.




Text typeset in Iowan Old Style roman, italics and small caps, optimised at approximately 10 words per line, typeface sized at 14 points on 1.4 x leading, with 0.2 points extra tracking, extract of an essay by Oscar Wilde The Renaissance of English Art circa 1882


Computerized typesetting was so rare that BYTE (comparing itself to "the proverbial shoemaker's children who went barefoot") did not use any computers in production until its August 1979 issue used a Compugraphics system for typesetting and page layout. The magazine did not yet accept articles on floppy disks, but hoped to do so "as matters progress".[7] Before the 1980s, practically all typesetting for publishers and advertisers was performed by specialist typesetting companies. These companies performed keyboarding, editing and production of paper or film output, and formed a large component of the graphic arts industry. In the United States, these companies were located in rural Pennsylvania, New England or the Midwest, where labor was cheap and paper was produced nearby, but still within a few hours' travel time of the major publishing centers.
In 1985, desktop publishing became available, starting with the Apple Macintosh, Aldus PageMaker (and later QuarkXPress) and PostScript. Improvements in software and hardware, and rapidly lowering costs, popularized desktop publishing and enabled very fine control of typeset results much less expensively than the minicomputer dedicated systems. At the same time, word processing systems, such as Wang and WordPerfect, revolutionized office documents. They did not, however, have the typographic ability or flexibility required for complicated book layout, graphics, mathematics, or advanced hyphenation and justification rules (H and J).
By the year 2000, this industry segment had shrunk because publishers were now capable of integrating typesetting and graphic design on their own in-house computers. Many found the cost of maintaining high standards of typographic design and technical skill made it more economical to outsource to freelancers and graphic design specialists.
The availability of cheap or free fonts made the conversion to do-it-yourself easier, but also opened up a gap between skilled designers and amateurs. The advent of PostScript, supplemented by the PDF file format, provided a universal method of proofing designs and layouts, readable on major computers and operating systems.
SCRIPT variants[edit]
Main article: SCRIPT (markup)




Mural mosaic "Typesetter" at John A. Prior Health Sciences Library in Ohio


IBM created and inspired a family of typesetting languages with names that were derivatives of the word "SCRIPT". Later versions of SCRIPT included advanced features, such as automatic generation of a table of contents and index, multicolumn page layout, footnotes, boxes, automatic hyphenation and spelling verification.[8]
NSCRIPT was a port of SCRIPT to OS and TSO from CP-67/CMS SCRIPT.[9]
Waterloo Script was created at the University of Waterloo later.[10] One version of SCRIPT was created at MIT and the AA/CS at UW took over project development in 1974. The program was first used at UW in 1975. In the 1970s, SCRIPT was the only practical way to word process and format documents using a computer. By the late 1980s, the SCRIPT system had been extended to incorporate various upgrades.[11]
The initial implementation of SCRIPT at UW was documented in the May 1975 issue of the Computing Centre Newsletter, which noted some the advantages of using SCRIPT:
a) It easily handles footnotes.
b) Page numbers can be in Arabic or Roman numerals, and can appear at the top or bottom of the page, in the centre, on the left or on the right, or on the left for even-numbered pages and on the right for odd-numbered pages.
c) Underscoring or overstriking can be made a function of SCRIPT, thus uncomplicating editor functions.
d) SCRIPT files are regular OS datasets or CMS files.
e) Output can be obtained on the printer, or at the terminal…” The article also pointed out SCRIPT had over 100 commands to assist in formatting documents, though 8 to 10 of these commands were sufficient to complete most formatting jobs. Thus, SCRIPT had many of the capabilities computer users generally associate with contemporary word processors.[12]
SCRIPT/VS was a SCRIPT variant developed at IBM in the 1980s.
DWScript is a version of SCRIPT for MS-DOS, called after its author, D. D. Williams,[13] but was never released to the public and only used internally by IBM.
Script is still available from IBM as part of the Document Composition Facility for the z/OS operating system.[14]
SGML and XML systems[edit]
The standard generalized markup language (SGML) was based upon IBM Generalized Markup Language (GML). GML was a set of macros on top of IBM Script.
The arrival of SGML/XML as the document model made other typesetting engines popular. Such engines include RenderX's XEP, Datalogics Pager, Penta, Miles 33's OASYS, Xyvision's XML Professional Publisher (XPP), FrameMaker, Arbortext, YesLogic's Prince, QuarkXPress and Adobe InDesign. These products allow users to program their SGML/XML typesetting process with the help of scripting languages. Some of them, such as Arbortext Editor and XMetaL Author, provide attractive WYSIWYG-ish interfaces with support for XML standards and Unicode to attract a wider spectrum of users.
Troff and successors[edit]
Main article: Troff
During the mid-1970s, Joseph Ossanna, working at Bell Laboratories, wrote the troff typesetting program to drive a Wang C/A/T phototypesetter owned by the Labs; it was later enhanced by Brian Kernighan to support output to different equipment, such as laser printers. While its use has fallen off, it is still included with a number of Unix and Unix-like systems, and has been used to typeset a number of high-profile technical and computer books. Some versions, as well as a GNU work-alike called groff, are now open source.
TeX and LaTeX[edit]




Mathematical text typeset using TeX and the AMS Euler font.


Main article: TeX
The TeX system, developed by Donald E. Knuth at the end of the 1970s, is another widespread and powerful automated typesetting system that has set high standards, especially for typesetting mathematics. TeX is considered fairly difficult to learn on its own, and deals more with appearance than structure. The LaTeX macro package written by Leslie Lamport at the beginning of the 1980s offered a simpler interface, and an easier way to systematically encode the structure of a document. LaTeX markup is very widely used in academic circles for published papers and even books. Although standard TeX does not provide an interface of any sort, there are programs that do. These programs include Scientific Workplace, TeXmacs and LyX, which are graphical/interactive editors.
See also[edit]

Composing stick
Dingbat
History of Western typography
Ligature (typography)
Prepress
Printing
Printing press
Strut (typesetting)
Technical writing
Typeface
Formula editor
The Long Short Cut
Lout (software)

References[edit]


^ Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. 23 December 2009. Dictionary.reference.com
^ Murray, Stuart A., The Library: An Illustrated History, ALA edition, Skyhorse, 2009, page 131
^ Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Technology, 1976
^ Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Technology
^ Linotype History
^ Petru-Ioan Becheru (Oct 2011). "Correcting Romanian typesetting mistakes by using regular expressions". An. Univ. Spiru Haret—ser. matemat.-inform. 7 (2): 31–36. ISSN 1841-7833. 83. Retrieved 2012-04-09. (webpage has a translation button)
^ Helmers, Carl (August 1979). "Notes on the Appearance of BYTE.." BYTE. pp. 158–159. 
^ U01-0547, "Introduction to SCRIPT," is available through PRTDOC.
^ SCRIPT 90.1 Implementation Guide, June 6, 1990
^ CSG.uwaterloo.ca
^ A Chronology of Computing at The University of Waterloo
^ Glossary of University of Waterloo Computing Chronology
^ DWScript - Document Composition Facility for the IBM Personal Computer Version 4.6 Updates, DW-04167, Nov 8th, 1985
^ IBM Document Composition Facility (DCF)


External links[edit]



Look up typesetting in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Metal Type - For Those who Remember Hot Metal Typesetting
TeX Users Group
The Lout Document Formatting System
XML page at www.W3C.org
SGML page at www.xml.org
TYPESET-8, the first low cost computerized type setting system
1960 era Typesetting in the 1960 era.
Symbols - Comprehensive list of typographical symbols







v
t
e


The book publishing process



Copy preparation



Submission
author or literary agent
Publisher's reader


Contract negotiation
intellectual property rights
royalty rates, format, etc


Editing





Prepress

Literary editor  •  Commissioning editor  •  Developmental editor  •  Authors' editor  •  Book editor

Design
Typesetting
Proof-reading
List of Proofreader's Marks





Book production



Printing
Folding
Binding
Trimming












v
t
e


Typography terminology



Page



Canons of page construction
Column
Even working
Margin
Page numbering
Pagination
Pull quote
Recto and verso





Paragraph



Alignment
Justification
Leading
River
Sentence spacing
Widows and orphans





Character




Typeface anatomy



Counter
Diacritics
Dingbat
Glyph
Initial
Kerning
Letter-spacing
Ligature
Subscript and superscript
Swash
Text figures
Tittle





Capitalization



ALL CAPS
CamelCase
Letter case
Petite caps
Small caps





Visual distinction



Italics
Oblique
Bold
Color
Underline
𝔹𝕝𝕒𝕔𝕜𝕓𝕠𝕒𝕣𝕕 𝕓𝕠𝕝𝕕
𝕭𝖑𝖆𝖈𝖐𝖑𝖊𝖙𝖙𝖊𝖗
Infɑnt





Vertical aspects



Ascender
Baseline
Cap height
Descender
Median
Overshoot
x-height








Classifications




Roman type



Antiqua (old style)
Didone (modern)
Sans-serif
Script
Serif
Slab serif
Transitional
Reverse-contrast





Blackletter type



Fraktur
Rotunda
Schwabacher
Textualis





Gaelic type



Insular
Uncial





Specialist



Record type








Punctuation



Dashes
Hanging punctuation
Hyphen-minus
Hyphenation
Prime mark
Quotation mark





Typesetting



Calligraphy
etaoin shrdlu
Font

computer
monospaced


Font catalog
Letterpress
Lorem ipsum
Microtypography
Movable type
Pangram
Phototypesetting
Punchcutting
Type color
Type design
Typeface
Microprint

list







Typographic units



Agate
Cicero
Em
En
Figure space
Measure
Paren space
Pica
Point

traditional point-size names


Thin space





Digital typography



Character encoding
Font formats
Hinting
Rasterization
Typesetting software
Typographic features
Web typography





Related



Intentionally blank page
Style guide
Type foundry








 Category
 Commons
 Portal












v
t
e


Letterpress printing






History of printing
Printer





Ways to make
impressions




Movable type



Type casting
Type metal
Punchcutter
Matrix





Blocks and plates



Stereotype
Logographic printing
Wood engraving
Electrotype
Zinc etching











Typesetting




Manual typesetting



Type case
Composing stick
Sort
Slug
Strut
Reglet
Furniture
Leading
Quoin
Chase
Forme
Hellbox





Hot metal typesetting



Linotype machine
Monotype System
Ludlow Typograph
Intertype Machine
Paige Compositor








Printing press




Parts of a press



Platen
Frisket
Tympan
Bed





Inking



Offset ink
Ink ball
Composition roller





Types of presses



Hand press

Stanhope
Columbian
Albion


Jobbing press

Golding & Company
Chandler & Price
Colt's Armory


Cylinder press
Rotary press








Other equipment



Folding machine
Paper cutter
Addressograph








Related arts
Typography
Bookbinding
Printmaking
Papermaking









Authority control



GND: 4077033-3
NDL: 00572233











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Typesetting&oldid=806477071"					Categories: TypographyTypesettingTextual scholarshipHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2009All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles containing video clips