

U.S. states


Also known as:
Commonwealth (in four states)





Category
Federated state


Location
United States of America


Number
50


Populations
Smallest: Wyoming, 585,501
Largest: California, 39,250,017[1]


Areas
Smallest: Rhode Island, 1,214 square miles (3,140 km2)
Largest: Alaska, 663,268 square miles (1,717,860 km2)[2]


Government
State government


Subdivisions
County (or equivalent)


A U.S. state is a constituent political entity of the United States of America. There are currently 50 states, which are bound together in a union with each other. Each state holds governmental jurisdiction over a defined geographic territory, and shares its sovereignty with the United States federal government. Due to the shared sovereignty between each state and the federal government, Americans are citizens of both the federal republic and of the state in which they reside.[3] State citizenship and residency are flexible, and no government approval is required to move between states, except for persons covered by certain types of court orders (e.g., paroled convicts and children of divorced spouses who are sharing custody).
States range in population from just under 600,000 (Wyoming) to over 39 million (California), and in area from 1,214 square miles (3,140 km2) (Rhode Island) to 663,268 square miles (1,717,860 km2) (Alaska). Four states use the term commonwealth rather than state in their full official names.
States are divided into counties or county-equivalents, which may be assigned some local governmental authority but are not sovereign. County or county-equivalent structure varies widely by state. State governments are allocated power by the people (of each respective state) through their individual constitutions. All are grounded in republican principles, and each provides for a government, consisting of three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial.[4]
States possess a number of powers and rights under the United States Constitution. States and their residents are represented in the United States Congress, a bicameral legislature consisting of the Senate and the House of Representatives. Each state is also entitled to select a number of electors (equal to the total number of representatives and senators from that state) to vote in the Electoral College, the body that directly elects the President of the United States. Additionally, each state has the opportunity to ratify constitutional amendments, and, with the consent of Congress, two or more states may enter into interstate compacts with one another.
Historically, the tasks of local law enforcement, public education, public health, regulating intrastate commerce, and local transportation and infrastructure have generally been considered primarily state responsibilities, although all of these now have significant federal funding and regulation as well. Over time, the Constitution has been amended, and the interpretation and application of its provisions have changed. The general tendency has been toward centralization and incorporation, with the federal government playing a much larger role than it once did. There is a continuing debate over states' rights, which concerns the extent and nature of the states' powers and sovereignty in relation to the federal government and the rights of individuals.
The Constitution grants to Congress the authority to admit new states into the Union. Since the establishment of the United States in 1776, the number of states has expanded from the original 13 to 50. Alaska and Hawaii are the most recent states admitted, both in 1959. The Constitution is silent on the question of whether states have the power to secede (withdraw) from the Union. Shortly after the Civil War, the U.S. Supreme Court, in Texas v. White, held that a state cannot unilaterally do so.[5][6]



Contents


1 States of the United States
2 Governments

2.1 Constitutions

2.1.1 Executive
2.1.2 Legislative
2.1.3 Judicial


2.2 States as unitary systems


3 Relationships

3.1 Among states
3.2 With the federal government


4 Admission into the Union
5 Possible new states

5.1 Puerto Rico
5.2 Washington, D.C.
5.3 Others


6 Secession from the Union
7 Commonwealths
8 Origins of states' names
9 Geography

9.1 Borders
9.2 Regional grouping


10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



States of the United States
For more details on each U.S. state, see List of states and territories of the United States.
See also: List of U.S. state abbreviations
The 50 U.S. states, in alphabetical order, along with each state's flag:



 Alabama
 Alaska
 Arizona
 Arkansas
 California
 Colorado
 Connecticut
 Delaware
 Florida
 Georgia
 Hawaii
 Idaho
 Illinois
 Indiana
 Iowa
 Kansas
 Kentucky
 Louisiana
 Maine
 Maryland
 Massachusetts
 Michigan
 Minnesota
 Mississippi
 Missouri
 Montana
 Nebraska
 Nevada
 New Hampshire
 New Jersey
 New Mexico
 New York
 North Carolina
  North Dakota
 Ohio
 Oklahoma
 Oregon
 Pennsylvania
 Rhode Island
 South Carolina
 South Dakota
 Tennessee
 Texas
 Utah
 Vermont
 Virginia
 Washington
 West Virginia
 Wisconsin
 Wyoming









A map of the 50 U.S. states and Washington, D.C., the nation's capital




Governments
Further information: Comparison of U.S. state governments


Administrative divisions
of the United States


First level




State (Commonwealth)



Federal district
Territory (Commonwealth)



Indian reservation (list) / Hawaiian home land / Alaska Native tribal entity / Pueblo / Off-reservation trust land




Second level




County / Parish / Borough
Unorganized Borough / Census area / Villages / District (USVI) / District (AS)



Consolidated city-county
Independent city
Municipality



Unorganized atoll



State-recognized tribes




Third level




Cities, towns, and villages



Civil township
Coterminous municipality
Survey township



Barrio
Chapter




Fourth level




Ward




Other areas




Protected areas (Conservation district, National Monument, National Park)



Congressional district



Homeowner association



Associated state



Military base
Federal enclave



Unincorporated area
Ghost town







v
t
e





As sovereign entities, each of the 50 states reserves the right to organize its individual government in any way (within the broad parameters set by the U.S. Constitution) deemed appropriate by its people. As a result, while the governments of the various states share many similar features, they often vary greatly with regard to form and substance. No two state governments are identical.
Constitutions
The government of each state is structured in accordance with its individual constitution. Many of these documents are more detailed and more elaborate than their federal counterpart. The Constitution of Alabama, for example, contains 310,296 words – more than 40 times as many as the U.S. Constitution.[7] In practice, each state has adopted a three-branch system of government, modeled after the federal government, and consisting of three branches (although the three-branch structure is not required): executive, legislative, and judicial.[7][8]
Executive
In each state, the chief executive is called the governor, who serves as both head of state and head of government. The governor may approve or veto bills passed by the state legislature, as well as push for the passage of bills supported by the party of the Governor. In 43 states, governors have line item veto power.[9]
Most states have a "plural executive" in which two or more members of the executive branch are elected directly by the people. Such additional elected officials serve as members of the executive branch, but are not beholden to the governor and the governor cannot dismiss them. For example, the attorney general is elected, rather than appointed, in 43 of the 50 U.S. states.
Legislative
The legislatures of 49 of the 50 states are made up of two chambers: a lower house (termed the House of Representatives, State Assembly, General Assembly or House of Delegates) and a smaller upper house, always termed the Senate. The exception is the unicameral Nebraska Legislature, which is composed of only a single chamber.
Most states have part-time legislatures, while six of the most populated states have full-time legislatures. However, several states with high population have short legislative sessions, including Texas and Florida.[10]
In Baker v. Carr (1962) and Reynolds v. Sims (1964), the U.S. Supreme Court held that all states are required to elect their legislatures in such a way as to afford each citizen the same degree of representation (the one person, one vote standard). In practice, most states choose to elect legislators from single-member districts, each of which has approximately the same population. Some states, such as Maryland and Vermont, divide the state into single- and multi-member districts, in which case multi-member districts must have proportionately larger populations, e.g., a district electing two representatives must have approximately twice the population of a district electing just one. If the governor vetoes legislation, all legislatures may override it, usually, but not always, requiring a two-thirds majority.
In 2013, there were a total of 7,383 legislators in the 50 state legislative bodies. They earned from $0 annually (New Mexico) to $90,526 (California). There were various per diem and mileage compensation.[11]
Judicial
States can also organize their judicial systems differently from the federal judiciary, as long as they protect the federal constitutional right of their citizens to procedural due process. Most have a trial level court, generally called a District Court, Superior Court or Circuit Court, a first-level appellate court, generally called a Court of Appeal (or Appeals), and a Supreme Court. However, Oklahoma and Texas have separate highest courts for criminal appeals. In New York State the trial court is called the Supreme Court; appeals are then taken to the Supreme Court's Appellate Division, and from there to the Court of Appeals.
Most states base their legal system on English common law (with substantial indigenous changes and incorporation of certain civil law innovations), with the notable exception of Louisiana, a former French colony, which draws large parts of its legal system from French civil law.
Only a few states choose to have the judges on the state's courts serve for life terms. In most of the states the judges, including the justices of the highest court in the state, are either elected or appointed for terms of a limited number of years, and are usually eligible for re-election or reappointment.
States as unitary systems
All states have unitary governments, local governments are created under state law, and ultimately, local governments within each state are subject to the central authority of that particular state. State governments commonly delegate some authority to local units and channel policy decisions down to them for implementation.[12] In a few states, local units of government are permitted a degree of home rule over various matters. The prevailing legal theory of state preeminence over local governments, referred to as Dillon's Rule, holds that,

A municipal corporation possesses and can exercise the following powers and no others: First, those granted in express words; second, those necessarily implied or necessarily incident to the powers expressly granted; third, those absolutely essential to the declared objects and purposes of the corporation-not simply convenient but indispensable; fourth, any fair doubt as to the existence of a power is resolved by the courts against the corporation-against the existence of the powers.[13]

Each state defines for itself what powers it will allow local governments. Generally, four categories of power may be given to local jurisdictions:


Structural – power to choose the form of government, charter and enact charter revisions,
Functional – power to exercise local self government in a broad or limited manner,
Fiscal – authority to determine revenue sources, set tax rates, borrow funds and other related financial activities,
Personnel – authority to set employment rules, remuneration rates, employment conditions and collective bargaining.[14]


Relationships
Among states
Each state admitted to the Union by Congress since 1789 has entered it on an equal footing with the original States in all respects.[15] With the growth of states' rights advocacy during the antebellum period, the Supreme Court asserted, in Lessee of Pollard v. Hagan (1845), that the Constitution mandated admission of new states on the basis of equality.[16] With the consent of Congress, states may enter into interstate compacts, agreements between two or more states. Compacts are frequently used to manage a shared resource, such as transportation infrastructure or water rights.[17]
Under Article IV of the Constitution, which outlines the relationship between the states, each state is required to give full faith and credit to the acts of each other's legislatures and courts, which is generally held to include the recognition of most contracts and criminal judgments, and before 1865, slavery status. Under the Extradition Clause, a state must extradite people located there who have fled charges of "treason, felony, or other crimes" in another state if the other state so demands. The principle of hot pursuit of a presumed felon and arrest by the law officers of one state in another state are often permitted by a state.[18]
The full faith and credit expectation does have exceptions, some legal arrangements, such as professional licensure and marriages, may be state-specific, and until recently states have not been found by the courts to be required to honor such arrangements from other states.[19] Such legal acts are nevertheless often recognized state-to-state according to the common practice of comity. States are prohibited from discriminating against citizens of other states with respect to their basic rights, under the Privileges and Immunities Clause.
With the federal government
Further information: Federalism in the United States
Under Article IV, each state is guaranteed a form of government that is grounded in republican principles, such as the consent of the governed.[20] This guarantee has long been at the fore-front of the debate about the rights of citizens vis-à-vis the government. States are also guaranteed protection from invasion, and, upon the application of the state legislature (or executive, if the legislature cannot be convened), from domestic violence. This provision was discussed during the 1967 Detroit riot, but was not invoked.
Under Article I of the Constitution, which establishes the U.S. Congress, each of the 50 states is represented in the Senate (irrespective of population size) by two senators, and each is guaranteed at least one representative (based on population size) in the House. Senators are elected by popular vote to staggered terms of six years. There are presently 100 U.S. Senators. Representatives are elected from single-member districts by popular vote to terms of two years (not staggered). The size of the House—presently 435 voting members—is set by federal statute. Seats in the House are distributed among the states in proportion to the most recent constitutionally mandated decennial census.[21]
Citizens in each state plus those in the District of Columbia indirectly elect the president and vice president. When casting ballots in presidential elections they are voting for presidential electors, who then, using procedures provided in the 12th amendment, elect the president and vice president. There were 538 electors for the most recent presidential election in 2016.[22] Each state is entitled to a number of electors equal to the total number of representatives and senators from that state; the District of Columbia is entitled to three electors.[23]
While the Constitution does set parameters for the election of federal officials, state law, not federal, regulates most aspects of elections in the U.S., including primaries, the eligibility of voters (beyond the basic constitutional definition), the running of each state's electoral college, as well as the running of state and local elections. All elections—federal, state and local—are administered by the individual states, and some voting rules and procedures may differ among states.[24]
Article V of the Constitution accords states a key role in the process of amending the U.S. Constitution. Amendments may be proposed either by Congress with a two-thirds vote in both the House and the Senate, or by a convention of states called for by two-thirds of the state legislatures.[25] To become part of the Constitution, an amendment must be ratified by either—as determined by Congress—the legislatures of three-quarters of the states or state ratifying conventions in three-quarters of the states.[26] The vote in each state (to either ratify or reject a proposed amendment) carries equal weight, regardless of a state's population or length of time in the Union.
Since the early 20th century, the Supreme Court has interpreted the Commerce Clause of the Constitution of the United States to allow greatly expanded scope of federal power over time, at the expense of powers formerly considered purely states' matters. The Cambridge Economic History of the United States says, "On the whole, especially after the mid-1880s, the Court construed the Commerce Clause in favor of increased federal power."[27] In Wickard v. Filburn 317 U.S. 111 (1942), the court expanded federal power to regulate the economy by holding that federal authority under the commerce clause extends to activities which may appear to be local in nature but in reality effect the entire national economy and are therefore of national concern.[28]
For example, Congress can regulate railway traffic across state lines, but it may also regulate rail traffic solely within a state, based on the reality that intrastate traffic still affects interstate commerce. In recent years, the Court has tried to place limits on the Commerce Clause in such cases as United States v. Lopez and United States v. Morrison.[clarification needed]
Another example of congressional power is its spending power – the ability of Congress to impose taxes and distribute the resulting revenue back to the states (subject to conditions set by Congress).[29] An example of this is the system of federal aid for highways, which include the Interstate Highway System. The system is mandated and largely funded by the federal government, and also serves the interests of the states. By threatening to withhold federal highway funds, Congress has been able to pressure state legislatures to pass a variety of laws.[citation needed] An example is the nationwide legal drinking age of 21, enacted by each state, brought about by the National Minimum Drinking Age Act. Although some objected that this infringes on states' rights, the Supreme Court upheld the practice as a permissible use of the Constitution's Spending Clause in South Dakota v. Dole 483 U.S. 203 (1987).
Admission into the Union
Main article: Admission to the Union




U.S. states by date of statehood.
  1776–1790
  1791–1796
  1803–1819
  1820–1837
  1845–1859
  1861–1876
  1889–1896
  1907–1912
  1959







The order in which the original 13 states ratified the constitution, then the order in which the others were admitted to the union. (Click to see animation)


Article IV also grants to Congress the authority to admit new states into the Union. Since the establishment of the United States in 1776, the number of states has expanded from the original 13 to 50. Each new state has been admitted on an equal footing with the existing states.[16] It also forbids the creation of new states from parts of existing states without the consent of both the affected states and Congress. This caveat was designed to give Eastern states that still had Western land claims (including Georgia, North Carolina, and Virginia), to have a veto over whether their western counties could become states,[15] and has served this same function since, whenever a proposal to partition an existing state or states in order that a region within might either join another state or to create a new state has come before Congress.
Most of the states admitted to the Union after the original 13 were formed from an organized territory established and governed by Congress in accord with its plenary power under Article IV, Section 3, Clause 2.[30] The outline for this process was established by the Northwest Ordinance (1787), which predates the ratification of the Constitution. In some cases, an entire territory has become a state; in others some part of a territory has.
When the people of a territory make their desire for statehood known to the federal government, Congress may pass an enabling act authorizing the people of that territory to organize a constitutional convention to write a state constitution as a step towards admission to the Union. Each act details the mechanism by which the territory will be admitted as a state following ratification of their constitution and election of state officers. Although the use of an enabling act is a traditional historic practice, a number of territories have drafted constitutions for submission to Congress absent an enabling act and were subsequently admitted. Upon acceptance of that constitution, and upon meeting any additional Congressional stipulations, Congress has always admitted that territory as a state.
In addition to the original 13, six subsequent states were never an organized territory of the federal government, or part of one, before being admitted to the Union. Three were set off from an already existing state, two entered the Union after having been sovereign states, and one was established from unorganized territory:

California, 1850, from land ceded to the United States by Mexico in 1848 under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.[31][32][33]
Kentucky, 1792, from Virginia (District of Kentucky: Fayette, Jefferson, and Lincoln counties)[31][32][34]
Maine, 1820, from Massachusetts (District of Maine)[31][32][34]
Texas, 1845, previously the Republic of Texas[31][32][35]
Vermont, 1791, previously the Vermont Republic (also known as the New Hampshire Grants and claimed by New York)[31][32][36]
West Virginia, 1863, from Virginia (Trans-Allegheny region counties) during the Civil War[32][34][37]

Congress is under no obligation to admit states, even in those areas whose population expresses a desire for statehood. Such has been the case numerous times during the nation's history. In one instance, Mormon pioneers in Salt Lake City sought to establish the state of Deseret in 1849. It existed for slightly over two years and was never approved by the United States Congress. In another, leaders of the Five Civilized Tribes (Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole) in Indian Territory proposed to establish the state of Sequoyah in 1905, as a means to retain control of their lands.[38] The proposed constitution ultimately failed in the U.S. Congress. Instead, the Indian Territory, along with Oklahoma Territory were both incorporated into the new state of Oklahoma in 1907. The first instance occurred while the nation still operated under the Articles of Confederation. The State of Franklin existed for several years, not long after the end of the American Revolution, but was never recognized by the Confederation Congress, which ultimately recognized North Carolina's claim of sovereignty over the area. The territory comprising Franklin later became part of the Southwest Territory, and ultimately the state of Tennessee.
Additionally, the entry of several states into the Union was delayed due to distinctive complicating factors. Among them, Michigan Territory, which petitioned Congress for statehood in 1835, was not admitted to the Union until 1837, due to a boundary dispute with the adjoining state of Ohio. The Republic of Texas requested annexation to the United States in 1837, but fears about potential conflict with Mexico delayed the admission of Texas for nine years.[39] Also, statehood for Kansas Territory was held up for several years (1854–61) due to a series of internal violent conflicts involving anti-slavery and pro-slavery factions.
Further information: Historic regions of the United States and List of U.S. state partition proposals
Possible new states
Puerto Rico
Main articles: Political status of Puerto Rico and Proposed political status for Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico referred to itself as the "Commonwealth of Puerto Rico" in the English version of its constitution, and as "Estado Libre Asociado" (literally, Associated Free State) in the Spanish version.
As with any non-state territory of the United States, its residents do not have voting representation in the federal government. Puerto Rico has limited representation in Congress in the form of a Resident Commissioner, a delegate with limited voting rights in the Committee of the Whole House on the State of the Union, and no voting rights otherwise.[40]
A non-binding referendum on statehood, independence, or a new option for an associated territory (different from the current status) was held on November 6, 2012. Sixty one percent (61%) of voters chose the statehood option, while one third of the ballots were submitted blank.[41][42]
On December 11, 2012, the Legislative Assembly of Puerto Rico enacted a concurrent resolution requesting the President and the Congress of the United States to respond to the referendum of the people of Puerto Rico, held on November 6, 2012, to end its current form of territorial status and to begin the process to admit Puerto Rico as a State.[43]
Another status referendum was held on June 11, 2017, in which 97% percent of voters chose statehood. Turnout was low, as only 23% of voters went to the polls.[44]
Washington, D.C.
Main article: District of Columbia statehood movement
The intention of the Founding Fathers was that the United States capital should be at a neutral site, not giving favor to any existing state; as a result, the District of Columbia was created in 1800 to serve as the seat of government. As it is not a state, the district does not have representation in the Senate and has a non-voting delegate in the House; neither does it have a sovereign elected government. Additionally, prior to ratification of the 23rd amendment in 1961, district citizens did not get the right to vote in Presidential elections.
Some residents of the District support statehood of some form for that jurisdiction – either statehood for the whole district or for the inhabited part, with the remainder remaining under federal jurisdiction. In November 2016, Washington, D.C. residents voted in a statehood referendum in which 86% of voters supported statehood for Washington, D.C.[45] For statehood to be achieved, it must be approved by Congress and signed by the President.[46]
Others
Other possible new states are Guam and the US Virgin Islands, both of which are unincorporated organized territories of the United States. Also, either the Northern Mariana Islands or American Samoa, an unorganized, unincorporated territory, could seek statehood.
Further information: 51st state
Secession from the Union
Main article: Secession in the United States
The Constitution is silent on the issue of the secession of a state from the union. However, its predecessor document, the Articles of Confederation, stated that the United States "shall be perpetual." The question of whether or not individual states held the right to unilateral secession remained a difficult and divisive one until the American Civil War. In 1860 and 1861, eleven southern states seceded, but following their defeat in the American Civil War were brought back into the Union during the Reconstruction Era. The federal government never recognized the secession of any of the rebellious states.[5][47]
Following the Civil War, the United States Supreme Court, in Texas v. White, held that states did not have the right to secede and that any act of secession was legally void. Drawing on the Preamble to the Constitution, which states that the Constitution was intended to "form a more perfect union" and speaks of the people of the United States in effect as a single body politic, as well as the language of the Articles of Confederation, the Supreme Court maintained that states did not have a right to secede. However, the court's reference in the same decision to the possibility of such changes occurring "through revolution, or through consent of the States," essentially means that this decision holds that no state has a right to unilaterally decide to leave the Union.[5][47]
Commonwealths
Main article: Commonwealth (U.S. state)
Four states – Kentucky, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Virginia – adopted constitutions early in their post-colonial existence identifying themselves as commonwealths, rather than states. These commonwealths are states, but legally, each is a commonwealth because the term is contained in its constitution.[48] As a result, "commonwealth" is used in all public and other state writings, actions or activities within their bounds.
The term, which refers to a state in which the supreme power is vested in the people, was first used in Virginia during the Interregnum, the 1649–60 period between the reigns of Charles I and Charles II during which parliament's Oliver Cromwell as Lord Protector established a republican government known as the Commonwealth of England. Virginia became a royal colony again in 1660, and the word was dropped from the full title. When Virginia adopted its first constitution on June 29, 1776, it was reintroduced.[49] Pennsylvania followed suit when it drew up a constitution later that year, as did Massachusetts, in 1780, and Kentucky, in 1792.[48]
The U.S. territories of the Northern Marianas and Puerto Rico are also referred to as commonwealths. This designation does have a legal status different from that of the 50 states. Both of these commonwealths are unincorporated territories of the United States.
Origins of states' names




A map showing the source languages of state names.


Further information: List of state name etymologies of the United States
The 50 states have taken their names from a wide variety of languages. Twenty-four state names originate from Native American languages. Of these, eight are from Algonquian languages, seven are from Siouan languages, three are from Iroquoian languages, one is from Uto-Aztecan languages and five others are from other indigenous languages. Hawaii's name is derived from the Polynesian Hawaiian language.
Of the remaining names, 22 are from European languages: Seven from Latin (mainly Latinized forms of English names), the rest are from English, Spanish and French. Eleven states are named after individual people, including seven named for royalty and one named after an American president. The origins of six state names are unknown or disputed. Several of the states that derive their names from (corrupted) names used for Native peoples, have retained the plural ending of "s".
Geography
Borders
The borders of the 13 original states were largely determined by colonial charters. Their western boundaries were subsequently modified as the states ceded their western land claims to the Federal government during the 1780s and 1790s. Many state borders beyond those of the original 13 were set by Congress as it created territories, divided them, and over time, created states within them. Territorial and new state lines often followed various geographic features (such as rivers or mountain range peaks), and were influenced by settlement or transportation patterns. At various times, national borders with territories formerly controlled by other countries (British North America, New France, New Spain including Spanish Florida, and Russian America) became institutionalized as the borders of U.S. states. In the West, relatively arbitrary straight lines following latitude and longitude often prevail, due to the sparseness of settlement west of the Mississippi River.
Once established, most state borders have, with few exceptions, been generally stable. Only two states, Missouri (Platte Purchase) and Nevada, grew appreciably after statehood. Several of the original states ceded land, over a several year period, to the Federal government, which in turn became the Northwest Territory, Southwest Territory, and Mississippi Territory. In 1791 Maryland and Virginia ceded land to create the District of Columbia (Virginia's portion was returned in 1847). In 1850, Texas ceded a large swath of land to the federal government. Additionally, Massachusetts and Virginia (on two occasions), have lost land, in each instance to form a new state.
There have been numerous other minor adjustments to state boundaries over the years due to improved surveys, resolution of ambiguous or disputed boundary definitions, or minor mutually agreed boundary adjustments for administrative convenience or other purposes.[31] Occasionally the United States Congress or the United States Supreme Court have settled state border disputes. One notable example is the case New Jersey v. New York, in which New Jersey won roughly 90% of Ellis Island from New York in 1998.[50]
Regional grouping
Further information: List of regions of the United States
States may be grouped in regions; there are endless variations and possible groupings. Many are defined in law or regulations by the federal government. For example, the United States Census Bureau defines four statistical regions, with nine divisions.[51] The Census Bureau region definition is "widely used … for data collection and analysis,"[52] and is the most commonly used classification system.[53][54][55] Other multi-state regions are unofficial, and defined by geography or cultural affinity rather than by state lines.
See also

State (polity)

References


^ "Population by State". Retrieved January 21, 2017. 
^ "United States Summary: 2000" (PDF). U.S. Census 2000. U. S. Census Bureau. April 2004. Retrieved September 15, 2013. 
^ Erler, Edward. "Essays on Amendment XIV: Citizenship". The Heritage Foundation. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions About the Minnesota Legislature". Minnesota State Legislature. 
^ a b c Aleksandar Pavković, Peter Radan, Creating New States: Theory and Practice of Secession, p. 222, Ashgate Publishing, 2007.
^ "Texas v. White 74 U.S. 700 (1868)". Justia.com. 
^ a b "State & Local Government". whitehouse.gov. The White House. Retrieved May 15, 2016. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions About the Minnesota Legislature". Minnesota State Legislature. 
^ "Gubernatorial Veto Authority with Respect to Major Budget Bill(s)". National Conference of State Legislatures. 
^ http://www.reformcal.com/citleg_historical.pdf
^ Wilson, Reid (August 23, 2013). "GovBeat:For legislators, salaries start at zero". Washington Post. Washington, DC. pp. A2. Retrieved August 26, 2013. 
^ "Unitary system". Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved August 13, 2016. 
^ Dean, Kenneth d. (1976). "The Dillon Rule -- A limit on Local Government Powers". Missouri Law Review. 41 (4): 548. Retrieved August 13, 2016. 
^ "Local Government Authority". National League of Cities. Retrieved August 13, 2016. 
^ a b Forte, David F. "Essays on Article IV: New States Clause". The Heritage Guide to the Constitution. The Heritage Foundation. 
^ a b "Doctrine of the Equality of States". Justia.com. Retrieved January 30, 2012. 
^ deGolian, Crady. "Interstate Compacts: Background and History". Council on State Governments. Retrieved September 25, 2013. 
^ "Hot Pursuit Law & Legal Definition". USLegal, Inc. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ Adam Liptak (March 17, 2004). "Bans on Interracial Unions Offer Perspective on Gay Ones". New York Times. 
^ Ernest B. Abbott; Otto J. Hetzel (2010). Homeland Security and Emergency Management: A Legal Guide for State and Local Governments. American Bar Association. p. 52. 
^ Kristin D. Burnett. "Congressional Apportionment (2010 Census Briefs C2010BR-08)" (PDF). U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration. 
^ "The Executive Branch". whitehouse.gov. Retrieved August 2, 2017. 
^ Elhauge, Einer R. "Essays on Article II: Presidential Electors". The Heritage Guide to The Constitution. The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved August 2, 2017. 
^ "Elections & Voting". whitehouse.gov. Retrieved August 2, 2017. 
^ "The Constitutional Amendment Process". The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Retrieved November 17, 2015. 
^ Wines, Michael (August 22, 2016). "Inside the Conservative Push for States to Amend the Constitution". NYT. Retrieved August 24, 2016. 
^ Stanley Lewis Engerman (2000). The Cambridge economic history of the United States: the colonial era. Cambridge University Press. p. 464. ISBN 978-0-521-55307-0. 
^ David Shultz (2005). Encyclopedia of the Supreme Court. Infobase Publishing. p. 522. ISBN 978-0-8160-5086-4. 
^ "Constitution of the United States, Article I, Section 8". Legal Information Institute, Cornell University Law School. Retrieved 17 October 2015. 
^ "Property and Territory: Powers of Congress". Justia.com. 
^ a b c d e f Stein, Mark (2008). How the States Got Their Shapes. New York: HarperCollins. pp. xvi, 334. ISBN 9780061431395. 
^ a b c d e f "Official Name and Status History of the several States and U.S. Territories". TheGreenPapers.com. 
^ "California Admission Day September 9, 1850". CA.gov. California Department of Parks and Recreation. 
^ a b c Michael P. Riccards, "Lincoln and the Political Question: The Creation of the State of West Virginia" Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 27, 1997 online edition
^ Holt, Michael F. (200). The fate of their country: politicians, slavery extension, and the coming of the Civil War. New York: Hill and Wang. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-8090-4439-9. 
^ "The 14th State". Vermont History Explorer. Vermont Historical Society. 
^ "A State of Convenience: The Creation of West Virginia, Chapter Twelve, Reorganized Government of Virginia Approves Separation". Wvculture.org. West Virginia Division of Culture and History. 
^ "Museum of the Red River - The Choctaw". Museum of the Red River. 2005. Retrieved 4 August 2009. 
^ Winders, Richard Bruce (2002). Crisis in the Southwest: the United States, Mexico, and the Struggle over Texas. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 82, 92. ISBN 978-0-8420-2801-1 – via Google Books. 
^ "Rules of the House of Representatives" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 28, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010. 
^ "Puerto Ricans favor statehood for first time". CNN. November 7, 2012. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ "Puerto Ricans opt for statehood". Fox News. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ The Senate and the House of Representative of Puerto Rico Concurrent Resolution
^ https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/11/us/puerto-ricans-vote-on-the-question-of-statehood.html?_r=1
^ http://www.nbcwashington.com/news/local/DC-Election-Statehood-Council-Seats-400275901.html
^ http://people.howstuffworks.com/new-state-in-us.htm
^ a b Texas v. White, 74 U.S. 700 (1868) at Cornell University Law School Supreme Court collection.
^ a b "Why is Massachusetts a Commonwealth?". Mass.Gov. Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2016. 
^ Salmon, Emily J.; Edward D. C. Campbell, Jr., eds. (1994). The Hornbook of Virginia History (4th ed.). Richmond, VA: Virginia Office of Graphic Communications. p. 88. ISBN 0-88490-177-7. 
^ Greenhouse, Linda (May 27, 1998). "The Ellis Island Verdict: The Ruling; High Court Gives New Jersey Most of Ellis Island". The New York Times. Retrieved August 2, 2012. 
^ United States Census Bureau, Geography Division. "Census Regions and Divisions of the United States" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-01-10. 
^ "The National Energy Modeling System: An Overview 2003" (Report #:DOE/EIA-0581, October 2009). United States Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration.
^ "The most widely used regional definitions follow those of the U.S. Bureau of the Census." Seymour Sudman and Norman M. Bradburn, Asking Questions: A Practical Guide to Questionnaire Design (1982). Jossey-Bass: p. 205.
^ "Perhaps the most widely used regional classification system is one developed by the U.S. Census Bureau." Dale M. Lewison, Retailing, Prentice Hall (1997): p. 384. ISBN 978-0-13-461427-4
^ "(M)ost demographic and food consumption data are presented in this four-region format." Pamela Goyan Kittler, Kathryn P. Sucher, Food and Culture, Cengage Learning (2008): p.475. ISBN 9780495115410


Further reading

Stein, Mark, How the States Got Their Shapes, New York : Smithsonian Books/Collins, 2008. ISBN 978-0-06-143138-8

External links

Information about All States from UCB Libraries GovPubs
State Resource Guides, from the Library of Congress
Tables with areas, populations, densities and more (in order of population)
Tables with areas, populations, densities and more (alphabetical)
State and Territorial Governments on USA.gov
StateMaster – statistical database for U.S. states
U.S. States: Comparisons, rankings, demographics
50states.com – States and Capitals








v
t
e


 Political divisions of the United States



States



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming





Federal district

Washington, D.C.



Insular areas



American Samoa
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
U.S. Virgin Islands





Outlying islands



Baker Island
Howland Island
Jarvis Island
Johnston Atoll
Kingman Reef
Midway Atoll
Navassa Island
Palmyra Atoll
Wake Island





Indian reservations



List of Indian reservations












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American civil rights movement 1865–1896 / 1896–1954 / 1954–1968
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


United States state-related lists




List of states and territories of the United States



Demographics



Educational attainment
Irreligion
Largest cities by population
Most popular given names
Most populous counties
Population

Density
Growth rate
Birth and death rates
Historical
African American
Amish
Asian
Hispanic and Latino
Spanish-speaking







Economy



Billionaires
Budgets
Companies
Federal tax revenue
Federal taxation and spending
Gross domestic product

Growth rate
Per capita


Income

Household
Per capita
Inequality


Minimum wages
Poverty rates
Sales taxes
Sovereign wealth funds
State income taxes

Flat rate
None


Unemployment rates
Union affiliation
Vehicles per capita





Environment



Carbon dioxide emissions
Botanical gardens
Parks
Renewable energy
Superfund sites
Wilderness areas





Geography



Area
Coastline
Elevation
Forest
Geographic centers
Regions





Government



Attorneys general
Capitals

Historical


Capitol buildings
Comparison
Counties

Alphabetical


Current State Legislators
Governors

Lieutenant governors


Legislatures
Libraries and archives
Official languages
Poets laureate
Political divisions
State auditors
State secretaries of state
State superintendents of education
State supreme courts
State treasurers





Health



Human Development Index
Fertility rates
Hospitals
Life expectancy
Obesity rates





History



Date of statehood
Name etymologies
Historical societies and museums
National Historic Landmarks
National Register of Historic Places
State partitions
Historic regions





Law



Abortion
Age of consent
Alcohol

Dry communities


Alford plea
Cell phone use while driving
Constitutions
Firearms

Homicide


Law enforcement agencies
Legality of cannabis
Peace Index
Prisons

Incarceration rate


Same-sex unions

Former constitutional bans
Marriage law


Seat belt laws
Self-representation
Smoking bans
Speed limits (by jurisdiction)
Statutory codes





Miscellaneous



Abbreviations
Demonyms
Fictional states
Flags
Insignia
License plates
Numbered highways
Symbols
Tallest buildings
Time zones








 Category
 Commons
 Portals












v
t
e


United States Census



Regions



Division
State
Federal District
Insular area

American Samoa
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
United States Virgin Islands


ZIP Code Tabulation Area





Native areas



Alaska Native corporation
Indian reservation

list


Hawaiian home land
Off-reservation trust land
Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area





Metropolitan



Primary statistical area

list


Combined statistical area
Core-based statistical area

list


Metropolitan statistical area

list


Micropolitan statistical area

list


New England city and town area
Urban area

list







State-level



Congressional district
County

list
Alaska census area
Independent city
Municipio


Place

Census-designated


Public use microdata area
School district

lists


State legislative district
Urban growth area





County-level



Census county division
Minor civil division
Traffic analysis zone
Voting district





Local



Block
Block group
Tract








Census Bureau
Office of Management and Budget












v
t
e


Articles on first-level administrative divisions of North American countries






Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Table of administrative subdivisions by country






History portal
Geography portal
North America portal
United States portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=U.S._state&oldid=817676617"					Categories: Country subdivisions in North AmericaFirst-level administrative country subdivisionsStates of the United StatesSubdivisions of the United StatesTypes of country subdivisionsHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from October 2014Pages using deprecated image syntaxWikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2011All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2015