

United States Army



Logo of the United States Army



Founded
14 June 1775; 242 years ago (1775-06-14)[1][2]


Country
 United States of America


Type
Army


Role
Land warfare


Size
476,000 Regular Army (2017)[3]
343,000 Army National Guard (2017)
199,000 Army Reserve (2017)
1,018,000 total uniformed personnel (2017)
330,000 civilian personnel
4,836 aircraft[4]


Part of

U.S. Department of Defense

Dept. of the Army (since 1947)




Headquarters
The Pentagon
Arlington County, Virginia, U.S.


Motto(s)
"This We'll Defend"


Colors
Black and gold[5][6]          


March
"The Army Goes Rolling Along"


Anniversaries
Army Birthday: 14 June


Engagements


See list

American Revolutionary War
Whiskey Rebellion
Indian Wars
First Barbary War
War of 1812
Patriot War
Mexican–American War
Utah War
Cortina Troubles
Reform War
American Civil War
Las Cuevas War
Spanish–American War
Banana Wars
Philippine–American War
Boxer Rebellion
Border War
World War I
Russian Civil War
World War II
Puerto Rican Nationalist Revolts
Korean War
1958 Lebanon crisis
Operation Power Pack
Vietnam War
Korean DMZ Conflict
Operation Eagle Claw
Multinational Force Lebanon
Invasion of Grenada
Operation Golden Pheasant
Invasion of Panama
Persian Gulf War
Somali Civil War
Kosovo War
Operation Enduring Freedom

Afghanistan
Philippines
Horn of Africa
Trans Sahara

Iraq War
War in North-West Pakistan
Pakistan-United States skirmishes
Intervention against ISIS
Syrian Civil War (limited)





Website
Army.mil


Commanders


Commander-in-Chief
President Donald Trump


Secretary of Defense
James Mattis


Secretary of the Army
Mark Esper


Chief of Staff
GEN Mark A. Milley


Vice Chief of Staff
GEN James C. McConville


Sergeant Major of the Army
SMA Daniel A. Dailey


Insignia


Flag



Emblem of the Department of the Army



The United States Army (USA) is the largest branch of the United States Armed Forces and performs land-based military operations. It is one of the seven uniformed services of the United States and is designated as the Army of the United States in the United States Constitution, Article 2, Section 2, Clause 1 and United States Code, Title 10, Subtitle B, Chapter 301, Section 3001. As the oldest and most senior branch of the U.S. military in order of precedence,[7] the modern U.S. Army has its roots in the Continental Army, which was formed (14 June 1775) to fight the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783)—before the United States of America was established as a country.[8] After the Revolutionary War, the Congress of the Confederation created the United States Army on 3 June 1784 to replace the disbanded Continental Army.[9][10] The United States Army considers itself descended from the Continental Army, and dates its institutional inception from the origin of that armed force in 1775.[8]
As a uniformed military service, the U.S. Army is part of the Department of the Army, which is one of the three military departments of the Department of Defense. The U.S. Army is headed by a civilian senior appointed civil servant, the Secretary of the Army (SECARMY) and by a chief military officer, the Chief of Staff of the Army (CSA) who is also a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In the fiscal year 2017, the projected end strength for the Regular Army (USA) was 476,000 soldiers; the Army National Guard (ARNG) had 343,000 soldiers and the United States Army Reserve (USAR) had 199,000 soldiers; the combined-component strength of the U.S. Army was 1,018,000 soldiers.[3] As a branch of the armed forces, the mission of the U.S. Army is "to fight and win our Nation's wars, by providing prompt, sustained, land dominance, across the full range of military operations and the spectrum of conflict, in support of combatant commanders".[11] The branch participates in conflicts worldwide and is the major ground-based offensive and defensive force of the United States.



Contents


1 Mission
2 History

2.1 Origins
2.2 19th century

2.2.1 Early wars on the Frontier
2.2.2 American Civil War
2.2.3 Later 19th century


2.3 20th century

2.3.1 World wars
2.3.2 Cold War

2.3.2.1 1945–1960
2.3.2.2 1960–1970
2.3.2.3 1970–1990


2.3.3 1990s


2.4 21st century


3 Organization

3.1 Army components
3.2 Army commands and army service component commands
3.3 Structure
3.4 Combat maneuver organizations
3.5 Special operations forces


4 Personnel

4.1 Commissioned officers
4.2 Warrant officers
4.3 Enlisted personnel
4.4 Training


5 Equipment

5.1 Weapons
5.2 Vehicles
5.3 Uniforms

5.3.1 Berets


5.4 Tents
5.5 3D printing


6 See also
7 Notes and references
8 Further reading
9 External links



Mission[edit]
The United States Army serves as the land-based branch of the U.S. Armed Forces. Section 3062 of Title 10, U.S. Code defines the purpose of the army as:[12][13]

Preserving the peace and security and providing for the defense of the United States, the Commonwealths and possessions and any areas occupied by the United States
Supporting the national policies
Implementing the national objectives
Overcoming any nations responsible for aggressive acts that imperil the peace and security of the United States

History[edit]
Main article: History of the United States Army






This article or section may need to be cleaned up or summarized because it has been split from/to History of the United States Army.



Origins[edit]




Storming of Redoubt No. 10 in the Siege of Yorktown during the American Revolutionary War prompted the British government to begin negotiations, resulting in the Treaty of Paris and British recognition of the United States of America


The Continental Army was created on 14 June 1775 by the Continental Congress[14] as a unified army for the colonies to fight Great Britain, with George Washington appointed as its commander.[8][15][16][17] The army was initially led by men who had served in the British Army or colonial militias and who brought much of British military heritage with them. As the Revolutionary War progressed, French aid, resources and military thinking influenced the new army. A number of European soldiers came on their own to help, such as Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben, who taught Prussian Army tactics and organizational skills.
The army fought numerous pitched battles and in the South in 1780–1781, sometimes used the Fabian strategy and hit-and-run tactics, hitting where the British were weakest to wear down their forces. Washington led victories against the British at Trenton and Princeton, but lost a series of battles in the New York and New Jersey campaign in 1776 and the Philadelphia campaign in 1777. With a decisive victory at Yorktown and the help of the French, the Continental Army prevailed against the British.
After the war, the Continental Army was quickly given land certificates and disbanded in a reflection of the republican distrust of standing armies. State militias became the new nation's sole ground army, with the exception of a regiment to guard the Western Frontier and one battery of artillery guarding West Point's arsenal. However, because of continuing conflict with Native Americans, it was soon realized that it was necessary to field a trained standing army. The Regular Army was at first very small and after General St. Clair's defeat at the Battle of the Wabash, the Regular Army was reorganized as the Legion of the United States, which was established in 1791 and renamed the United States Army in 1796.
19th century[edit]
Early wars on the Frontier[edit]
Further information: Army on the Frontier




General Andrew Jackson stands on the parapet of his makeshift defenses as his troops repulse attacking Highlanders during the defense of New Orleans, the final major and most one-sided battle of the War of 1812


The War of 1812, the second and last war between the United States and Great Britain, had mixed results. The U.S. Army did not conquer Canada but it did destroy Native American resistance to expansion in the Old Northwest and it validated its independence by stopping two major British invasions in 1814 and 1815. After taking control of Lake Erie in 1813, the U.S. Army seized parts of western Upper Canada, burned York and defeated Tecumseh, which caused his Western Confederacy to collapse. Following U.S.victories in the Canadian province of Upper Canada, British troops who had dubbed the U.S. Army "Regulars, by God!", were able to capture and burn Washington, which was defended by militia, in 1814. The regular army, however proved they were professional and capable of defeating the British army during the invasions of Plattsburgh and Baltimore, prompting British agreement on the previously rejected terms of a status quo ante bellum. Two weeks after a treaty was signed (but not ratified), Andrew Jackson defeated the British in the Battle of New Orleans and Siege of Fort St. Philip, and became a national hero. U.S. troops and sailors captured HMS Cyane, Levant and Penguin in the final engagements of the war. Per the treaty, both sides (the United States and Great Britain) returned to the geographical status quo. Both navies kept the warships they had seized during the conflict.
The army's major campaign against the Indians was fought in Florida against Seminoles. It took long wars (1818–1858) to finally defeat the Seminoles and move them to Oklahoma. The usual strategy in Indian wars was to seize control of the Indians' winter food supply, but that was no use in Florida where there was no winter. The second strategy was to form alliances with other Indian tribes, but that too was useless because the Seminoles had destroyed all the other Indians when they entered Florida in the late eighteenth century.[18]
The U.S. Army fought and won the Mexican–American War (1846–1848), which was a defining event for both countries.[19] The U.S. victory resulted in acquisition of territory that eventually became all or parts of the states of California, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, Arizona, Wyoming and New Mexico.
American Civil War[edit]
Further information: Union Army




The Battle of Gettysburg, the turning point of the American Civil War


The American Civil War was the costliest war for the U.S. in terms of casualties. After most slave states, located in the southern U.S., formed the Confederate States, the Confederate States Army, led by former U.S. Army officers, mobilized a large fraction of Southern white manpower. Forces of the United States (the "Union" or "the North") formed the Union Army, consisting of a small body of regular army units and a large body of volunteer units raised from every state, north and south, except South Carolina.[20]
For the first two years Confederate forces did well in set battles but lost control of the border states.[21] The Confederates had the advantage of defending a large territory in an area where disease caused twice as many deaths as combat. The Union pursued a strategy of seizing the coastline, blockading the ports, and taking control of the river systems. By 1863, the Confederacy was being strangled. Its eastern armies fought well, but the western armies were defeated one after another until the Union forces captured New Orleans in 1862 along with the Tennessee River. In the Vicksburg Campaign of 1862–1863, General Ulysses Grant seized the Mississippi River and cut off the Southwest. Grant took command of Union forces in 1864 and after a series of battles with very heavy casualties, he had General Robert E. Lee under siege in Richmond as General William T. Sherman captured Atlanta and marched through Georgia and the Carolinas. The Confederate capital was abandoned in April 1865 and Lee subsequently surrendered his army at Appomattox Court House. All other Confederate armies surrendered within a few months.
The war remains the deadliest conflict in American history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 soldiers. Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6.4% in the North and 18% in the South.[22]
Later 19th century[edit]




Army soldiers in 1890


Following the Civil War, the U.S. Army had the mission of containing western tribes of Native Americans on the Indian reservations. They set up many forts, and engaged in the last of the American Indian Wars. U.S. Army troops also occupied several Southern states during the Reconstruction Era to protect freedmen.
The key battles of the Spanish–American War of 1898 were fought by the Navy. Using mostly new volunteers, the U.S. Army defeated Spain in land campaigns in Cuba and played the central role in the Philippine–American War.
20th century[edit]




U.S. Army troops assault a German bunker, France, c. 1918


Starting in 1910, the army began acquiring fixed-wing aircraft.[23] In 1910, Mexico was having a civil war, peasant rebels fighting government soldiers. The army was deployed to American towns near the border to ensure safety to lives and property. In 1916, Pancho Villa, a major rebel leader, attacked Columbus, New Mexico, prompting a U.S. intervention in Mexico until 7 February 1917. They fought the rebels and the Mexican federal troops until 1918.
World wars[edit]
For a list of campaigns see List of United States Army campaigns during World War II
The United States joined World War I in 1917 on the side of Britain, France, Russia, Italy and other allies. U.S. troops were sent to the Western Front and were involved in the last offensives that ended the war. With the armistice in November 1918, the army once again decreased its forces.




American soldiers hunt Japanese infiltrators during the Bougainville Campaign


The United States joined World War II in December 1941 after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. On the European front, U.S. Army troops formed a significant portion of the forces that captured North Africa and Sicily and later fought in Italy. On D-Day 6 June 1944 and in the subsequent liberation of Europe and defeat of Nazi Germany, millions of U.S. Army troops played a central role. In the Pacific War, U.S. Army soldiers participated alongside the United States Marine Corps in capturing the Pacific Islands from Japanese control. Following the Axis surrenders in May (Germany) and August (Japan) of 1945, army troops were deployed to Japan and Germany to occupy the two defeated nations. Two years after World War II, the Army Air Forces separated from the army to become the United States Air Force in September 1947. In 1948, the army was desegregated by order of President Harry S. Truman.
Cold War[edit]
1945–1960[edit]




U.S. Army soldiers look on an atomic bomb test of Operation Buster-Jangle at the Nevada Test Site during the Korean War.


The end of World War II set the stage for the East–West confrontation known as the Cold War. With the outbreak of the Korean War, concerns over the defense of Western Europe rose. Two corps, V and VII, were reactivated under Seventh United States Army in 1950 and American strength in Europe rose from one division to four. Hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops remained stationed in West Germany, with others in Belgium, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, until the 1990s in anticipation of a possible Soviet attack.[24]:minute 9:00-10:00
During the Cold War, American troops and their allies fought communist forces in Korea and Vietnam. The Korean War began in 1950, when the Soviets walked out of a U.N. Security Council meeting, removing their possible veto. Under a United Nations umbrella, hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops fought to prevent the takeover of South Korea by North Korea and later to invade the northern nation. After repeated advances and retreats by both sides and the Chinese People's Volunteer Army's entry into the war, the Korean Armistice Agreement returned the peninsula to the status quo in 1953.
1960–1970[edit]
The Vietnam War is often regarded as a low point for the U.S. Army due to the use of drafted personnel, the unpopularity of the war with the American public and frustrating restrictions placed on the military by American political leaders. While American forces had been stationed in the Republic of Vietnam since 1959, in intelligence and advising/training roles, they were not deployed in large numbers until 1965, after the Gulf of Tonkin Incident. American forces effectively established and maintained control of the "traditional" battlefield, but they struggled to counter the guerrilla hit and run tactics of the communist Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese Army. On a tactical level, American soldiers (and the U.S. military as a whole) did not lose a sizable battle.[25]




A U.S. Army infantry patrol moves up to assault the last North Vietnamese Army position at Dak To, South Vietnam during Operation Hawthorne


During the 1960s, the Department of Defense continued to scrutinize the reserve forces and to question the number of divisions and brigades as well as the redundancy of maintaining two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve.[26] In 1967, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara decided that 15 combat divisions in the Army National Guard were unnecessary and cut the number to eight divisions (one mechanized infantry, two armored, and five infantry), but increased the number of brigades from seven to 18 (one airborne, one armored, two mechanized infantry and 14 infantry). The loss of the divisions did not sit well with the states. Their objections included the inadequate maneuver element mix for those that remained and the end to the practice of rotating divisional commands among the states that supported them. Under the proposal, the remaining division commanders were to reside in the state of the division base. However, no reduction in total Army National Guard strength was to take place, which convinced the governors to accept the plan. The states reorganized their forces accordingly between 1 December 1967 and 1 May 1968.
1970–1990[edit]




U.S. Army soldiers prepare to take La Comandancia in the El Chorrillo neighborhood of Panama City during the United States invasion of Panama


The Total Force Policy was adopted by Chief of Staff of the Army General Creighton Abrams in the aftermath of the Vietnam War and involves treating the three components of the army – the Regular Army, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve as a single force.[27] Believing that no U.S. President should be able to take the United States (and more specifically the U.S. Army) to war without the support of the American people, General Abrams intertwined the structure of the three components of the army in such a way as to make extended operations impossible, without the involvement of both the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve.[28]
The 1980s was mostly a decade of reorganization. The army converted to an all-volunteer force with greater emphasis on training and technology. The Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1986 created unified combatant commands bringing the army together with the other four military services under unified, geographically organized command structures. The army also played a role in the invasions of Grenada in 1983 (Operation Urgent Fury) and Panama in 1989 (Operation Just Cause).
By 1989 Germany was nearing reunification and the Cold War was coming to a close. Army leadership reacted by starting to plan for a reduction in strength. By November 1989 Pentagon briefers were laying out plans to reduce army end strength by 23%, from 750,000 to 580,000.[29] A number of incentives such as early retirement were used.
1990s[edit]




M1 Abrams move out before the Battle of Al Busayyah during the Gulf War


In 1990, Iraq invaded its smaller neighbor, Kuwait, and U.S. land forces quickly deployed to assure the protection of Saudi Arabia. In January 1991 Operation Desert Storm commenced, a U.S.-led coalition which deployed over 500,000 troops, the bulk of them from U.S. Army formations, to drive out Iraqi forces. The campaign ended in total victory, as Western coalition forces routed the Iraqi Army. Some of the largest tank battles in history were fought during the Gulf war. The Battle of Medina Ridge, Battle of Norfolk and the Battle of 73 Easting were tank battles of historical significance.[30][31][32]
After Operation Desert Storm, the army did not see major combat operations for the remainder of the 1990s but did participate in a number of peacekeeping activities. In 1990 the Department of Defense issued guidance for "rebalancing" after a review of the Total Force Policy,[33] but in 2004, Air War College scholars concluded the guidance would reverse the Total Force Policy which is an "essential ingredient to the successful application of military force."[34]
21st century[edit]




Army Rangers take part in a raid during operation in Nahr-e Saraj, Afghanistan


On 11 September 2001, 53 Army civilians (47 employees and six contractors) and 22 soldiers were among the 125 victims killed in the Pentagon in a terrorist attack when American Airlines Flight 77 commandeered by five Al-Qaeda hijackers slammed into the western side of the building, as part of the September 11 attacks.[35] Lieutenant General Timothy Maude was the highest-ranking military official killed at the Pentagon and the most senior U.S. Army officer killed by foreign action since the death of Lieutenant General Simon B. Buckner Jr. on 18 June 1945 in the Battle of Okinawa during World War II.[36]




U.S. Army soldiers with 2nd Battalion, 327th Infantry Regiment, 101st Airborne Division return fire during a firefight with Taliban forces in Barawala Kalay Valley in Kunar province, Afghanistan, March 2011


In response to the 11 September attacks and as part of the Global War on Terror, U.S. and NATO forces invaded Afghanistan in October 2001, displacing the Taliban government. The U.S. Army also led the combined U.S. and allied invasion of Iraq in 2003. It served as the primary source for ground forces with its ability to sustain short and long-term deployment operations. In the following years, the mission changed from conflict between regular militaries to counterinsurgency, resulting in the deaths of more than 4,000 U.S service members (as of March 2008) and injuries to thousands more.[37][38] 23,813 insurgents[39] were killed in Iraq between 2003–2011.
Until 2009, the army's chief modernization plan, its most ambitious since World War II,[40] was the FCS program. In 2009, many systems were canceled and the remaining were swept into the BCT modernization program.[41] In response to Budget sequestration in 2013, the army is planned to shrink to a size not seen since the World War II buildup.[42] From 2016 to 2017, the army retired hundreds of OH-58 Kiowa Warrior observation helicopters without an adequate successor.[43] The 2015 expenditure for Army research, development and acquisition changed from $32 billion projected in 2012 for FY15 to $21 billion for FY15 expected in 2014.[44] By 2017, the Brigade Modernization project was completed and its headquarters, the Brigade Modernization Command, was renamed the Joint Modernization Command, or JMC, to reflect its evolving mission at TRADOC.[45] (TRADOC is the Army Command whose mission is to define the architecture and organization of the Army, to train and supply soldiers to FORSCOM and to design hardware, as well as to define materiel for AMC).[46]:minutes 2:30-15:00[24]
Organization[edit]
Main article: Structure of the United States Army




Organization chart[47]


Army components[edit]




U.S. general officers, World War II, Europe


The task of organizing the U.S. Army commenced in 1775.[48] In the first one hundred years of its existence, the United States Army was maintained as a small peacetime force to man permanent forts and perform other non-wartime duties such as engineering and construction works. During times of war, the U.S. Army was augmented by the much larger United States Volunteers which were raised independently by various state governments. States also maintained full-time militias which could also be called into the service of the army.
By the twentieth century, the U.S. Army had mobilized the U.S. Volunteers on four separate occasions during each of the major wars of the nineteenth century. During World War I, the "National Army" was organized to fight the conflict, replacing the concept of U.S. Volunteers.[49] It was demobilized at the end of World War I, and was replaced by the Regular Army, the Organized Reserve Corps and the State Militias. In the 1920s and 1930s, the "career" soldiers were known as the "Regular Army" with the "Enlisted Reserve Corps" and "Officer Reserve Corps" augmented to fill vacancies when needed.[50]
In 1941, the "Army of the United States" was founded to fight World War II. The Regular Army, Army of the United States, the National Guard and Officer/Enlisted Reserve Corps (ORC and ERC) existed simultaneously. After World War II, the ORC and ERC were combined into the United States Army Reserve. The Army of the United States was re-established for the Korean War and Vietnam War and was demobilized upon the suspension of the draft.[50]
Currently, the Army is divided into the Regular Army, the Army Reserve and the Army National Guard.[49] Some states further maintain state defense forces, as a type of reserve to the National Guard, while all states maintain regulations for state militias.[51] State militias are both "organized", meaning that they are armed forces usually part of the state defense forces, or "unorganized" simply meaning that all able bodied males may be eligible to be called into military service. The unorganized militia has never been activated in the history of the United States, and by law this would only be done in the event of an extreme national emergency, such as a mainland invasion of the United States.[52]
The U.S. Army is also divided into branches and functional areas. The basic branches include:


Branch
Insignia
Branch
Insignia
Branch
Insignia


Acquisition Corps (AC)

Air Defense Artillery (AD)

Adjutant General's Corps (AG)



Armor (AR)

Aviation (AV)

Civil Affairs Corps (CA)



Chaplain Corps (CH)

Chemical Corps (CM)

Cyber Corps (CY)



Dental Corps (DC)

Corps of Engineers (EN)

Field Artillery (FA)



Finance Corps (FI)

Infantry (IN)

Judge Advocate General's Corps (JA)



Logistics (LG)

Medical Corps (MC)

Military Intelligence Corps (MI)



Military Police Corps (MP)

Medical Service Corps (MS)

Medical Specialist Corps (SP)



Army Nurse Corps (AN)

Ordnance Corps (OD)

Psychological Operations (PO)



Public Affairs (PA)

Quartermaster Corps (QM)

Signal Corps (SC)



Special Forces (SF)

Transportation Corps (TC)

Veterinary Corps (VC)




Before 1903, members of the National Guard were considered state soldiers unless federalized (i.e., activated) by the President. Since the Militia Act of 1903, all National Guard soldiers have held dual status: as National Guardsmen under the authority of the governor of their state or territory and when activated as a reserve of the U.S. Army under the authority of the President.
Since the adoption of the total force policy, in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, reserve component soldiers have taken a more active role in U.S. military operations. For example, Reserve and Guard units took part in the Gulf War, peacekeeping in Kosovo, Afghanistan and the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
Army commands and army service component commands[edit]
 Headquarters, United States Department of the Army (HQDA):


Army Commands
Current commander
Location of headquarters


 United States Army Forces Command (FORSCOM)
GEN Robert B. Abrams
Fort Bragg, North Carolina


 United States Army Materiel Command (AMC)
GEN Gustave F. Perna
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama


 United States Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC)
GEN David G. Perkins
Fort Eustis, Virginia


Army Service Component Commands
Current commander
Location of headquarters


 United States Army Africa (USARAF)/Ninth Army/United States Army Southern European Task Force[53]
BG Eugene J. LeBoeuf, Acting[54] [55][56][57]
Caserma Ederle, Vicenza, Italy


 United States Army Central (ARCENT)/Third Army
LTG Michael X. Garrett[58]
Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina


 United States Army Europe (USAREUR)/Seventh Army (U.S.)
LTG Ben Hodges
Clay Kaserne, Wiesbaden, Germany


 United States Army North (ARNORTH)/Fifth Army
LTG Jeffrey S. Buchanan
Joint Base San Antonio, Texas


 United States Army Pacific (USARPAC)
GEN Robert B. Brown
Fort Shafter, Hawaii


 United States Army South (ARSOUTH)/Sixth Army
MG Clarence K.K. Chinn
Joint Base San Antonio, Texas


 Surface Deployment and Distribution Command (SDDC)
MG Kurt J. Ryan[59]
Scott AFB, Illinois


 United States Army Cyber Command (ARCYBER)[60][61][62]
LTG Paul Nakasone
Fort Belvoir, Virginia[63]


 United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command/United States Army Strategic Command (USASMDC/ARSTRAT)
LTG James H. Dickinson
Redstone Arsenal, Alabama


 United States Army Special Operations Command (USASOC)
LTG Kenneth E. Tovo
Fort Bragg, North Carolina


Operational Force Headquarters
Current commander
Location of headquarters


 Eighth Army (EUSA)[64]
LTG Thomas S. Vandal[65]
Yongsan Garrison, South Korea


Direct reporting units
Current commander
Location of headquarters


 Arlington National Cemetery and Soldiers' and Airmen's Home National Cemetery[66]
Jack E. Lechner
Arlington, Virginia


United States Army Marketing and Engagement Brigade (USAMEB)[67]
COL Brian M. Cavanaugh
Fort Knox, Kentucky


 United States Army Acquisition Support Center (USASC)[68]
Craig A. Spisak
Fort Belvoir, Virginia


 United States Army Civilian Human Resources Agency (CHRA)[69]
Barbara P. Panther
Washington, D.C.


 United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
LTG Todd T. Semonite[70]
Washington, D.C.


 United States Army Criminal Investigation Command (USACIDC)
MG Mark S. Inch
Quantico, Virginia


United States Army Financial Management Command (USAFMC)
BG David C. Coburn
Indianapolis, Indiana[71]


 United States Army Human Resources Command (HRC)[72]
MG Jason T. Evans
Alexandria, Virginia


 United States Army Installation Management Command (IMCOM)
LTG Kenneth R. Dahl
Joint Base San Antonio, Texas


 United States Army Intelligence and Security Command (INSCOM)
MG Christopher S. Ballard
Fort Belvoir, Virginia


 United States Army Medical Command (MEDCOM)
LTG Nadja West
Joint Base San Antonio, Texas


 United States Army Military District of Washington (MDW)
MG Michael L. Howard
Fort Lesley J. McNair, Washington, D.C.


 United States Army Recruiting Command (USAREC)[73]
MG Jeffrey J. Snow
Fort Knox, Kentucky


 United States Army Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC)
MG Peter D. Utley
Alexandria, Virginia


 United States Army War College (AWC)[74]
MG John S. Kem
Carlisle, Pennsylvania


 United States Military Academy (USMA)
LTG Robert L. Caslen
West Point, New York


Source: U.S. Army organization[75]
Structure[edit]
Main article: Transformation of the United States Army
See Structure of the United States Army for detailed treatment of the history, components, administrative and operational structure and the branches and functional areas of the Army.




U.S. Army soldiers of 1st Battalion, 175th Infantry Regiment, Maryland Army National Guard conduct an urban cordon and search exercise as part of the army readiness and training evaluation program in the mock city of Balad at Fort Dix, New Jersey






U.S. soldiers from the 6th Infantry Regiment taking up positions on a street corner during a foot patrol in Ramadi, Iraq


The U.S. Army is made up of three components: the active component, the Regular Army; and two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve. Both reserve components are primarily composed of part-time soldiers who train once a month – known as battle assemblies or unit training assemblies (UTAs) – and conduct two to three weeks of annual training each year. Both the Regular Army and the Army Reserve are organized under Title 10 of the United States Code, while the National Guard is organized under Title 32. While the Army National Guard is organized, trained and equipped as a component of the U.S. Army, when it is not in federal service it is under the command of individual state and territorial governors. However, the District of Columbia National Guard reports to the U.S. President, not the district's mayor, even when not federalized. Any or all of the National Guard can be federalized by presidential order and against the governor's wishes.[76]
The U.S. Army is led by a civilian Secretary of the Army, who has the statutory authority to conduct all the affairs of the army under the authority, direction and control of the Secretary of Defense.[77] The Chief of Staff of the Army, who is the highest-ranked military officer in the army, serves as the principal military adviser and executive agent for the Secretary of the Army, i.e., its service chief; and as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a body composed of the service chiefs from each of the four military services belonging to the Department of Defense who advise the President of the United States, the Secretary of Defense and the National Security Council on operational military matters, under the guidance of the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.[78][79] In 1986, the Goldwater–Nichols Act mandated that operational control of the services follows a chain of command from the President to the Secretary of Defense directly to the unified combatant commanders, who have control of all armed forces units in their geographic or function area of responsibility, thus the secretaries of the military departments (and their respective service chiefs underneath them) only have the responsibility to organize, train and equip their service components. The army provides trained forces to the combatant commanders for use as directed by the Secretary of Defense.[80]




The 1st Cavalry Division's combat aviation brigade performs a mock charge with the horse detachment


By 2013, the army shifted to six geographical commands that align with the six geographical unified combatant commands (COCOM):

United States Army Central headquartered at Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina
United States Army North headquartered at Fort Sam Houston, Texas
United States Army South headquartered at Fort Sam Houston, Texas
United States Army Europe headquartered at Clay Kaserne, Wiesbaden, Germany
United States Army Pacific headquartered at Fort Shafter, Hawaii
United States Army Africa headquartered at Vicenza, Italy





U.S. Army Special Forces soldiers from the 3rd Special Forces Group patrol a field in the Gulistan district of Farah, Afghanistan


The army also transformed its base unit from divisions to brigades. Division lineage will be retained, but the divisional headquarters will be able to command any brigade, not just brigades that carry their divisional lineage. The central part of this plan is that each brigade will be modular, i.e., all brigades of the same type will be exactly the same and thus any brigade can be commanded by any division. As specified before the 2013 end-strength re-definitions, the three major types of ground combat brigades are:

Armored brigades, with strength of 4,743 troops as of 2014.
Stryker brigades, with strength of 4,500 troops as of 2014.
Infantry brigades, with strength of 4,413 troops as of 2014.

In addition, there are combat support and service support modular brigades. Combat support brigades include aviation (CAB) brigades, which will come in heavy and light varieties, fires (artillery) brigades (now transforms to division artillery) and battlefield surveillance brigades. Combat service support brigades include sustainment brigades and come in several varieties and serve the standard support role in an army.
Combat maneuver organizations[edit]

To track the effects of the 2018 budget cuts, see Transformation of the United States Army#Divisions and Brigades

The U.S. Army currently consists of 10 active divisions and one deployable division headquarters (7th Infantry Division) as well as several independent units. The force is in the process of contracting after several years of growth. In June 2013, the Army announced plans to downsize to 32 active combat brigade teams by 2015 to match a reduction in active duty strength to 490,000 soldiers. Army Chief of Staff Raymond Odierno projected that the Army was to shrink to "450,000 in the active component, 335,000 in the National Guard and 195,000 in U.S. Army Reserve" by 2018.[81] However, this plan was scrapped by the new administration and now the Army plans to grow by 16,000 soldiers to a total of 476,000 by October 2017. The National Guard and the Army Reserve will see a smaller expansion.[82][83]
Within the Army National Guard and United States Army Reserve there are a further 8 divisions, over 15 maneuver brigades, additional combat support and combat service support brigades and independent cavalry, infantry, artillery, aviation, engineer and support battalions. The Army Reserve in particular provides virtually all psychological operations and civil affairs units.
 United States Army Forces Command (FORSCOM)


Direct reporting units
Current commander
Location of headquarters


 I Corps
LTG Gary J. Volesky
Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington


 III Corps
LTG Paul E. Funk II
Fort Hood, Texas


 XVIII Airborne Corps
LTG Stephen J. Townsend
Fort Bragg, North Carolina


 First Army (FUSA)[84]
LTG Stephen Twitty
Rock Island Arsenal, Illinois


 United States Army Reserve Command (USARC)[85]
LTG Charles D. Luckey
Fort Bragg, North Carolina




Combat maneuver units aligned under FORSCOM


Name
Headquarters
Subunits
Subordinate to




1st Armored Division
Fort Bliss, Texas
1 Stryker Brigade Combat Team (BCT), 2 armored BCTs, 1 Division Artillery (DIVARTY), 1 Combat Aviation Brigade (CAB) and 1 sustainment brigade
III Corps




1st Cavalry Division
Fort Hood, Texas
3 armored BCTs, 1 DIVARTY, 1 CAB and 1 sustainment brigade
III Corps


 1st Infantry Division
Fort Riley, Kansas
2 armored BCTs, 1 DIVARTY, 1 CAB and 1 sustainment brigade
III Corps




3d Cavalry Regiment
Fort Hood, Texas
4 Stryker squadrons, 1 fires squadron, 1 engineer squadron and 1 support squadron (overseen by the 1st Cavalry Division)[86]
III Corps




3rd Infantry Division
Fort Stewart, Georgia
2 armored BCT, 1 DIVARTY, 1 CAB and 1 sustainment brigade as well as the 48th Infantry Brigade Combat Team of the Georgia Army National Guard
XVIII Airborne Corps




4th Infantry Division
Fort Carson, Colorado
1 infantry BCT, 1 Stryker BCT, 1 armored BCT, DIVARTY, 1 CAB and 1 sustainment brigade
III Corps




7th Infantry Division
Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington
Administrative control of 2 Stryker BCTs and 1 DIVARTY of the 2nd Infantry Division as well as the 81st Stryker Brigade Combat Team of the Washington and California Army National Guard
I Corps




10th Mountain Division
Fort Drum, New York
2 infantry BCTs, 1 DIVARTY, 1 CAB and 1 sustainment brigade as well as the 86th Infantry Brigade Combat Team (Mountain) of the Vermont Army National Guard
XVIII Airborne Corps




82nd Airborne Division
Fort Bragg, North Carolina
3 airborne infantry BCTs, 1 airborne DIVARTY, 1 CAB and 1 airborne sustainment brigade
XVIII Airborne Corps




101st Airborne Division
Fort Campbell, Kentucky
3 air assault infantry BCTs, 1 air assault DIVARTY, 1 CAB and 1 sustainment brigade
XVIII Airborne Corps




Combat maneuver units aligned under other organizations


Name
Headquarters
Subunits
Subordinate to




2nd Cavalry Regiment
Rose Barracks, Vilseck, Germany
4 Stryker squadrons, 1 engineer squadron, 1 fires squadron and 1 support squadron
U.S. Army Europe




2nd Infantry Division
Camp Red Cloud, South Korea
2 Stryker BCTs, 1 mechanized brigade from the ROK Army,[87] 1 DIVARTY (under administrative control of 7th ID) and 1 sustainment brigade. An ABCT was deactivated and in its place a stateside ABCT from the active divisions is rotated in on a regular basis.
Eighth Army




25th Infantry Division
Schofield Barracks, Hawaii
2 infantry BCTs, 1 airborne infantry BCT, 1 Stryker BCT, 1 DIVARTY, 1 CAB and 1 sustainment brigade
U.S. Army Pacific




173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team
Camp Ederle, Vicenza, Italy
3 airborne infantry battalions (including 1st Battalion, 143rd Infantry Regiment of the Texas Army National Guard), 1 airborne field artillery battalion, 1 cavalry squadron, 1 airborne engineer battalion (54th Brigade Engineer Battalion (BEB), effective 17 June 2015)[88] and 1 airborne support battalion
U.S. Army Europe




 Combat maneuver units aligned under the Army National Guard, until federalized


Name
Locations
Subunits




28th Infantry Division
Pennsylvania, Ohio and Maryland
2nd Infantry BCT, 56th Stryker BCT and 28th Combat Aviation Brigade




29th Infantry Division
Virginia, Maryland, North Carolina and Florida
30th Armored BCT, 53rd Infantry BCT, 116th Infantry BCT and 29th CAB




34th Infantry Division
Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa and Idaho
1st Armored BCT, 2nd Infantry BCT, 32nd Infantry BCT, 116th Cavalry BCT and 34th CAB




35th Infantry Division
Kansas, Missouri, Illinois, Oklahoma, Georgia and Arkansas
33rd Infantry BCT, 39th Infantry BCT, 45th Infantry BCT and 35th CAB




36th Infantry Division
Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi
56th Infantry BCT, 72nd Infantry BCT, 155th Armored BCT, 256th Infantry BCT, 36th CAB and the 3rd BCT (Regular Army) (formerly of the 10th Mountain Division)




38th Infantry Division
Indiana, Michigan, Ohio and Tennessee
37th Infantry BCT, 76th Infantry BCT, 278th Armored Cavalry Regiment and 38th CAB




40th Infantry Division
California, Oregon, Washington and Hawaii
29th Infantry BCT, 41st Infantry BCT, 79th Infantry BCT and 40th CAB




42nd Infantry Division
New York, New Jersey and Vermont
27th Infantry BCT, 50th Infantry BCT and 42nd CAB


For a description of U.S. Army tactical organizational structure, see: a U.S. context and also a global context.
Special operations forces[edit]
 United States Army Special Operations Command (Airborne) (USASOC):[89]


Name
Headquarters
Structure and purpose




1st Special Forces Command (Airborne)
Fort Bragg, North Carolina
The  1st SFC(A) manages seven special forces groups (the  1st SFG(A),  3rd SFG(A),  5th SFG(A),  7th SFG(A),  10th SFG(A),  19th SFG(A) (ARNG) and  20th SFG(A) (ARNG)) that are trained for unconventional warfare, foreign internal defense, special reconnaissance, direct action and counter-terrorism missions. The command also manages two military information support groups (the  4th MISG(A) and  8th MISG(A)) that are trained to conduct psychological operations; the  95th Civil Affairs Brigade (Airborne) that enables military commanders and U.S. ambassadors to improve relationships with various stakeholders via five operational battalions ( 91st CA BN,  92nd CA BN,  96th CA BN,  97th CA BN and  98th CA BN); and the  528th Sustainment Brigade (Airborne) that provides combat service support and combat health support units via a Special Troops Battalion; the  112th Special Operations Signal Battalion (Airborne), an ARSOF Support Operations Cell, six ARSOF Liaison Elements; and two Medical Role II teams. The command also has an organic  Military Intelligence Battalion providing multi-source intelligence information and analysis.




Army Special Operations Aviation Command
Ft. Bragg, North Carolina
Organizes, mans, trains, resources and equips Army special operations aviation units to provide responsive, special operations aviation support to Special Operations Forces (SOF) consisting of five units:  USASOC Flight Company (UFC), Special Operations Training Battalion (SOATB), Technology Applications Program Office (TAPO), Systems Integration Management Office (SIMO) and the  160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (160th SOAR)




75th Ranger Regiment
Fort Benning, Georgia
Three maneuver battalions (the  1st Ranger BN,  2nd Ranger BN, and  3rd Ranger BN) and a  Special Troops Battalion of elite airborne infantry specializing in direct action raids and airfield seizures.




John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School
Ft. Bragg, North Carolina
The  SWCS selects and trains Army Special Forces, Civil Affairs and Military Information Support Operations Soldiers consisting of five distinct units and one directorate:  1st Special Warfare Training Group (Airborne),  Special Warfare Education Group (Airborne),  Special Warfare Medical Group (Airborne),  Special Forces Warrant Officer Institute,  David K. Thuma Noncommissioned Officers Academy and the  Directorate of Training and Doctrine.




1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta
Ft. Bragg, North Carolina
Elite special operations and counter-terrorism unit under the control of  Joint Special Operations Command.


Personnel[edit]
Main articles: Ranks and Insignia of NATO, United States Army officer rank insignia, and United States Army enlisted rank insignia
These are the U.S. Army ranks authorized for use today and their equivalent NATO designations. Although no living officer currently holds the rank of General of the Army, it is still authorized by Congress for use in wartime.
Commissioned officers[edit]
Main article: Commissioned Officers
There are several paths to becoming a commissioned officer[90] including the United States Military Academy, Reserve Officers' Training Corps and Officer Candidate School. Regardless of which road an officer takes, the insignia are the same. Certain professions including physicians, pharmacists, nurses, lawyers and chaplains are commissioned directly into the army and are designated by insignia unique to their staff community.
Most army commissioned officers are promoted based on an "up or out" system. The Defense Officer Personnel Management Act of 1980 establishes rules for timing of promotions and limits the number of officers that can serve at any given time.
Army regulations call for addressing all personnel with the rank of general as "General (last name)" regardless of the number of stars. Likewise, both colonels and lieutenant colonels are addressed as "Colonel (last name)" and first and second lieutenants as "Lieutenant (last name)".[91]


US DoD Pay Grade
O-1
O-2
O-3
O-4
O-5
O-6
O-7
O-8
O-9
O-10
O-11


Insignia













Title
Second
Lieutenant
First
Lieutenant
Captain
Major
Lieutenant
Colonel
Colonel
Brigadier
General
Major
General
Lieutenant
General
General
General of the
Army


Abbreviation
2LT
1LT
CPT
MAJ
LTC
COL
BG
MG
LTG
GEN
GA



NATO Code
OF-1
OF-2
OF-3
OF-4
OF-5
OF-6
OF-7
OF-8
OF-9
OF-10


Note: General of the Army is reserved for wartime.[92]


Warrant officers[edit]
Main article: Warrant officers
Warrant officers[90] are single track, specialty officers with subject matter expertise in a particular area. They are initially appointed as warrant officers (in the rank of WO1) by the Secretary of the Army, but receive their commission upon promotion to chief warrant officer two (CW2).
By regulation, warrant officers are addressed as "Mr. (last name)" or "Ms. (last name)" by senior officers and as "sir" or "ma'am" by all enlisted personnel.[91] However, many personnel address warrant officers as "Chief (last name)" within their units regardless of rank.


US DoD pay grade
W-1
W-2
W-3
W-4
W-5


Insignia







Title
Warrant Officer 1
Chief Warrant Officer 2
Chief Warrant Officer 3
Chief Warrant Officer 4
Chief Warrant Officer 5


Abbreviation
WO1
CW2
CW3
CW4
CW5


NATO Rank
WO-1
WO-2
WO-3
WO-4
WO-5


Enlisted personnel[edit]
Main article: Enlisted personnel
Sergeants and corporals are referred to as NCOs, short for non-commissioned officers.[90][93] This distinguishes corporals from the more numerous specialists who have the same pay grade, but do not exercise leadership responsibilities.
Privates (E1 and E2) and privates first class (E3) are addressed as "Private (last name)", specialists as "Specialist (last name)", corporals as "Corporal (last name)" and sergeants, staff sergeants, sergeants first class and master sergeants all as "Sergeant (last name)". First sergeants are addressed as "First Sergeant (last name)" and sergeants major and command sergeants major are addressed as "Sergeant Major (last name)".[91]


US DoD Pay grade
E-1
E-2
E-3
E-4
E-5
E-6
E-7
E-8
E-9


Insignia
No insignia














Title
Private
Private
Private
First Class
Specialist
Corporal
Sergeant
Staff
Sergeant
Sergeant
First Class
Master
Sergeant
First
Sergeant
Sergeant
Major
Command
Sergeant Major
Sergeant Major
of the Army


Abbreviation
PV1 ¹
PV2 ¹
PFC
SPC ²
CPL
SGT
SSG
SFC
MSG
1SG
SGM
CSM
SMA


NATO Code
OR-1
OR-2
OR-3
OR-4
OR-4
OR-5
OR-6
OR-7
OR-8
OR-8
OR-9
OR-9
OR-9


¹ PVT is also used as an abbreviation for both private ranks when pay grade need not be distinguished.[94]
² SP4 is sometimes encountered instead of SPC for specialist. This is a holdover from when there were additional specialist ranks at pay grades E-5 to E-7.


Training[edit]




Rangers practice fast roping techniques from an MH-47 during an exercise at Fort Bragg






A trainer with Company A, 1st Battalion 502nd Infantry Regiment, Task Force Strike, 101st Airborne Division assists Iraqi army ranger students during a room clearing drill at Camp Taji, Iraq on 18 July 2016


Training in the U.S. Army is generally divided into two categories – individual and collective. Basic training consists of 10 weeks for most recruits followed by Advanced Individualized Training (AIT) where they receive training for their military occupational specialties (MOS). Some individuals MOSs range anywhere from 14–20 weeks of One Station Unit Training (OSUT), which combines Basic Training and AIT. The length of AIT school varies by the MOS The length of time spent in AIT depends on the MOS of the soldier and some highly technical MOS training may require many months (e.g., foreign language translators). Depending on the needs of the army, Basic Combat Training for combat arms soldiers is conducted at a number of locations, but two of the longest-running are the Armor School and the Infantry School, both at Fort Benning, Georgia.
Following their basic and advanced training at the individual-level, soldiers may choose to continue their training and apply for an "additional skill identifier" (ASI). The ASI allows the army to take a wide-ranging MOS and focus it into a more specific MOS. For example, a combat medic, whose duties are to provide pre-hospital emergency treatment, may receive ASI training to become a cardiovascular specialist, a dialysis specialist or even a licensed practical nurse. For commissioned officers, training includes pre-commissioning training, known as Basic Officer Leader Course A, either at USMA or via ROTC, or by completing OCS. After commissioning, officers undergo branch specific training at the Basic Officer Leaders Course B, (formerly called Officer Basic Course), which varies in time and location according their future assignments. Officers will continue to attend standardized training at different stages of their career.




U.S. Army soldiers familiarizing with the latest INSAS 1B1 during exercise Yudh Abhyas 2015


Collective training at the unit level takes place at the unit's assigned station, but the most intensive training at higher echelons is conducted at the three combat training centers (CTC); the National Training Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin, California, the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC) at Fort Polk, Louisiana and the Joint Multinational Training Center (JMRC) at the Hohenfels Training Area in Hohenfels, Germany. ARFORGEN is the Army Force Generation process approved in 2006 to meet the need to continuously replenish forces for deployment, at unit level and for other echelons as required by the mission. Individual-level replenishment still requires training at a unit level, which is conducted at the continental U.S. (CONUS) replacement center (CRC) at Fort Bliss, in New Mexico and Texas before their individual deployment.[95]
Equipment[edit]
Main article: Equipment of the United States Army
Weapons[edit]




Lockheed Martin Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system used by the army for ballistic missile protection



Individual weapons

The army employs various individual weapons to provide light firepower at short ranges. The most common weapons used by the army are the compact variant of the M16 rifle, the M4 carbine,[96] as well as the 7.62×51mm variant of the FN SCAR for Army Rangers. The primary sidearm in the U.S. Army is the 9 mm M9 pistol; the M11 pistol is also used. Both handguns are to be replaced by the M17[97] through the Modular Handgun System program.[98] Soldiers are also equipped with various hand grenades, such as the M67 fragmentation grenade and M18 smoke grenade.
Many units are supplemented with a variety of specialized weapons, including the M249 SAW (Squad Automatic Weapon), to provide suppressive fire at the squad level.[99] Indirect fire is provided by the M320 grenade launcher. The M1014 Joint Service Combat Shotgun or the Mossberg 590 Shotgun are used for door breaching and close-quarters combat. The M14EBR is used by designated marksmen. Snipers use the M107 Long Range Sniper Rifle, the M2010 Enhanced Sniper Rifle and the M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper Rifle.




American troops of the 28th Infantry Division march down the Champs-Élysées, in the victory parade following the Liberation of Paris






3rd Infantry Division soldiers manning an M1A1 Abrams in Iraq



Crew served weapons

The army employs various crew-served weapons to provide heavy firepower at ranges exceeding that of individual weapons.
The M240 is the U.S. Army's standard Medium Machine Gun.[100] The M2 heavy machine gun is generally used as a vehicle-mounted machine gun. In the same way, the 40 mm MK 19 grenade machine gun is mainly used by motorized units.[101]
The U.S. Army uses three types of mortar for indirect fire support when heavier artillery may not be appropriate or available. The smallest of these is the 60 mm M224, normally assigned at the infantry company level.[102] At the next higher echelon, infantry battalions are typically supported by a section of 81 mm M252 mortars.[103] The largest mortar in the army's inventory is the 120 mm M120/M121, usually employed by mechanized units.[104]
Fire support for light infantry units is provided by towed howitzers, including the 105 mm M119A1[105] and the 155 mm M777 (which will replace the M198).[106]
The U.S. Army utilizes a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an Anti-Armor Capability. The AT4 is an unguided projectile that can destroy armor and bunkers at ranges up to 500 meters. The FIM-92 Stinger is a shoulder-launched, heat seeking anti-aircraft missile. The FGM-148 Javelin and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank guided missiles.
Vehicles[edit]




A US soldier on patrol with the support of a Humvee vehicle


U.S. Army doctrine puts a premium on mechanized warfare. It fields the highest vehicle-to-soldier ratio in the world as of 2009.[107]
The army's most common vehicle is the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), commonly called the Humvee, which is capable of serving as a cargo/troop carrier, weapons platform and ambulance, among many other roles.[108] While they operate a wide variety of combat support vehicles, one of the most common types centers on the family of HEMTT vehicles. The M1A2 Abrams is the army's main battle tank,[109] while the M2A3 Bradley is the standard infantry fighting vehicle.[110] Other vehicles include the Stryker,[111] the M113 armored personnel carrier[112] and multiple types of Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicles.
The Pentagon bought 25,000 MRAP vehicles since 2007 in 25 variants through rapid acquisition with no long-term plans for the platforms. The Army plans to divest 7,456 vehicles and retain 8,585. Of the total number of vehicles the Army is to keep, 5,036 are to be put in storage, 1,073 used for training and the remainder spread across the active force. The Oshkosh M-ATV will be kept the most at 5,681 vehicles, as it is smaller and lighter than other MRAPs for off-road mobility. The other most retained vehicle will be the Navistar MaxxPro Dash with 2,633 vehicles and 301 Maxxpro ambulances. Other MRAPs such as the Cougar, BAE Caiman, and larger MaxxPros will be disposed.[113]
The U.S. Army's principal artillery weapons are the M109A6 Paladin self-propelled howitzer[114] and the M270 Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS),[115] both mounted on tracked platforms and assigned to heavy mechanized units.
While the United States Army Aviation Branch operates a few fixed-wing aircraft, it mainly operates several types of rotary-wing aircraft. These include the AH-64 Apache attack helicopter,[116] the OH-58D Kiowa Warrior armed reconnaissance/light attack helicopter,[117] the UH-60 Black Hawk utility tactical transport helicopter[118] and the CH-47 Chinook heavy-lift transport helicopter.[119] Restructuring plans call for reduction of 750 aircraft and from 7 to 4 types.[120]
Under the Johnson-McConnell agreement of 1966, the Army agreed to limit its fixed-wing aviation role to administrative mission support (light unarmed aircraft which cannot operate from forward positions). For UAVs, the Army is deploying at least one company of drone MQ-1C Gray Eagles to each Active Army division.[121]
Uniforms[edit]
Main article: Uniforms of the United States Army
The Army Combat Uniform (ACU) currently features a digital Universal Camouflage Pattern (UCP) and is designed for use in woodland, desert and urban environments. However, soldiers operating in Afghanistan and trainees in Basic Combat Training (as of 2017),[122] are being issued a fire-resistant ACU with the "MultiCam" pattern, officially known as Operation Enduring Freedom Camouflage Pattern or "OCP".[123]




The Ranger Honor Platoon marching in the former service uniform






An element of the 18th Infantry Regiment, wearing ASUs, representing the United States at the 2010 Victory Day commemoration in Moscow


The standard garrison service uniform is the Army Service Uniform, which functions as both a garrison uniform (when worn with a white shirt and necktie) and a dress uniform (when worn with a white shirt and either a necktie for parades or a bow tie for after six p.m. or black tie events).
Berets[edit]
The U.S. Army's black beret is no longer worn with the new ACU for garrison duty, having been permanently replaced with the patrol cap. After years of complaints that it was not suited well for most work conditions, Army Chief of Staff General Martin Dempsey eliminated it for wear with the ACU in June 2011. Soldiers still wear berets who are currently in a unit in jump status, whether the wearer is parachute-qualified or not (maroon beret). Members of the 75th Ranger Regiment and the Airborne and Ranger Training Brigade (tan beret) and Special Forces (rifle green beret) may wear it with the Army Service Uniform for non-ceremonial functions. Unit commanders may still direct the wear of patrol caps in these units in training environments or motor pools.
Tents[edit]
The Army has relied heavily on tents to provide the various facilities needed while on deployment. The most common tent uses for the military are as temporary barracks (sleeping quarters), DFAC buildings (dining facilities), forward operating bases (FOBs), after action review (AAR), tactical operations center (TOC), morale, welfare and recreation (MWR) facilities, as well as security checkpoints. Furthermore, most of these tents are set up and operated through the support of Natick Soldier Systems Center.
The U.S. Army is beginning to use a more modern tent called the deployable rapid assembly shelter or DRASH. In 2008, DRASH became part of the Army's Standard Integrated Command Post System.[124]
3D printing[edit]
In November 2012, the U.S. Army developed a tactical 3D printing capability to allow it to rapidly manufacture critical components on the battlefield.[125]
See also[edit]


United States Army portal
Military of the United States portal




America's Army (Video games for recruitment)
Army CHESS (Computer Hardware Enterprise Software and Solutions)
Army National Guard
Comparative military ranks
History of the United States Army
List of active United States military aircraft
List of former United States Army medical units
List of wars involving the United States
Military–industrial complex
Officer Candidate School (United States Army)
Reserve Officers' Training Corps and Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps
Soldier's Creed
Structure of the United States Army
Timeline of United States military operations
Transformation of the United States Army
U.S. Army Combat Arms Regimental System
U.S. Army Regimental System
United States Military Academy
United States Army Basic Training
United States Army Center of Military History
United States Volunteers
Vehicle markings of the United States military
Warrant Officer Candidate School (United States Army)


Notes and references[edit]


^ Wright, Jr., Robert K. (1983). The Continental Army (Army Lineage Series). Washington, DC: Center of Military History, United States Army. ISBN 9780160019319. OCLC 8806011. 
^ Maass, John R. "June 14th: The Birthday of the U.S. Army". U.S. Army Center of Military History. Retrieved 30 October 2013. 
^ a b https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/agency/end-strength.htm
^ "World Air Forces 2017". Flightglobal: 17. Retrieved 10 February 2017. 
^ Usa, Ibp. U.S. Future Combat & Weapon Systems Handbook. p. 15. 
^ U.S. Army Official Branding Toolkit (PDF). Retrieved 2 August 2017. 
^ "Department of Defense Directive 1005.8". Permanent.access.gpo.gov. October 31, 1977. Retrieved 7 July 2017. Subject: "Order of Precedence of Members of Armed Forces of the United States When in Formation" (Paragraph 3. PRESCRIBED PROCEDURE) 
^ a b c "14 June: The Birthday of the U.S. Army". United States Army Center of Military History. Retrieved 1 July 2011.  an excerpt from Robert Wright, The Continental Army
^ Library of Congress, Journals of the Continental Congress, Volume 27
^ "Army Birthdays". United States Army Center of Military History. 15 November 2004. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 3 June 2010. 
^ "The United States Army - Organization". army.mil. Retrieved 1 April 2015. 
^ DA Pamphlet 10-1 Organization of the United States Army; Figure 1.2 Military Operations.
^ "10 USC 3062: Policy; composition; organized peace establishment". U.S. House of Representatives. Retrieved 21 August 2013. 
^ Cont'l Cong., Formation of the Continental Army, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 89–90 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Commission for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774-1789 96-7 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Instructions for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774-1789 100-1 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Resolution Changing "United Colonies" to "United States", in 5 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774-1789 747 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Ron Field and Richard Hook, The Seminole Wars 1818–58 (2009)
^ "The U.S.-Mexican War - PBS". pbs.org. Retrieved 1 April 2015. 
^ Tinkler, Robert. "Southern Unionists in the Civil War". csuchico.edu/. Retrieved 21 November 2016. 
^ McPherson, James M., ed. The Atlas of the Civil War, (Philadelphia, PA, 2010)
^ Maris Vinovskis (1990). Toward a social history of the American Civil War: exploratory essays. Cambridge University Press. p. 7. ISBN 0-521-39559-3
^ Cragg, Dan, ed., The Guide to Military Installations, Stackpole Books, Harrisburg, 1983, p. 272.
^ a b US Army TRADOC (16 September 2015). "Perkins discusses operationalizing the Army Operating Concept". YouTube. Retrieved 2 November 2017. 
^ Woodruff, Mark. Unheralded Victory: The Defeat of the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese Army 1961–1973 (Arlington, VA: Vandamere Press, 1999).
^ Wilson, John B. (1997). Maneuver and Firepower: The Evolution of Divisions and Separate Brigades. Washington, DC: Center of Military History, Chapter XII, for references see Note 48.
^ "Army National Guard Constitution". Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. 
^ Carafano, James, Total Force Policy and the Abrams Doctrine: Unfulfilled Promise, Uncertain Future, Foreign Policy Research Institute, 3 February 2005.
^ An Army at War: Change in the Midst of Conflict, p. 515, via Google Books
^ "10 Most Epic Tank Battles in Military History". www.militaryeducation.org. Retrieved 2 November 2017. 
^ VUA Citation
^ "These were the 6 most massive tank battles in US history". Wearethemighty.com. 24 March 2016. Retrieved 2 November 2017. 
^ Section 1101, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Years 1990 and 1991, Department of Defense Interim Report to Congress, September 1990 (see "rebalancing" as used in finance.)
^ Downey, Chris, The Total Force Policy and Effective Force, Air War College, 19 March 2004.
^ "September 11, 2001 Pentagon Victims". patriotresource.com. Retrieved 13 November 2015. 
^ "9/11 a day of remembrance"[permanent dead link]. The Star Press. Muncie, Indiana.
^ Burnham, G; Lafta, R; Doocy, S; Roberts, L (2006). John Pike, ed. "U.S. Casualties in Iraq". The Lancet. GlobalSecurity.org (published 4 September 2007). 368 (9545): 1421–1428. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69491-9. PMID 17055943. Archived from the original (web page) on 5 September 2007. Retrieved 16 January 2012. 
^ "The Human Cost of the War in Iraq: A Mortality Study, 2002–2006" (PDF).  (603 KB). By Gilbert Burnham, Shannon Doocy, Elizabeth Dzeng, Riyadh Lafta, and Les Roberts. A supplement to the second Lancet study.
^ 597 killed in 2003,[1], 23,984 killed from 2004 through 2009 (with the exceptions of May 2004 and March 2009), [2] 652 killed in May 2004, [3] 45 killed in March 2009, [4] 676 killed in 2010, [5] 451 killed in 2011 (with the exception of February), [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11][permanent dead link] "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2011.  "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2 October 2011. Retrieved 15 October 2011.  "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 11 November 2011. Retrieved 3 November 2011.  thus giving a total of 26,405 dead.
^ "DEFENSE SECRETARY GATES OBSERVES ARMY FUTURE COMBAT SYSTEMS PROGRESS". US Fed News Service. 9 May 2008. Retrieved 12 May 2017. 
^ "FCS Program Transitions to Army BCT Modernization". defencetalk.com. Defencetalk.com. 26 June 2009. Retrieved 21 November 2016. 
^ Shanker, Thom; Cooper, Helene (23 February 2014). "Pentagon Plans to Shrink Army to Pre-World War II Level". The New York Times Company. Retrieved 23 February 2014. 
^ "Kiowa Warriors pass torch to Apache attack helicopters in South Korea". Stars and Stripes. 26 January 2017. Retrieved 13 May 2017. 
^ Drwiega, Andrew. "Missions Solutions Summit: Army Leaders Warn of Rough Ride Ahead" Rotor&Wing, 4 June 2014. Accessed: 8 June 2014.
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 16 February 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2017. 
^ Center for Strategic & International Studies (29 April 2014). ""The Future Army," featuring U.S. General David G. Perkins". YouTube. Retrieved 2 November 2017. 
^ DA Pam 10-1 Organization of the United States Army; Figure 1-1. '"Army Organizations Execute Specific Functions and Assigned Missions"
^ Organization of the United States Army: America's Army 1775 – 1995, DA PAM 10–1. Headquarters, Department of the Army, Washington, 14 June 1994.
^ a b Finnegan, John Patrick; Romana Danysh (1998). "Chapter 2: World War I". In Jeffrey J. Clarke. Military Intelligence. Army Lineage Series. Washington, D.C., United States: Center of Military History, United States Army. online. ISBN 0160488281. OCLC 35741383. Archived from the original on 30 August 2009. 
^ a b Pullen, Randy (23 April 2008). "Army Reserve Marks First 100 Years". DefenceTalk. Archived from the original (online article) on 24 April 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2008. 
^ Department of Defense, Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, Military compensation background papers, Seventh edition, page 229. Department of Defense, 2005.
^ Haslam, Jonathan, Russia's Cold War: From the October Revolution to the Fall of the Wall (2011), Yale University Press
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 August 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2012. 
^ "LeBoeuf selected as USARAF deputy commanding general". 
^ Myers, Meghann (1 September 2017). "US Army Africa commander suspended, under investigation for sending suggestive messages to soldier's wife". 
^ "Commanding General, United States Army Africa". usaraf.army.mil. Retrieved 16 May 2016. 
^ News, A. B. C. (13 October 2017). "Two-star Army general relieved from duty for alleged inappropriate contacts". ABC News. 
^ "USARCENT | U.S. Army Central". Army.mil. Retrieved 12 March 2017. 
^ "Commanding General" (PDF). United States Army, Surface Deployment and Distribution Command. 7 September 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 March 2012. Retrieved 26 February 2012. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2015. Retrieved 2 February 2015. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011. 
^ U.S. Army (1 October 2010). "Army establishes Army Cyber Command". army.mil. Retrieved 28 June 2016. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 18 July 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2015. 
^ "8th Army chief vows firm readiness". Koreatimes.co.kr. 2 February 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2016. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2015. Retrieved 2 February 2015. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 27 January 2017. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2015. 
^ DAGO 2017-03, DESIGNATION OF THE UNITED STATES ARMY CIVILIAN HUMAN RESOURCES AGENCY AND ITS SUBORDINATE ELEMENTS AS DIRECT REPORTING UNIT, apd.army.mil, dated 4 January 2017, last accessed 13 January 2017
^ Lieutenant General Todd T. Semonite, Biography article, undated. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2017. Retrieved 15 February 2017. 
^ DAGO 2017-04, DESIGNATION OF UNITED STATES ARMY HUMAN RESOURCES COMMAND AND ITS SUBORDINATE ELEMENTS AS DIRECT REPORTING UNIT, apd.army.mil, dated 4 January 2017, last accessed 13 January 2017
^ AR 10-87, ARMY COMMANDS, ARMY SERVICE COMPONENT COMMANDS, AND DIRECT REPORTING UNITS, apd.army.mil, dated 4 September 2007, last accessed 13 January 2017
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2015. Retrieved 2 February 2015. 
^ Organization, United States Army
^ Perpich v. Department of Defense, 496 U.S. 334 (1990)
^ "10 U.S.C. 3013" (PDF). Retrieved 2 May 2016. 
^ "10 U.S.C. 3033" (PDF). Retrieved 2 May 2016. 
^ "10 U.S.C. 151" (PDF). Retrieved 2 May 2016. 
^ "10 U.S.C. 162" (PDF). Retrieved 2 May 2016. 
^ "CSA Odierno and SMA Chandler virtual town hall, Jan 6, 2015". Army.mil. Retrieved 2 May 2016. 
^ "Army offers up to $90K bonuses to lure troops back". 6 June 2017. 
^ "Needing troops, U.S. Army offers up to $90K bonuses to re-enlist". Daily-chronicle.com. Retrieved 2 November 2017. 
^ "First Army - Mission". army.mil. Retrieved 1 April 2015. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 February 2015. 
^ Army announces Afghanistan deployment for 1,000 soldiers, ArmyTimes, by Michelle Tan, dated 2 March 2016, last accessed 3 October 2016
^ "South Korean troops form combined division with U.S. Army". Army Times. 14 January 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015. 
^ "173rd Airborne Brigade Site Redirect". 
^ USASOC Headquarters Fact Sheet, from the USASOC official website, last accessed 8 October 2016
^ a b c From the Future Soldiers Web Site.
^ a b c "Army Regulation 600-20" (PDF). Retrieved 2 May 2016. 
^ "Department of Defense - Officer Rank Insignia". defense.gov. Retrieved 1 April 2015. 
^ From the Enlisted Soldiers Descriptions Web Site.
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 1 April 2012. 
^ (13 December 2017) CONUS Replacement Center receives new command CRC 5 transition to CRC 6
^ M4. U.S. Army Fact Files
^ OMelveny, Sean. "Army Picks Sig Sauer's P320 Handgun to Replace M9 Service Pistol". 
^ Individual Weapons Future Innovations, Project Manager Soldier Weapons.
^ M249, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M240, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ MK 19, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M224, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M252, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M120, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M119, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ John Pike. "M777 Lightweight 155mm howitzer (LW155)". globalsecurity.org. Retrieved 1 April 2015. 
^ Us Future Combat & Weapon Systems Handbook. Int'l Business Publications,. 30 March 2009. p. 15. ISBN 1-4387-5447-7. Retrieved 12 May 2017. 
^ HMMWV, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Abrams Archived 15 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine., U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Bradley, United States Army Fact Files
^ Stryker, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ M113, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ "Majority of MRAPs to be scrapped or stored". Military Times, 5 January 2014
^ Paladin, Army.mil
^ MLRS, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Apache, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Kiowa, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Blackhawk, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Chinook, U.S. Army Fact Files
^ Stevenson, Beth (22 January 2015), "US Army continues to face financial challenge of rotary fleet maintenance", Flightglobal, Reed Business Information, archived from the original on 23 January 2015, retrieved 23 January 2015 
^ Kyle Jahner, Army Times (3:35 p.m. EST January 8, 2015) "Army to build dedicated drone runway at Fort Bliss"
^ Luis Martinez ABC News (19 December 2017) Thousands of Army recruits head home for holidays
^ Lopez, C. (20 February 2010). "Soldiers to get new cammo pattern for wear in Afghanistan". U.S. Army. Retrieved 22 February 2010. 
^ NG, DHS Technologies to support SICPS/TMSS United Press International
^ "US army builds its own 3D printer". BBC News. Retrieved 2 November 2017. 



 This article incorporates public domain material from the United States Army Center of Military History document "Army Birthdays".

Further reading[edit]
Main article: Bibliography of United States military history

"Desert Storm/Shield Valorous Unit Award (VUA) Citations". US Army Center of Military History. Retrieved 26 December 2014. 
Bailey, Beth. America's Army: Making the All-Volunteer Force (2009) ISBN 0674035364
Bluhm, Jr,, Raymond K. (Editor-in-Chief); Andrade, Dale; Jacobs, Bruce; Langellier, John; Newell, Clayton R.; Seelinger, Matthew (2004). U.S. Army: A Complete History (Beaux Arts ed.). Arlington, VA: The Army Historical Foundation. p. 744. ISBN 978-0-88363-640-4. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
Chambers, John Whiteclay, ed. The Oxford Guide to American Military History (1999) online at many libraries
Clark, J. P. Preparing for War: The Emergence of the Modern U.S. Army, 1815–1917 (Harvard UP, 2017) 336 pp.
Coffman, Edward M. The War to End All Wars: The American Military Experience in World War I (1998), a standard history
Kretchik, Walter E. U.S. Army Doctrine: From the American Revolution to the War on Terror (University Press of Kansas; 2011) 392 pages; studies military doctrine in four distinct eras: 1779–1904, 1905–1944, 1944–1962, and 1962 to the present.
Woodward, David R. The American Army and the First World War (Cambridge University Press, 2014). 484 pp. online review

External links[edit]

Find more aboutUnited States Armyat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Army.mil – United States Army official website
Army.mil/photos – United States Army featured photos
GoArmy.com – official recruiting site
U.S. Army Collection – Missouri History Museum
Finding Aids for researching the U.S. Army (compiled by the United States Army Center of Military History)
US-militaria.com – The U.S. Army during the Second World War







v
t
e


United States Army



Leadership



Secretary of the Army
Under Secretary of the Army
Chief of Staff
Vice Chief of Staff
4-star generals
Army Staff Senior Warrant Officer
Sergeant Major of the Army
House Armed Services Committee (House Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces)
Senate Committee on Armed Services (Senate Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces)





Components
and
commands



Regular Army
Army Reserve
Army National Guard
Active Units
Reorganization plan of United States Army




Army commands



Forces
Training and Doctrine
Materiel





Service components



Africa
Central
Europe
Pacific
North
South
Special Operations
Surface Deployment and Distribution
Space and Missile Defense
Cyber Command





Direct reporting
units



Second Army
Medical
Intelligence and Security
Criminal Investigation
Corps of Engineers
Military District of Washington
Test and Evaluation
Military Academy
Reserve
Acquisition Support Center
Installation Management
War College





Field armies



First
Second
Third
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh
Eighth
Ninth





Branches



Acquisition Corps
Adjutant General's Corps
Air Defense Artillery Branch
Armor Branch
Aviation Branch
Army Band
Chaplain Corps
Chemical Corps
Civil Affairs Corps
Corps of Engineers
Dental Corps
Field Artillery Branch
Finance Corps
Infantry Branch
Inspector General's Corps
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Logistics Branch
Medical Corps
Medical Service Corps
Medical Specialist Corps
Military Intelligence Corps
Military Police Corps
Nurse Corps
Ordnance Corps
Psychological Operations
Quartermaster Corps
Signal Corps
Special Forces
Transportation Corps
Veterinary Corps








Installations



United States and Overseas
Germany
Kosovo
Kuwait
South Korea





Training



Basic Training
BOLC
ROTC (ECP)
OCS
WOBC
WOCS
Military Academy (West Point)
MOS





Uniforms and
insignia



Awards and decorations
Badges
Branch
Officer
Warrant
Enlisted

World War I
World War II


Uniforms





Equipment



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles





Premier
ensembles



Army Field Band
Army Band
Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps
West Point Band





History and
traditions



History
Continental Army
Union Army
National Army
Army of the United States
Center of Military History
Institute of Heraldry
America's Army
Army Art Program
Flag
National Museum
West Point Museum
Rangers
U.S. Army Regimental System
Soldier's Creed
"The Army Goes Rolling Along"
Division nicknames
Draft
Service numbers








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


United States Armed Forces






 Book
 Portal

A
MC
N
AF
CG


 Category

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Navbox

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Leadership



Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
Secretary of Defense
Deputy Secretary of Defense
Secretary of Homeland Security
Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security
Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Chairman
Vice Chairman


United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:

Senate
House


Active duty four-star officers
United States military seniority
National Security Act of 1947
Goldwater–Nichols Act





Organization




Service departments



Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
Navy (Secretary)
Air Force (Secretary)
Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard





Branches



Army (Chief of Staff)
Marine Corps (Commandant)
Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
Air Force (Chief of Staff)
Coast Guard (Commandant)





Reserve components



Reserves:

Army
Marine Corps Reserve
N
AF
CG


National Guard:

A
AF







Civilian auxiliaries



Military Auxiliary Radio System
Merchant Marine
Civil Air Patrol
Coast Guard Auxiliary





Unified Combatant Command



Northern
Central
European
Pacific
Southern
Africa
Special Operations
Strategic
Transportation








Structure



United States Code

Title 10
Title 14
Title 32
Title 50


The Pentagon
Installations
Units:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Logistics
Media
Unit mottoes





Operations and history



Current deployments
Conflicts
Wars
Timeline
History:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Colonial
World War II
Civil affairs
African Americans
Asian Americans
Buddhist Americans
Jewish Americans
Muslim Americans
Pakistani Americans
Sikh Americans
Historiography:

Army Center of Military History
MC History Division
Naval History and Heritage Command
Air Force Historical Research Agency


American official war artists:

Army Art Program
AF Art Program







Personnel




Training



MEPS
ASVAB
Recruit training:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Officer candidate school:

A
MC
N
AF


Warrant:

A
MC


Service academies:

A (prep)
N (prep)
AF (prep)
CG
Merchant Marine


ROTC

A:ECP
MC/N
AF


Medical
Other education





Uniforms



Uniforms:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Awards & decorations:

Inter-service
A
MC/N
AF
CG
Foreign
International
Devices


Badges:

Identification
A
MC
N
AF
CG







Ranks



Enlisted:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Warrant officers
Officer:

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Other



Oath:

Enlistment
Office


Creeds & Codes:

Code of Conduct
NCO
A
MC
N
AF
CG


Service numbers:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
Pay
Uniform Code of Military Justice
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Military Health System/TRICARE
Separation
Veterans Affairs
Conscription
Chiefs of Chaplains:

A
MC
N
AF
CG










Equipment



A
MC:

vehicles
weapons
other


N
AF
CG




Land



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles (active)





Sea



All watercraft
Ships:

A
N (active)
AF
CG
MSC


Weapons:

N
CG


Aircraft:

N
CG


Reactors





Air



Aircraft

World War I
active


Aircraft designation
Missiles
Helicopter arms





Other



Nuclear football
Electronics (designations)
Flags:

A
MC
N
AF
CG
Ensign
Jack
Guidons


Food
WMDs:

Nuclear
Biological
Chemical













Legend
A = Army
MC = Marine Corps
N = Navy
AF = Air Force
CG = Coast Guard












v
t
e


United States Department of Defense






Headquarters: The Pentagon


James Mattis, Secretary of Defense
Patrick M. Shanahan, Deputy Secretary of Defense










Office of the Secretary of Defense
(including Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities)







Deputy Secretary of Defense



Deputy's Advisory Working Group
Office of Net Assessment
Special Access Program Oversight Committee





Under Secretary of Defense
for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics



Director, Defense Research and Engineering
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Missile Defense Agency
Defense Contract Management Agency
Defense Logistics Agency
Defense Technical Information Center
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
Office of Economic Adjustment
Defense Acquisition University
Defense Acquisition Board





Under Secretary of Defense for Policy



Defense Security Cooperation Agency
Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency
Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee





Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)



Defense Contract Audit Agency
Defense Finance and Accounting Service





Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness



Defense Commissary Agency
Department of Defense Education Activity
DoD Human Resources Activity
Military Health System
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute





Under Secretary of Defense
for Intelligence



Defense Intelligence Agency
Defense Security Service
Defense Information Systems Agency
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency (Director)





Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs



Defense Media Activity (American Forces Press Service, American Forces Radio and Television Service, Stars and Stripes, The Pentagon Channel)





General Counsel of the Department of Defense



Defense Legal Services Agency





Director of Administration and Management



Pentagon Force Protection Agency
Washington Headquarters Services



















Military Departments







Department of the Army



Secretary of the Army
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Army
Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology
Assistant Secretary for Civil Works
Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
General Counsel of the Army
The Administrative Assistant
The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army
Vice Chief of Staff of the Army
Sergeant Major of the Army
Deputy Chief of Staff G-8
Chief of Chaplains
Judge Advocate General
Provost Marshal General
Surgeon General
U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army





Department of the Navy



Secretary of the Navy
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Navy
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Installations and Environment)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisitions)
General Counsel of the Navy
Judge Advocate General
Naval Criminal Investigative Service
Naval Inspector General
Headquarters Marine Corps: Commandant of the Marine Corps
Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps
Chaplain
U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps
Office of the Chief of Naval Operations: Chief of Naval Operations
Vice Chief of Naval Operations
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
Director of Naval Reactors
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Naval Personnel
Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy





Department of the Air Force



Secretary of the Air Force
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Air Force
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Logistics)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs)
General Counsel of the Air Force
Air Force Office of Special Investigations
The Air Staff: Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Safety
Chief Scientist
Judge Advocate General
Surgeon General
U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands
Direct Reporting Units
Field Operating Agencies
















Joint Chiefs of Staff






Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman
Joint Requirements Oversight Council
Director of the Joint Staff
Joint Staff
National Military Command Center
Alternate National Military Command Center
National Defense University













Combatant Commands






Africa Command
Central Command
European Command
Northern Command
Pacific Command
Southern Command
Special Operations Command
Strategic Command (Cyber Command)
Transportation Command













National Guard Bureau






Chief of the National Guard Bureau
Air National Guard
Army National Guard













Office of the Inspector General






Defense Criminal Investigative Service















v
t
e


NATO Land Forces



Land forces



Albania

Albanian Land Force
Albanian Military Police


Belgium

Belgian Land Component
Belgian Medical Component


Bulgarian Land Forces
Canadian Army
Croatian Army
Czech Republic

Czech Land Forces
Czech Castle Guard


Denmark

Royal Danish Army
Danish Army Home Guard


Estonia

Estonian Land Forces
Estonian Defence League


France

French Army
French National Gendarmerie
French National Guard


Germany

German Army
German Joint Support Service
German Joint Medical Service


Hellenic Army
Hungarian Ground Forces
Iceland Crisis Response Unit
Italy

Italian Army
Italian Carabinieri


Latvia

Latvian Land Forces
Latvian National Guard


Lithuania

Lithuanian Land Force
Lithuanian Special Operations Force


Luxembourg Army
Montenegrin Ground Army
Netherlands

Royal Netherlands Army
Royal Netherlands Marechaussee


Norway

Norwegian Army
Norwegian Home Guard


Poland

Polish Land Forces
Polish Special Forces
Polish Territorial Defence Force


Portuguese Army
Romanian Land Forces
Ground Forces of the Slovak Republic
Slovenian Ground Force
Spain

Spanish Army
Spanish Royal Guard
Common Corps of the Spanish Armed Forces
Military Emergencies Unit


Turkey

Turkish Land Forces
Turkish Gendarmerie General Command


British Army
United States Army





Maritime land forces



Military Police Company of the Bulgarian Naval Forces Command
Croatian Naval Security Company
Estonian Naval Base Defense Company
French Fusiliers Marins
German Naval Force Protection Battalion
Italian Navy San Marco Marine Brigade
Netherlands Marine Corps
Portuguese Marine Corps
Romanian Naval Forces 307th Marine Battalion
Spanish Navy Marines
Turkish Naval Amphibious Marine Brigade
British Royal Marines
United States Marine Corps





Air force land forces



Belgian Air Component Force Protection Squadron
Military Police Company of the Bulgarian Air Forces Command
Czech Air Force Security Squadrons
Estonian Air Force Base Defense Operations Center
French Fusiliers Commandos de l'Air
German Air Force Regiment
Latvian Air Force Security Platoon
Lituanian Air Force Air Defence Battalion
Montenegrin Air Force Air Base Security Platoon
Royal Norwegian Air Force Base Defense Squadron
Portuguese Polícia Aérea
British Royal Air Force Regiment
United States Air Force Security Forces









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 135579316
LCCN: n79063202
ISNI: 0000 0001 2163 2208
GND: 2188-X
SUDOC: 026376687
BNF: cb11863615b (data)
IATH: w6km312r











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Army&oldid=817179754"					Categories: United States ArmyUniformed services of the United StatesMilitary units and formations established in 17751775 establishments in the Thirteen ColoniesHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2017Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from April 2017Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Army Center of Military HistoryCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers