This article is about the 18th President of the United States. For others with the same name, see Ulysses S. Grant (disambiguation).
"General Grant" redirects here. For other uses, see General Grant (disambiguation).


Ulysses S. Grant



President Grant






18th President of the United States


In office
March 4, 1869 – March 4, 1877


Vice President



Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873)
Henry Wilson (1873–1875)
None (1875–1877)





Preceded by
Andrew Johnson


Succeeded by
Rutherford B. Hayes


6th Commanding General of the United States Army


In office
March 9, 1864 – March 4, 1869


President
Abraham Lincoln
Andrew Johnson


Preceded by
Henry W. Halleck


Succeeded by
William Tecumseh Sherman





Personal details


Born
Hiram Ulysses Grant
(1822-04-27)April 27, 1822
Point Pleasant, Ohio, U.S.


Died
July 23, 1885(1885-07-23) (aged 63)
Wilton, New York, U.S.


Resting place
General Grant National Memorial
Manhattan, New York


Political party
Republican


Spouse(s)
Julia Grant (m. 1848)


Children
Frederick, Ulysses Jr., Nellie, and Jesse


Parents
Jesse Root Grant
Hannah Simpson


Alma mater
United States Military Academy


Occupation
Soldier, politician


Signature



Military service


Allegiance
 United States


Service/branch

 United States Army

Union Army




Years of service
1839–1854
1861–1869


Rank
 General of the Army


Commands



Company F, 4th Infantry
21st Illinois Infantry Regiment
District of Southeast Missouri
District of Cairo
Army of the Tennessee
Division of the Mississippi
United States Army





Battles/wars
 Mexican–American War
 American Civil War








This article is part of
a series about
Ulysses S. Grant







Birthplace
Early life and career



American Civil War


American Civil War Service

Campaigns: Vicksburg
Chattanooga
Overland
Petersburg
Appomattox




General Order No. 11



Post-war army service



President of the United States

Presidency



1868 presidential campaign

Election




1st inauguration


1872 reelection campaign

Election




2nd inauguration


Reconstruction
15th Amendment


Scandals
Reforms
Grantism
Peace Policy
Judicial Appointments


Post-Presidency

Later life
World tour
3rd term bid
Tomb
Memorial
Historical reputation
Depictions
Memoirs
Bibliography








v
t
e





Ulysses S. Grant (born Hiram Ulysses Grant,[a] April 27, 1822 – July 23, 1885) was a prominent United States Army general during the American Civil War and Commanding General at the conclusion of that war. He was elected as the 18th President of the United States in 1868, serving from 1869 to 1877. As Commanding General, Grant worked closely with President Abraham Lincoln to lead the Union Army to victory over the Confederacy. After Lincoln's assassination, Grant's assignment in implementing Reconstruction often put him at odds with President Andrew Johnson, Lincoln's successor. Twice elected president, Grant led the Republicans in their effort to remove the vestiges of Confederate nationalism and slavery, protect African-American citizenship and civil rights, implement reconstruction and support economic prosperity. Grant's presidency has often been criticized for its scandals and for his failure to alleviate the economic depression following the Panic of 1873, but modern scholarship regards him as a president who performed a difficult job during the early post Civil War era.
Grant graduated in 1843 from the United States Military Academy at West Point and served in the Mexican–American War. After the war, he married Julia Dent in 1848, and together they had four children. Grant retired from the Army in 1854 and struggled financially in civilian life. When the Civil War began in 1861, he rejoined the U.S. Army and quickly rose through the ranks. In 1862, Grant took control of Kentucky and most of Tennessee, and led Union forces to victory in the Battle of Shiloh, earning a reputation as an aggressive commander. In July 1863, after a series of coordinated battles, Grant defeated Confederate armies and seized Vicksburg, giving the Union control of the Mississippi River and dividing the Confederacy in two. After Grant's victories in the Chattanooga Campaign, Lincoln promoted him to lieutenant general and Commanding General of the Army in March 1864. Grant confronted Robert E. Lee in a series of bloody battles, trapping Lee's army in their defense of Richmond. Grant coordinated a series of devastating campaigns in other theaters, as well. In April 1865, Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox, effectively ending the war. Historians have hailed Grant's military genius, and his strategies are featured in military history textbooks, but a minority contend that he won by brute force rather than superior strategy.
With the close of the Civil War, Grant led the army's supervision of Reconstruction in the former Confederate states. Elected president in 1868, he stabilized the nation during that turbulent period, prosecuted the Ku Klux Klan, briefly used the military to enforce laws in the south and created the Department of Justice while bolstering the Republican Party in the South. Grant also employed the Army to supervise new elections in the South with universal male suffrage. When blacks in the South came under violent attack from whites, Grant tried to protect them by signing three civil rights acts into law. In 1871, he created the first Civil Service Commission, to appease reformers. The Democrats and Liberal Republicans united behind Grant's opponent in the presidential election of 1872, but Grant was reelected by a strong margin. In his second term, the Republican coalitions in the South splintered and were defeated as a faction of white Southern "Redeemers" regained control of Southern state governments using violence, voter fraud, and racist appeal. Although personally regarded as honest, Grant faced charges of corruption in his administration more than any 19th Century president. Grant's Peace Policy with Native Americans was a bold departure, but historians agree that, as with Reconstruction, it ended in failure.
In foreign policy, Grant sought to increase trade and influence while remaining at peace with the world. With Secretary of State Hamilton Fish, he successfully resolved the Alabama claims through the Treaty of Washington with Great Britain. Grant and Fish negotiated a peaceful resolution with Spain over the Virginius Affair. Congress rejected Grant's initiative to annex the Dominican Republic, creating a rift among Republicans. His administration implemented a gold standard and sought to strengthen the dollar. Grant's immediate response to the Panic of 1873 failed to halt a severe industrial depression that produced high unemployment, deflation, and bankruptcies. When he left office in 1877, he embarked on a two and a half year world tour that captured favorable global attention for him and the United States.
In 1880, Grant was unsuccessful in obtaining the Republican presidential nomination for a third term. Facing severe investment reversals and dying of throat cancer, he wrote his memoirs, which proved to be a major critical and financial success. His death in 1885 prompted an outpouring in support of national unity. Historical assessments of Grant's legacy have varied considerably over the years. His popular reputation focuses on his drinking, which historians agree did not adversely affect his military campaigns. Early historical evaluations were mostly negative about Grant's presidency. Scholars continue to rank his presidency below the average, but modern appreciation for Grant's support of civil rights has helped improve his historical reputation.



Contents


1 Early life and education
2 Early military career and personal life

2.1 West Point and first assignment
2.2 Mexican American War
2.3 Pacific duty and resignation


3 Civilian struggles and politics
4 Civil War

4.1 Early commands
4.2 Belmont, Forts Henry and Donelson
4.3 Shiloh and aftermath
4.4 Vicksburg campaign
4.5 Chattanooga and promotion
4.6 Overland Campaign and Petersburg siege
4.7 Appomattox and victory
4.8 Lincoln's assassination


5 Commanding General

5.1 Reconstruction
5.2 Relationship with Johnson
5.3 Election of 1868


6 Presidency (1869–77)

6.1 Later Reconstruction and civil rights
6.2 Indian peace policy
6.3 Foreign affairs
6.4 Gold standard and the Gold Ring
6.5 Election of 1872 and second term
6.6 Panic of 1873 and loss of Congress
6.7 Gilded Age corruption and reform
6.8 Election of 1876
6.9 Cabinet


7 Post-presidency

7.1 World tour and diplomacy
7.2 Third term attempt
7.3 Business reversals
7.4 Memoirs, pension, and death


8 Historical reputation
9 Memorials and presidential library
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 Bibliography
14 External links



Early life and education
Further information: Early life and career of Ulysses S. Grant




Grant's birthplace, Point Pleasant, Ohio


Hiram Ulysses Grant was born in Point Pleasant, Ohio, on April 27, 1822, to Jesse Root Grant, a tanner and merchant, and Hannah Grant (née Simpson).[1] His ancestors Matthew and Priscilla Grant arrived aboard the Mary and John at Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630.[2] Grant's great-grandfather fought in the French and Indian War, and his grandfather, Noah, served in the American Revolution at Bunker Hill.[3] Afterward, Noah settled in Pennsylvania and married Rachel Kelley, the daughter of an Irish pioneer.[4] Their son Jesse (Ulysses's father) was a Whig Party supporter and abolitionist.[5]
Jesse Grant moved to Point Pleasant in 1820 and found work as a foreman in a tannery.[6] He soon met his future wife, Hannah, and the two were married on June 24, 1821.[7] Ten months later Hannah gave birth to their first child, a son.[8] At a family gathering several weeks later the boy's name, Ulysses, was drawn from ballots placed in a hat. Wanting to honor his father-in-law, Jesse declared the boy to be Hiram Ulysses, though he would always refer to him as Ulysses.[9][b]
In 1823, the family moved to the village of Georgetown, Ohio, where five more siblings were born: Simpson, Clara, Orvil, Jennie, and Mary.[11] At the age of five, young Grant began his formal education, starting at a subscription school and later was enrolled in two private schools.[12] In the winter of 1836–1837, Grant was a student at Maysville Seminary, and in the autumn of 1838 he attended John Rankin's academy. In his youth, Grant developed an unusual ability to ride, work with, and control horses.[13] Expressing a strong dislike for the tannery, Grant's father instead put this ability to use giving Ulysses work driving wagon loads of supplies and transporting people.[14] Unlike his siblings, Grant was not forced to attend church by his Methodist parents.[15][c] For the rest of his life, he prayed privately and never officially joined any denomination.[16] To others, including late in life, his own son, Grant appeared to be an agnostic.[17] He inherited some of Hannah's Methodist piety and quiet nature while adopting his father's Whig political inclinations.[18]
Early military career and personal life




Second lieutenant Grant in full dress uniform in 1843


West Point and first assignment
Grant's father wrote to Representative Thomas L. Hamer requesting that he nominate Ulysses to the United States Military Academy (USMA) at West Point, New York. When a spot opened in March 1839, Hamer nominated the 16-year-old Grant.[19] He mistakenly wrote down "Ulysses S. Grant", which became Grant's adopted name.[20][d] Initially reluctant because of concerns about his academic ability, Grant entered the academy on July 1, 1839, as a cadet and trained there for four years.[23] On Sundays, cadets were required to march to and attend services at the academy's church, a requirement that Grant disliked.[24] His nickname became "Sam" among army colleagues since the initials "U.S." also stood for "Uncle Sam".[25]
Grant developed a reputation as the "most proficient" horseman and set a high-jump record at the academy that stood for 25 years.[26] While studying at the academy his greatest interest was horses.[27] Seeking relief from military routine, he also studied under Romantic artist Robert Walter Weir and produced nine surviving artworks.[28] He spent more time reading books from the library than his academic texts, frequently reading works by James Fenimore Cooper and others.[29] Initially Grant was indifferent to military life, but within a year he reexamined his desire to leave the academy and later wrote, "on the whole I like this place very much".[30] Quiet by nature, Grant established a few intimate friends among fellow cadets, including Frederick Tracy Dent and James Longstreet. He was inspired both by the Commandant, Captain Charles F. Smith and by General Winfield Scott, who visited the academy to review the cadets. Grant later wrote of the military life, "there is much to dislike, but more to like."[31]
Grant graduated on July 1, 1843, ranked 21st in a class of 39, and was promoted to the rank brevet second lieutenant.[32] Glad to leave the academy, he planned to resign his commission after his four-year term of duty.[33] Despite his excellent horsemanship, he was not assigned to the cavalry, but to the 4th Infantry Regiment. He served as regimental quartermaster, managing supplies and equipment.[34] Grant's first assignment took him to the Jefferson Barracks near St. Louis, Missouri.[35] Commanded by Colonel Stephen W. Kearny, the barracks was the nation's largest military base in the west.[36] Grant was happy with his new commander, but looked forward to the end of his military service and a possible teaching career.[37]
He spent some of his time in Missouri visiting Dent's family and became engaged to Dent's sister, Julia, in 1844.[37] Four years later on August 22, 1848, they were married at Julia's home in St. Louis. Grant's abolitionist father Jesse, who disapproved of the Dents owning slaves, refused to attend their wedding, which took place without either of Grant's parents.[38] Grant was flanked by three fellow West Point graduates, all dressed in their blue uniforms, including Longstreet, Julia's cousin.[39][e] At the end of the month, Julia was nevertheless warmly received by Grant's family in Bethel, Ohio.[42] They had four children: Frederick, Ulysses Jr. ("Buck"), Ellen ("Nellie"), and Jesse.[43] After the wedding, Grant obtained a two-month extension to his leave and returned to St. Louis when he decided, with a wife to support, that he would remain in the army.[44]
Mexican American War




Monterrey street fighting, 1846


Main articles: Mexican–American War and Mexican Cession
After rising tensions with Mexico following the United States' annexation of Texas, war broke out in 1846. During the conflict, Grant distinguished himself as a daring and competent soldier.[45] Before the war, President John Tyler had ordered Grant's unit to Louisiana as part of the Army of Observation under Major General Zachary Taylor.[46] In September 1846, Tyler's successor, James K. Polk, unable to provoke Mexico into war at Corpus Christi, Texas, ordered Taylor to march 150 miles south to the Rio Grande. Marching south to Fort Texas, to prevent a Mexican siege, Grant experienced combat for the first time on May 8, 1846, at the Battle of Palo Alto.[47]
While serving as regimental quartermaster, Grant yearned for a combat role; when finally allowed, he led a cavalry charge at the Battle of Resaca de la Palma, demonstrating his equestrian ability at Monterrey by carrying a dispatch past snipers while hanging off the side of his horse, keeping the animal between him and the enemy.[48] Before leaving the city he stopped at a house occupied by wounded Americans, giving them assurance he would send for help.[49] Polk, wary of Taylor's growing popularity, divided his forces, sending some troops (including Grant's unit) to form a new army under Major General Winfield Scott.[50] Traveling by sea, Scott's army landed at Veracruz and advanced toward Mexico City.[51] The army met the Mexican forces at the battles of Molino del Rey and Chapultepec outside Mexico City.[52] For his bravery at Molino del Rey, Grant was brevetted first lieutenant.[45] At San Cosmé, men under Grant's direction dragged a disassembled howitzer into a church steeple, reassembled it, and bombarded nearby Mexican troops.[52] His bravery and initiative earned him his second brevet promotion to captain.[53] On September 14, 1847, Scott's army marched into the city; Mexico ceded the vast territory, including California, to the U.S. on February 2, 1848.[54]
During the war, Grant studied the tactics and strategies of Scott and Taylor, later writing in his memoirs that this is how he learned about military leadership.[55] In retrospect, he identified his leadership style with Taylor's. However, Grant also wrote that the Mexican War was wrong and the territorial gains were designed to expand slavery, stating, "I was bitterly opposed to the measure...and to this day, regard the war, which resulted, as one of the most unjust ever waged by a stronger against a weaker nation." He opined that the Civil War was punishment on the nation for its aggression in Mexico.[56] During the war, Grant discovered his "moral courage" and began to consider a career in the army.[57]
Pacific duty and resignation




Grant believed Pacific Northwest Indians were harmless. Chinook Indian Plankhouse 1850s.


Grant's first post-war assignments took him and Julia to Detroit and then to Sackets Harbor, New York.[58] In 1852, Grant was ordered to the Pacific Northwest, traveling the New York-Panama oceanic route.[59] Julia, eight months pregnant with Ulysses Jr., did not accompany him.[60] In Panama, an outbreak of cholera among his fellow travelers caused 150 fatalities; Grant arranged makeshift transportation and hospital facilities and helped nurse the sick. In August, Grant arrived in San Francisco, and his next assignment sent him north to Vancouver Barracks in the Oregon Territory (subsequently Washington Territory in March 1853).[61][f] To supplement a military salary which was inadequate to support his family, Grant speculated and failed at several business ventures, confirming his father's belief that he had no head for business.[63] Grant assured Julia in a letter that local Native Americans were harmless, while he developed an empathy for the plight of Indians from the "unjust treatment" by white men.[64]
Promoted to captain on August 5, 1853, Grant was assigned to command Company F, 4th Infantry, at the newly constructed Fort Humboldt in California.[65] He arrived at the fort on January 5, 1854, and reported to its commander Lieutenant Colonel Robert C. Buchanan.[66] Grant was bored and depressed about being separated from his wife Julia, and he began to drink.[67] An officer who roomed with Grant said he "fell too much under the influence of liquor to properly perform his duties. Colonel Buchanan demanded he should resign." Historian Jean Edward Smith says, "The story rings true." [68] When Grant was reprimanded by Buchanan for one drinking episode, Grant told Buchanan if he did not reform he would resign. One Sunday, Grant was rumored to have been found at his company's paytable influenced by drink. Keeping his pledge to Buchanan, Grant resigned, effective July 31, 1854, without explanation.[69] Buchanan endorsed Grant's letter of resignation but did not submit any report that verified the incident.[70][g] Grant was neither arrested nor faced court-martial, while the War Department stated, "Nothing stands against his good name."[74] Grant said years later, "the vice of intemperance (drunkenness) had not a little to do with my decision to resign."[75] With no means of support, Grant returned to St. Louis and reunited with his family, uncertain about his future.[76]
Civilian struggles and politics




"Hardscrabble", the farm home Grant built in Missouri for his family


At age 32, while living in Covington, Kentucky with no civilian vocation, Grant struggled through seven financially lean years. His father offered him a place in the Galena, Illinois, branch of the family's leather business on condition that Julia and the children stay with her parents in Missouri or with the Grants in Kentucky. Ulysses and Julia opposed another separation and declined the offer. In 1855, Grant farmed on his brother-in-law's property near St. Louis, using slaves owned by Julia's father.[77] The farm was not successful and to earn money he sold firewood on St. Louis street corners.[78] Earning only $50 a month, wearing his faded army jacket, an unkempt Grant desperately looked for work.[79] The next year, the Grants moved to land on Julia's father's farm, and built a home Grant called "Hardscrabble". Julia disliked the rustic house, which she described as an "unattractive cabin".[80] The Panic of 1857 devastated farmers, including Grant, who reaching a low ebb financially, pawned his gold watch to pay for Christmas.[81] In 1858, Grant rented out Hardscrabble and moved his family to Julia's father's 850-acre estate, a plantation that employed slave labor.[82] That fall, after a bout of malaria, Grant retired from farming.[83][h]
The same year, Grant acquired a slave from his father-in-law, a thirty-five-year-old man named William Jones.[85] In March 1859, Grant freed William, worth about $1,500, instead of selling him at a time when he desperately needed money.[86] Grant moved to St. Louis, taking on a partnership with Julia's cousin Harry Boggs working in real estate business as a bill collector, again without success, and at Julia's recommendation dissolved his partnership.[87] In August, Grant applied for a position as county engineer, believing his education qualified him for the job. His application came with thirty-five notable recommendations, but Grant correctly assumed the position would be given on the basis of political affiliation and was passed over as he was believed to share his father-in-law's Democratic sentiments.[88] In April 1860, Grant and his family moved north to Galena, accepting a position in his father's leather goods business run by his younger brothers Simpson and Orvil.[89][i] In a few months, Ulysses paid off the debts he acquired in Missouri.[91] Ulysses and family attended the local Methodist church and he soon established himself as a reputable citizen of Galena.[92]
In the 1856 presidential election, Grant cast his first presidential vote for Democrat James Buchanan, later saying he was really voting against Republican John C. Frémont over concern that his anti-slavery position would lead to southern secession and war.[93] Although Grant was not an abolitionist, neither was he considered a "slavery man", and could not bring himself to force slaves to do work.[94] By the 1860 election, Grant was openly Democratic, favoring Democrat Stephen A. Douglas over Abraham Lincoln, and Lincoln over the Southern Democrat, John C. Breckinridge. Lacking the residency requirements in Illinois at the time, he could not vote.[95] After Lincoln was elected, Southern states seceded from the Union forming a Confederacy, seizing federal forts and institutions.[96]
Civil War
Main article: Ulysses S. Grant and the American Civil War




Brig. Gen. Grant in 1861


Early commands
On April 12, 1861, the American Civil War began as Confederate troops attacked Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina.[97] Grant wrote to his father in a letter of April 21 that "we have a government and laws and a flag, and they must all be sustained. There are but two parties now, Traitors and Patriots ..."[98] Two days after the attack, Lincoln called for 75,000 volunteers and a mass meeting was held in Galena to assess the crisis and encourage recruitment. Before the attack, Grant had not reacted strongly to Southern secession. The news came as a shock in Galena, and Grant shared his neighbors' concern about the war.[99] The captain of the local militia nominated Grant, the only man in town with professional military training, to lead the recruitment effort.[100] A speech by his father's attorney, John Aaron Rawlins, stirred Grant's patriotism.[101] Rawlins later became Grant's aide-de-camp and close friend during the war. Grant recalled with satisfaction that after that first recruitment meeting in Galena, "I never went into our leather store again."[102]
Grant quickly raised and recruited a company of volunteers, and was given the captaincy, accompanying them to Springfield.[103] He perceived that the war would be fought mostly by volunteers, not career soldiers.[104] Governor Richard Yates offered Grant a militia commission to recruit and train volunteer units, which he accepted, but still wanted a field command. He made several efforts through his professional contacts. Major General George B. McClellan refused to see him, remembering the day in Oregon in 1853 when he saw Grant on a drunken spree.[105] With the aid of his advocate, Representative Elihu B. Washburne of Illinois, Grant was promoted to Colonel on June 14 and charged with disciplining the unruly 21st Illinois Volunteer Infantry Regiment.[106] Transferred to northern Missouri, Grant was promoted to Brigadier General, backdated to May 17, 1861.[107]
Control of the Mississippi River was the key to victory in the Western theater. Believing Grant was a general of "dogged persistence" and "iron will", Major General John C. Frémont assigned Grant to command troops on the Mississippi at Cairo, Illinois at the end of August (passing over generals John Pope and Benjamin Prentiss).[108] Frémont dismissed rumors of Grant's drunkenness years earlier in the regular army, saying there was something about Grant's manner "that was sufficient to counteract the influence of what they said."[109] Cairo was a bustling Union military and naval base that was to be used to launch a joint campaign down the Mississippi, Tennessee, and Cumberland Rivers.[110] After the Confederates moved into western Kentucky, with designs on Southern Illinois, Grant, under Frémont's authority, advanced on Paducah, Kentucky, taking it without a fight, and set up a supply station.[111] Having understood the importance to Lincoln in keeping Kentucky in the Union, Grant assured its citizens, "I have come among you not as your enemy, but as your friend."[112] On November 1, Frémont ordered Grant to "make demonstrations" against the Confederates on both sides of the Mississippi, but prohibited him from attacking the enemy.[113]
Belmont, Forts Henry and Donelson
Main articles: Battle of Belmont, Battle of Fort Henry, and Battle of Fort Donelson





Battle of Fort Donelson




Map showing Fort Donelson and surrounding area during capture



On November 1, 1861, Frémont ordered Grant to embark south with his troops from Cairo to attack Confederate soldiers encamped in Belmont, Missouri. Grant, along with Brigadier General John A. McClernand, landed 2,500 men at Hunter's Point, two miles north of the Confederate base outside Belmont.[114] They took the camp, but the reinforced Confederates under Brigadier Generals Frank Cheatham and Gideon J. Pillow forced a chaotic Union retreat.[115] At first, Grant had wanted to destroy Confederate strongholds at both Belmont, Missouri and Columbus, Kentucky, but Frémont had not given Grant enough troops to do the job. All Grant's men could do was disrupt the Confederates and fight their way back to their Union boats. They escaped back to Cairo under fire from the heavily fortified stronghold at Columbus.[116] A tactical defeat, the battle gave Grant's volunteers confidence and experience.[117]
Confederate forces still at Columbus blocked the Union army's access to the lower Mississippi. Grant, and General James B. McPherson, came up with a plan to bypass Columbus and with a force of 25,000 troops, move against Fort Henry on the Tennessee River and then ten miles east to Fort Donelson on the Cumberland River, with the aid of gunboats, opening both rivers and allowing the Union access further south. Grant presented his plan to Henry Halleck, his new commander under the newly created Department of Missouri.[118][j] Halleck was considering the same strategy, but rebuffed Grant, believing he needed twice the number of troops. However, after Halleck telegraphed and consulted McClellan about the plan, he finally agreed on condition that the attack be conducted in close cooperation with navy Flag Officer, Andrew H. Foote.[120] After Foote's gunboats had silenced most of the guns at the fort, Grant's troops moved in and easily captured Fort Henry on February 6, 1862.[121]
Grant then ordered an immediate assault on nearby Fort Donelson, under the command of John B. Floyd, which dominated the Cumberland River. Unlike Fort Henry, Grant was now going up against a force equal to his. Unaware of the garrison's strength, Grant's forces approached the scene over-confident from their easy victory at Fort Henry. Grant, McClernand, and Smith positioned their divisions around the fort. The next day McClernand and Smith launched probing attacks on what they figured were weak spots in the Confederate line, only to retreat with heavy losses. On February 14, Foote's gunboats arrived and began bombarding the fort, only to be repulsed by the heavy guns at the fort. Foote himself was wounded. Thus far it was a victory for the Confederates, but soon Union reinforcements arrived, giving Grant a total force of over 40,000 men. When Foote regained control of the river, Grant resumed his attack, but a standoff remained. That evening Confederate commander Floyd called a council of war, unsure of his next action. Grant received a dispatch from Foote, requesting that they meet. Grant mounted a horse and rode seven miles over freezing roads and trenches, reaching Smith's division, instructing him to prepare for the next assault, and rode on and met up with McClernand and Wallace. After exchanging reports he met up with Foote. After they conferred, Foote resumed his bombardment, which signaled the other generals to resume the attack. After a day of battle, Fort Donelson submitted to Grant's demand for "unconditional and immediate surrender", and Floyd struck his flag. Grant telegraphed Halleck, informing him that Fort Donelson had fallen.[122]
Grant had won the first major victory for the Union, capturing Floyd's entire rebel army of more than 12,000. Halleck was nevertheless angry that Grant had acted without his authorization and complained to McClellan, accusing Grant of "neglect and inefficiency". On March 3, Halleck sent a telegram to Washington complaining that he had no communication with Grant for a week. Three days later, Halleck followed up with a postscript claiming "word has just reached me that...Grant has resumed his bad habits (of drinking)".[123] Lincoln, regardless, promoted Grant to major general of volunteers while the Northern press treated Grant as a hero. Playing off his initials, they took to calling him "Unconditional Surrender Grant".[124]
Shiloh and aftermath





Battle of Shiloh Thulstrup 1888





Battle of Shiloh Map




Further information: Battle of Shiloh
As the great numbers of troops from both armies gathered, it was widely assumed in the North that this would be the battle to end the war.[125] Grant, reinstated by Halleck at Lincoln's and Stanton's urging, left Fort Henry and traveled by boat up the Tennessee River to rejoin his army with orders to advance with the Army of the Tennessee into Tennessee. Grant's main Union army was located at Pittsburg Landing, while 40,000 Confederate troops converged at Corinth.[126] Brigadier General William Tecumseh Sherman assured Grant that his green troops were ready for an attack. Grant agreed and wired Halleck with their assessment.[127] Grant, whose forces numbered 45,000, wanted to attack the Confederates at Corinth, but Halleck ordered him not to attack until Major General Don Carlos Buell arrived with his division of 25,000.[128] Meanwhile, Grant prepared for an attack on the Confederate army of roughly equal strength. Instead of preparing defensive fortifications between the Tennessee River and Owl Creek,[k] and clearing fields of fire, they spent most of their time drilling the largely inexperienced troops while Sherman dismissed reports of nearby Confederates.[129]
Union inaction created the opportunity for the Confederates to attack first before Buell arrived.[130] On the morning of April 6, 1862, Grant's troops were taken by surprise when the Confederates, led by Generals Albert Sidney Johnston and P.G.T. Beauregard, struck first "like an Alpine avalanche" near Shiloh church, attacking five divisions of Grant's army and forcing a confused retreat toward the Tennessee River.[131] Johnston was wounded and died during the engagement and command fell upon Beauregard.[132] One Union line held the Confederate attack off for several hours at a place later called the "Hornet's Nest", giving Grant time to assemble artillery and 20,000 troops near Pittsburg Landing.[133] The Confederates finally broke through the Hornet's Nest to capture a Union division, but "Grant's Last Line" held Pittsburg Landing, while the exhausted Confederates, lacking reinforcements, halted their advance.[134] That evening, heavy rain set in while Grant and his staff took cover and huddled around a fire. When asked by McPherson if he was going to retreat, Grant replied, "Retreat? No. I propose to attack them at daylight and whip them."[135]
Bolstered by 18,000 fresh troops from the divisions of Major Generals Buell and Lew Wallace, Grant counterattacked at dawn the next day and regained the field, forcing the disorganized and demoralized rebels to retreat back to Corinth while thousands deserted.[136] Halleck ordered Grant not to advance more than one day from Pittsburg Landing, stopping the pursuit of the Confederate Army.[137] Although Grant had won the battle the situation was little changed, with the Union in possession of Pittsburg Landing and the Confederates once again holed up in Corinth.[138] Grant, now realizing that the South was determined to fight and that the war would not be won with one battle, would later write, "Then, indeed, I gave up all idea of saving the Union except by complete conquest."[139]
Shiloh was the costliest battle in American history to that point and the staggering 23,746 total casualties stunned the nation.[140] Briefly hailed a hero for routing the Confederates, Grant was soon mired in controversy.[141] The Northern press castigated Grant for shockingly high casualties, and accused him of drunkenness during the battle, contrary to the accounts of officers and others with him at the time.[142][l] However, Grant's victory at Shiloh ended any chance for the Confederates to prevail in the Mississippi valley or regain its strategic advantage in the West.[143]
Halleck arrived from St. Louis on April 11, took command, and assembled a combined army of about 120,000 men. On April 29, he relieved Grant of field command and replaced him with Major General George Henry Thomas. Halleck slowly marched his army to take Corinth, entrenching each night.[144] Meanwhile, Beauregard pretended to be reinforcing, sent "deserters" to the Union Army with that story, and moved his army out during the night, to Halleck's surprise when he finally arrived at Corinth on May 30.[145] Discouraged, Grant considered resigning but Sherman convinced him to stay.[146] Lincoln dismissed Grant's critics, saying "I can't spare this man; he fights."[147] Halleck divided his combined army and reinstated Grant as field commander of the Army of the Tennessee on July 11.[148]
On September 19, Grant's army defeated Confederates at the Battle of Iuka, then successfully defended Corinth, inflicting heavy casualties.[149] On October 25, Grant assumed command of the District of the Tennessee.[150] In November, after Lincoln's preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, Grant ordered units under his command to incorporate former slaves into the Union Army, giving them clothes, shelter and wages for their services.[151]
Vicksburg campaign
Further information: Vicksburg Campaign and General Order No. 11 (1862)




Grant's gamble: Porter's gunboats running the Confederate gauntlet at Vicksburg


The Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg, Mississippi blocked the way for complete Union control of the Mississippi River, making its capture vital for the Union War effort.[152] Grant's Army held western Tennessee with almost 40,000 troops available to fight.[153] Grant was aggravated to learn that Lincoln authorized McClernand to raise a separate army for the purpose.[154] Halleck ordered McClernand to Memphis, and placed him and his troops under Grant's authority.[155] After Grant's army captured Holly Springs Grant planned to attack Vicksburg's front overland while Sherman would attack the fortress from the rear on the Mississippi River.[156] However, Confederate cavalry raids on December 11 and 20 broke Union communications and recaptured Holly Springs, preventing Grant's and Sherman's armies from connecting.[157] On December 29, a Confederate army led by Lieutenant General John C. Pemberton repulsed Sherman's direct approach ascending the bluffs to Vicksburg at Chickasaw Bayou.[158] McClernand reached Sherman's army, assumed command, and independently of Grant led a campaign that captured Confederate Fort Hindman.[159] During this time Grant incorporated fleeing African American slaves into the Union Army giving them protection and paid employment.[160]
Along with his military responsibilities in the months following Grant's return to command, he was concerned over an expanding illicit cotton trade in his district.[161] He believed the trade undermined the Union war effort, funded the Confederacy, and prolonged the war, while Union soldiers died in the fields.[162] On December 17, he issued General Order No. 11, expelling "Jews, as a class," from the district, saying that Jewish merchants were violating trade regulations.[163] Writing in 2012, historian Jonathan D. Sarna said Grant "issued the most notorious anti-Jewish official order in American history."[164] Historians' opinions vary on Grant's motives for issuing the order.[165] Jewish leaders complained to Lincoln while the Northern press criticized Grant.[166] Lincoln demanded the order be revoked and Grant rescinded it within three weeks.[167] When interviewed years after the war, in response to accusations of his General Order being anti-Jewish, Grant explained: "During war times these nice distinctions were disregarded, we had no time to handle things with kid gloves."[168][m]




The Battle of Jackson, fought on May 14, 1863, was part of the Vicksburg Campaign.


On January 29, 1863, Grant assumed overall command and attempted to advance his army through water-logged terrain to bypass Vicksburg's guns; which was ineffective. In the process, however, the green Union soldiers were gaining experience.[170] On April 16, Grant ordered Admiral David Dixon Porter's gunboats south under fire from the Vicksburg batteries to meet up with his troops who had marched south down the west side of the Mississippi River.[171] Grant ordered diversionary battles, confusing Pemberton and allowing Grant's army to move east across the Mississippi, landing troops at Bruinsburg.[172] Grant's army captured Jackson, the state capital. Advancing his army to Vicksburg, Grant defeated Pemberton's army at the Battle of Champion Hill on May 16, forcing their retreat into Vicksburg.[173] After Grant's men assaulted the entrenchments twice, suffering severe losses, they settled in for a siege lasting seven weeks. During quiet periods of the campaign Grant would take to drinking on occasion.[174] Pemberton surrendered Vicksburg to Grant on July 4, 1863.[175]
Vicksburg's fall gave Union forces control of the Mississippi River and split the Confederacy. By that time, Grant's political sympathies fully coincided with the Radical Republicans' aggressive prosecution of the war and emancipation of the slaves.[176] The success at Vicksburg was a morale boost for the Union war effort. The personal rivalry between McClernand and Grant continued after Vicksburg until Grant removed McClernand from command when he contravened Grant by publishing an order without permission.[177] When Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton suggested Grant be brought back east to run the Army of the Potomac, Grant demurred, writing that he knew the geography and resources of the West better and he did not want to upset the chain of command in the East.[178]

Chattanooga and promotion
Further information: Chattanooga Campaign




Union troops swarm Missionary Ridge and defeat Bragg's army.


Lincoln promoted Grant to major general in the regular army and assigned him command of the newly formed Division of the Mississippi on October 16, 1863, including the Armies of the Ohio, Tennessee, and Cumberland.[179] After the Battle of Chickamauga, the Army of the Cumberland retreated into Chattanooga, where they were trapped.[180] When informed of the situation, Grant put Major General George H. Thomas in charge of the rescue.[181] Taking command, Grant arrived in Chattanooga by horseback, with plans to resupply the city and break the siege.[182] Lincoln also sent Major General Joseph Hooker and two divisions of the Army of the Potomac to assist. Union forces captured Brown's Ferry and opened a supply line to Bridgeport.[183] On November 23, Grant organized three armies to attack at Missionary Ridge and Lookout Mountain. Two days later, Hooker's forces took Lookout Mountain.[184] Grant ordered Thomas and the Army of the Cumberland to advance when Sherman's army failed to take Missionary Ridge from the northeast.[185] The Army of the Cumberland, led by Major General Philip Sheridan and Brigadier General Thomas J. Wood, charged uphill and captured the Confederate entrenchments at the top, forcing the rebels into retreat.[186] The decisive battle gave the Union control of Tennessee and opened Georgia, the Confederate heartland, to Union invasion.[187]
On March 2, 1864, Lincoln promoted Grant to lieutenant general, giving him command of all Union Armies, answering only to the President.[188] Grant assigned Sherman the Division of the Mississippi and traveled to Washington to meet with Lincoln to devise a strategy that focused on crippling the rebel army and capturing Richmond. Grant established his headquarters with General George Meade's Army of the Potomac in Culpeper, north-west of Richmond.[189][n] Grant developed an overall master plan of five coordinated Union offensives, attacking the rebel armies at the same time to keep the Confederates from shifting reinforcements within their interior lines.[191] Sherman was to pursue Joseph E. Johnston's Army of Tennessee, while Meade would lead the Army of the Potomac, with Grant in the field, to attack and destroy Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia.[192] Major General Benjamin Butler was to advance towards Richmond from the south, up the James River, while a joint army-navy operation was to be launched against Mobile, Alabama.[193] If Lee was forced south as expected, Grant would join forces with Butler's armies and be fed supplies from the James. Major General Franz Sigel was to capture the railroad line at Lynchburg, move east, and attack from the Blue Ridge Mountains.[194] Grant knew that Lee had limited manpower and that a war of attrition fought on a battlefield without entrenchments would lead to Lee's defeat.[195]
After the battle Grant received an enormous thoroughbred horse, named Cincinnati, as a gift from a thankful admirer which instantly became Grant's favorite, letting no one else but Lincoln ride it.[196][o] Grant was now experiencing a rising tide of popularity, and there was talk that a Union victory early in the year could lead to his candidacy for the presidency. He was aware of the rumors, but had ruled out a political candidacy; the possibility would soon vanish with delays on the battlefield.[195]
Overland Campaign and Petersburg siege
Further information: Overland Campaign and Siege of Petersburg




Battle of the Wilderness



The Overland Campaign was a series of brutal battles fought in Virginia for seven weeks during May and June 1864.[198] Sigel's and Butler's efforts sputtered, and Grant was left alone to fight Lee.[199] On the morning of Wednesday, May 4, dressed in his full uniform, with sword at his side, Grant rode out from his headquarters at Culpeper towards Germanna Ford, mounted on his war horse, Cincinnati.[200] The same day Grant crossed the Rapidian unopposed, as Union troops waded through the river while supplies were transported on four pontoon bridges.[201] On May 5, the Union army attacked Lee in the Wilderness, a three-day battle with estimated casualties of 17,666 Union and 11,125 Confederate.[202] Rather than retreat as his predecessors had done, Grant flanked Lee's army to the southeast and attempted to wedge his forces between Lee and Richmond at Spotsylvania Court House.[203] Lee's army got to Spotsylvania first and a costly battle ensued, lasting thirteen days, with estimated casualties of 18,399 Union and 13,421 Confederate.[204] Grant attempted to break through Lee's Muleshoe salient guarded by Confederate artillery, resulting in one of the bloodiest assaults of the Civil War, known as the Bloody Angle.[205] Unable to break Lee's lines, Grant again flanked the rebels to the southeast, meeting at North Anna, where a battle lasted three days.[206]




Commanding General Grant at the Battle of Cold Harbor in 1864


Grant maneuvered his army to Cold Harbor, a vital railroad hub that linked to Richmond, but Lee's men had the defensive advantage and entrenched against the Union assault. During the third day of the thirteen-day battle, Grant led a costly assault. Grant was soon castigated as "the Butcher" by the Northern press after taking 52,788 Union casualties; Lee's Confederate army suffered 32,907 casualties, but he was less able to replace them.[207] The Union assault at Cold Harbor was the second of two battles in the war that Grant later said he regretted (the other being his initial assault on Vicksburg). Undetected by Lee, Grant pulled out of Cold Harbor and moved his army south of the James River, freed Butler from the Bermuda Hundred (where the rebels had surrounded his army), and advanced toward Petersburg, Virginia's central railroad hub.[208] After crossing the James, Grant arrived at Petersburg, threatening nearby Richmond. Beauregard defended the city, and Lee's veteran reinforcements soon arrived, resulting in a nine-month siege. Northern resentment grew as the war dragged on, but Lee was forced to defend Richmond, unable to reinforce other Confederate forces. Sheridan was assigned command of the Union Army of the Shenandoah and Grant directed him to "follow the enemy to their death" and to destroy vital Confederate supplies in the Shenandoah Valley. When Sheridan reported suffering attacks by John S. Mosby's irregular Confederate cavalry, Grant recommended rounding up their families for imprisonment as hostages at Fort McHenry.[209]




Grant (center left) next to Lincoln with General Sherman (far left) and Admiral Porter (right) — The Peacemakers


At Petersburg, Grant approved a plan to blow up part of the enemy trenches from an underground tunnel. The explosion created a crater, into which poorly led Union troops poured. Recovering from the surprise, Confederates surrounded the crater and easily picked off Union troops within it. The Union's 3500 casualties outnumbered the Confederates' by three-to-one; although the plan could have been successful if implemented correctly, Grant admitted the tactic had been a "stupendous failure".[210] Rather than fight Lee in a full frontal attack as he had done at Cold Harbor, Grant continued to extend Lee's defenses south and west of Petersburg to capture essential railroad links.[211]
After the Federal army rebuilt the City Point Railroad, Grant used mortars to attack Lee's overstretched forces.[212] In August, Union forces captured Mobile Bay and on September 2, Sherman captured Atlanta while Confederate forces retreated.[213] Both victories, combined with Sheridan's triumph in the Shenandoah Valley, ensured Lincoln's reelection in November.[213] Sherman convinced Grant and Lincoln to send his army to march on Savannah and devastate the Confederate heartland.[214] Sherman cut a 60-mile path of destruction of Southern infrastructure unopposed, reached the Atlantic Ocean, and captured Savannah on December 22.[215] On December 16, after much prodding by Grant, the Union Army under Thomas smashed Hood's Confederate Army at Nashville.[216] It was the beginning of the end for the Confederacy, with Lee's forces at Petersburg being the only significant obstacle remaining.[217]
Appomattox and victory
Main articles: Appomattox Campaign and Battle of Appomattox Court House




Surrender of General Lee to General Grant at Appomattox Court House,


By March 1865, Grant had severely weakened Lee's strength, having extended his lines to 35 miles.[218] Lee's troops deserted by the thousands due to hunger and the strains of trench warfare.[219] Grant, Sherman, Porter, and Lincoln held a conference to discuss the surrender of Confederate armies and Reconstruction of the South on March 28.[220] On April 2, Union troops took Petersburg and captured an evacuated Richmond the following day.[221] Lee attempted to link up with the remnants of Joseph E. Johnston's defeated army, but Sheridan's cavalry stopped the two armies from converging, cutting them off from their supply trains.[222] Grant was in communication with Lee before he entrusted his aide Orville Babcock to carry his last dispatch to Lee requesting his surrender with instructions to escort him to a meeting place of Lee's choosing.[223] Grant immediately mounted his horse, Cincinnati, and rode a long route west, bypassing Lee's army, to join Sheridan who had captured Appomattox Station, blocking Lee's escape route. On his way Grant was hailed by a member of Meade's staff carrying a letter sent by Lee through the picket lines, informing Grant that he was ready to formally surrender.[224] On April 9, Grant and Lee met at Appomattox Court House, Grant extending his hand to Lee.[225] Upon receiving Lee's dispatch about the proposed meeting Grant was jubilant, but as to the actual meeting Grant later wrote in his memoirs that Lee was "a man of much dignity" and that he felt sad over "the downfall of a foe who had fought so long and valiantly..."[226] After briefly discussing their days of old in Mexico, Grant wrote out the terms of surrender, whereupon Lee expressed satisfaction and accepted Grant's terms.[227] Going beyond his military authority, Grant gave Lee and his men amnesty; Confederates would surrender their weapons and return to their homes. At Lee's request, Grant also allowed them to keep their horses, all on the condition that they would not take up arms against the United States.[228] Grant ordered his troops to stop all celebration, saying the "war is over; the rebels are our countrymen again."[229] On April 26, Johnson's army surrendered to Sherman under the same terms Grant offered to Lee.[230] On May 26, Kirby Smith's western army surrendered and the Civil War ended.[231]
Lincoln's assassination
Main article: Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
On April 14, 1865 five days after Grant's victory at Appomattox, he attended a cabinet meeting in Washington. Lincoln invited him and his wife to Ford's Theater, but they declined as they had plans to travel to Philadelphia. In a conspiracy that targeted several government leaders, Lincoln was fatally shot by John Wilkes Booth at the theater, and died the next morning.[232] Many, including Grant himself, thought that he had been a target in the plot.[233] Stanton notified him of the President's death and summoned him back to Washington. Vice President Andrew Johnson was sworn in as President on April 15. Attending Lincoln's funeral on April 19, Grant stood alone and wept openly; he later said Lincoln was "the greatest man I have ever known."[234] Regarding the new President, Andrew Johnson, Grant told Julia that he dreaded the change in administrations; he judged Johnson's attitude toward white southerners as one that would "make them unwilling citizens", and initially thought that with President Johnson, "Reconstruction has been set back no telling how far."[235]
Commanding General




    Commanding General Grant
by Ole Peter Hansen Balling, 1865



Main article: Ulysses S. Grant as commanding general, 1865–1869
At the war's end, Grant remained commander of the army, with duties that included dealing with Maximilian and French troops in Mexico, enforcement of Reconstruction in the former Confederate states, and supervision of Indian wars on the western Plains.[236] Grant secured a house for his family in Georgetown Heights in 1865, but instructed Elihu Washburne that for political purposes his legal residence remained in Galena, Illinois.[237] That same year, Grant spoke at Cooper Union in New York. Further travels that summer took the Grants to Albany, New York, back to Galena, and throughout Illinois and Ohio, with enthusiastic receptions.[238]On July 25, 1866, Congress promoted Grant to the newly created rank of General of the Army of the United States.[239]
Reconstruction
Further information: Reconstruction Era
Reconstruction was a turbulent time period starting in 1863 and ending in 1877, that readmitted former Confederate states to the Union, "during which the nation’s laws and Constitution were rewritten to guarantee the basic rights of the former slaves, and biracial governments came to power throughout the defeated Confederacy."[240] In November 1865, Johnson sent Grant on a fact-finding mission to the South. Grant recommended continuation of a reformed Freedmen's Bureau, which Johnson opposed, but advised against the use of black troops in garrisons, which he believed encouraged an alternative to farm labor.[241] Grant did not believe the people of the South were ready for self-rule, and that both whites and blacks in the South required protection by the federal government. Concerned four years of war led to a diminished respect for civil authorities, Grant concluded the Army should continue their presence to maintain order.[242] On the same day the Thirteenth Amendment was ratified Grant filed an unconvincing and optimistic report of his tour, expressing his faith that "the mass of thinking men of the South accept the present situation of affairs in good faith."[243] In this respect Grant's opinion on Reconstruction aligned with Johnson's policy of restoring former Confederates to their positions of power, arguing that Congress should allow representatives from the South to take their seats.[244] Grant, like Lincoln, out of a sense of duty, believed the federal government had responsibility to all Union Army veterans who served in the war, both white and black.[245]
Relationship with Johnson




President Andrew Johnson
Reconstruction conflict broke the fragile relationship between Grant and Johnson .


Grant's relationship to Johnson started out on a congenial basis, despite differences in politics and personalities.[246] Grant's service as Union General, caused him to join the Republican Party.[245] Johnson favored a lenient approach to Reconstruction, calling for an immediate return of the former Confederate states into the Union without any guarantee of African American civil rights.[247] The Radical Republican-controlled Congress opposed the idea and refused to admit Congressmen from the former Confederate states. Congress, over Johnson's vetoes, renewed the Freedmen's Bureau and passed the Civil Rights Act of 1866.[248] Grant and Johnson found themselves in a quiet conflict over Reconstruction enforcement, while Grant as a soldier was determined to remain loyal to his Commander In Chief.[249] Needing Grant's popularity, Johnson took Grant on his "Swing Around the Circle" tour, speaking out against Congressional Reconstruction.[250] Grant believed that Johnson was purposefully agitating conservative opinion to defy Congressional Reconstruction, privately calling Johnson's speeches a "national disgrace".[247] On March 2, 1867, overriding Johnson's veto, Congress passed the first of three Reconstruction Acts, which divided the southern states into five military districts, putting in charge military officers to enforce Reconstruction policy.[251] Protecting Grant, Congress passed the Command of the Army Act, attached to an army appropriation bill, preventing his removal or relocation, and forcing Johnson to pass orders through Grant, the general in chief.[252]
In August 1867, Johnson suspended Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, a Lincoln appointee who sympathized with Congressional Reconstruction, replacing him with Grant as acting Secretary.[p][254] Stanton was a Radical Republican and was protected by allies in Congress.[255] Grant wanted to replace Stanton but recommended against bypassing the Tenure of Office Act, that prohibited a cabinet removal without Senate approval.[254] Grant accepted the position, not wanting the Army to fall under a conservative appointee who would impede Reconstruction, and managed an uneasy partnership with Johnson.[256] In December 1867 Congress voted to keep Stanton who was reinstated by a Senate Committee on January 10, 1868. Grant told Johnson he was going to resign office because keeping the office would subject him to fine and imprisonment. Johnson, who was scheming to get rid of Grant, told him he would assume all such responsibility[253] and asked him to delay his resignation until a suitable replacement could be found, and he believed Grant had agreed to do so. When the Senate voted and reinstated Stanton,[257] Grant surrendered the office before Johnson had an opportunity to appoint a replacement. Johnson was livid at Grant accusing him of lying at a stormy cabinet meeting. The publication of angry messages between Grant and Johnson led to a complete break between the president and his general.[258] The controversy led to Johnson's impeachment and trial in the Senate.[255] Needing a two-thirds Senate vote to impeach, Johnson was acquitted by one vote in a Senate impeachment trial.[259] The break with Johnson popularized Grant among Republicans and made him the uncontested candidate for the Presidency in 1868.[260]
Election of 1868
Main article: United States presidential election, 1868




First inauguration of Ulysses S. Grant, Capitol building steps, March 4, 1869


When the Republican Party met at the 1868 Republican National Convention in Chicago, the delegates unanimously nominated Grant (Ohio) for presidential candidate and Speaker of the House Schuyler Colfax (Indiana), for vice-presidential candidate.[255] The Republicans advocated "equal civil and political rights to all" and African American enfranchisement.[261][262] The Democrats, having abandoned Johnson, nominated former governor Horatio Seymour (New York) for presidential candidate and Francis P. Blair (Missouri) for vice-presidential candidate.[263] The Democrats advocated the immediate restoration of former Confederate states to the Union and amnesty from "all past political offenses".[264] Although Grant did not campaign, the Republicans adopted his words "Let us have peace" as their campaign slogan.[265] Grant's 1862 General Order No. 11 became an issue during the presidential campaign; he sought to distance himself from the order, saying "I have no prejudice against sect or race, but want each individual to be judged by his own merit."[266] The Democrats focused mainly on ending Reconstruction and returning control of the South to the white planter class, which alienated many War Democrats in the North.[267] Grant won the popular election by 300,000 votes out of 5,716,082 votes cast, receiving an electoral college landslide, of 214 votes to Seymour's 80.[268] Seymour received a majority of white votes, but Grant was aided by 500,000 votes cast by blacks to get the win.[263] He lost Louisiana and Georgia primarily due to Ku Klux Klan violence against African American voters.[269] At the age of 46, Grant was the youngest president yet elected, as well as the first president to be elected after the nation had outlawed slavery. Grant's election was widely regarded as a triumph of principles that included restoration of Southern reconstructed states, efficient government and sound money.[270]
Presidency (1869–77)
Main article: Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant




President Grant, 1869



On March 4, 1869, Grant was sworn in as the eighteenth President of the United States by Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase. Grant assumed the presidency with reluctance. In an 1869 letter to Sherman, he wrote:

I have been forced into it in spite of myself. I could not back down without, as it seems to me, leaving the contest for power for the next four years between mere trading politicians, the elevation of whom, no matter which party won, would lose to us, largely, the results of the costly war which we have gone through.[271]

His presidency began with a break from tradition, as President Johnson, at the time angry with Grant, did not attend Grant's inauguration at the Capitol or ride with him as he departed the White House for the last time.[272]
In his inaugural address, Grant urged the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment and said he would approach Reconstruction "calmly, without prejudice, hate or sectional pride."[273] He also recommended the "proper treatment" of Native Americans be studied, advocating their civilization and eventual citizenship.[274]
Although some historians have belittled Grant's cabinet as being mediocre, according to biographers Jean Edward Smith and Ron Chernow, it had distinguished members, including former congressmen, senators, governors, and judges.[275] Without senatorial consultation, Grant's unconventional cabinet choices sparked both criticism and approval.[276] In his effort to create national harmony, he purposely avoided choosing Republican Party leaders, selecting several non-politicians.[277] Grant chose two close friends for important posts: Elihu B. Washburne for Secretary of State and John A. Rawlins as Secretary of War; Washburne was soon appointed minister to France and replaced by conservative New York statesman Hamilton Fish.[277] Rawlins died in office after serving only a few months, replaced by William W. Belknap of Iowa.[278] For Treasury, he appointed wealthy New York merchant Alexander T. Stewart, who was found ineligible and replaced by Representative George S. Boutwell, a Massachusetts Radical Republican.[277] Grant appointed Philadelphia businessman Adolph E. Borie Secretary of Navy, who soon resigned, and was replaced by a relative unknown, George M. Robeson.[277] Grant's nomination of James Longstreet, a former Confederate general, to the position of Surveyor of customs of the port of New Orleans, was met with general amazement, and was largely seen as a genuine effort to unite the North and South.[279] Other cabinet appointments—Jacob D. Cox (Interior), John Creswell (Postmaster General), and Ebenezer Rockwood Hoar (Attorney General)—were well received.[280]




The First Family: Ulysses and Julia Grant's family at the "summer capital" in Long Branch, New Jersey, 1870


Grant nominated Sherman his Army successor as general-in-chief and gave him control over War bureau chiefs.[281] When Rawlins took over the War Department,[q] He complained to Grant that Sherman was given too much authority. Grant reluctantly revoked his own order, upsetting Sherman and damaging their wartime friendship.[281]
Grant also appointed four Justices to the Supreme Court: William Strong, Joseph P. Bradley, Ward Hunt and Chief Justice Morrison Waite.[283] Hunt voted to uphold Reconstruction laws while Waite and Bradley did much to undermine them.[284] To rectify his controversial General Order # 11 during the Civil War, Grant appointed Jewish leaders to office, including Simon Wolf recorder of deeds in Washington D.C., Edward S. Salomon Governor of the Washington Territory.[285]
When Grant first moved into the White House, he had a statue of Thomas Jefferson, the third president, removed from the grounds and returned to the Capitol Rotunda.[286][287]

Later Reconstruction and civil rights




Amos T. Akerman
Attorney General who vigorously prosecuted the Ku Klux Klan.


When Grant took office in 1869, Reconstruction took precedence, Republicans controlled most Southern states, propped up by Republican controlled Congress, northern money, and southern military occupation.[288] Grant advocated in his inaugural address, the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendement, ratified February 3, 1870, that declared the right to vote for African Americans.[289] Unlike Johnson, Grant's vision of Reconstruction included federal enforcement of civil rights and spoke out against voter intimidation of Southern blacks.[290] Within a year three remaining former Confederate states Mississippi, Virginia, and Texas, were admitted to Congress, having complied with Congressional Reconstruction Acts and adopted the Fifteenth Amendment.[291] Grant, supported by Congress, put military pressure on Georgia, the last remaining former Confederate state, to reinstate its black legislators and adopt the new amendment. [292] Georgia complied, and on February 24, 1871 its Senators were seated in Congress, technically ending Reconstruction.[289] Southern Reconstructed states were controlled by carpetbaggers, scalawags, and former slaves. The Ku Klux Klan terrorist group, however, continued to undermine Reconstruction governments by violence and intimidation.[293]
To bolster the Fifteenth Amendment, Grant relied on the army and signed legislation creating the Justice Department, primarily to enforce federal laws in the South.[294] By early 1871, Grant was determined to take on the Klan, and on March 23 he went to Congress and pressured for the passage of the Klu Klux Klan Act, ratified on April 20, authorizing the President to use the army and suspend the writ of habeas corpus.[295] In May 1871, Grant ordered federal troops to help marshals in arresting Klansmen. That October, Grant suspended habeas corpus in part of South Carolina and sent federal troops to enforce the law there. Grant's new Attorney General, Hoar's replacement Amos T. Akerman, a zealous civil rights attorney from Georgia, now bolstered by the newly created Department of Justice and Solicitor General, made hundreds of arrests and forced 2000 Klansmen to flee the state. Akerman returned over 3,000 indictments of the Klan throughout the South and obtained 600 convictions for the worst offenders.[296] After prosecutions by Akerman, the Klan's power collapsed; by 1872, elections in the South saw African Americans voting in record numbers.[297] That same year, Grant signed the Amnesty Act, which restored political rights to former Confederates. Lacking sufficient funding, the Justice Department stopped prosecutions of the Klan in June 1873; civil rights prosecutions continued throughout Grant's second term but with fewer yearly cases and convictions.[298] Additionally, Grant's Postmaster General John Creswell, using his patronage powers, integrated the postal system and appointed African American postmasters across the nation.[299]




Picture of mobs rioting, wearing uniforms and using weapons on a city street, entitled "The Louisiana Outrage"; White Leaguers attacking the integrated police force and state militia, New Orleans, September 1874


After the Klan's decline, a faction of southern conservatives called "Redeemers" formed armed groups, such as the Red Shirts and the White League who openly used violence and intimidation in an attempt to take control of state governments.[300] The Panic of 1873 and the ensuing depression contributed to public fatigue, and the North grew less concerned with Reconstruction.[301] Supreme Court rulings in the Slaughter-House Cases and United States v. Cruikshank restricted federal enforcement of civil rights.[302] Grant began to limit the use of troops to avoid the impression that he was acting as a military dictator. In 1874, Grant ended the Brooks–Baxter War bringing Reconstruction in Arkansas to a peaceful conclusion; that same year, he sent troops and warships under Major General William H. Emory to New Orleans in the wake of the Colfax Massacre and disputes over the election of Governor William Pitt Kellogg.[303] Emory restored Kellogg to office and the following year the parties reached a compromise allowing Democrats to retain control of the Louisiana House.[304] Grant recalled Sheridan and most of the federal troops from Louisiana.[305]
By 1875, Redeemer Democrats took control of all but three Southern states. As violence against black Southerners escalated once more, Attorney General Edwards Pierrepont told Governor Adelbert Ames of Mississippi that the people were "tired of the autumnal outbreaks in the South", and declined to intervene directly, instead, sending an emissary to negotiate a peaceful election.[306] Grant later regretted not issuing a proclamation to help Ames, having been told Republicans in Ohio would bolt the party if Grant intervened in Mississippi.[307] Grant told Congress in January 1875 he could not "see with indifference Union men or Republicans ostracized, persecuted, and murdered."[308] Congress refused to strengthen the laws against violence, but instead passed a sweeping law to guarantee blacks access to public facilities.[309] Grant signed it as the Civil Rights Act of 1875, but enforcement was weak and the Supreme Court ruled the law unconstitutional in 1883.[310] In October 1876, Grant dispatched troops to South Carolina to aid Republican Governor Daniel Henry Chamberlain.[311] Grant's successor, Hayes, abandoned the remaining three Republican governments in the South that were supported by the army after the Compromise of 1877, which marked the end of Reconstruction.[312]
Indian peace policy
Further information: American Indian Wars § West of the Mississippi (1811–1924)




Ely Samuel Parker
Seneca Indian appointed by Grant as Commissioner of Indian Affairs


When Grant took office in 1869, the nation's policy towards Indians was in chaos, with more than 250,000 Indians being governed by 370 treaties. Grant promised in his inaugural address to work toward "the proper treatment of the original occupants of this land—the Indians."[64][r] He appointed Ely S. Parker, a Seneca Indian, a member of his wartime staff, as Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the first Native American to serve in this position. With his familiarity of Indian life, Parker became the chief architect of Grant's Peace Policy.[314] In April 1869, Grant signed a law establishing a Board of Indian Commissioners to oversee spending and reduce corruption in the Bureau of Indian Affairs.[315] In 1871, he signed a bill ending the Indian treaty system; the law now treated individual Native Americans as wards of the federal government, and no longer dealt with the tribes as sovereign entities.[316] Grant believed that Indians, given opportunities for education and work, could serve alongside white men.[313] His Peace Policy aimed to replace entrepreneurs serving as Indian agents with missionaries and aimed to protect Indians on reservations and educate them in farming.[317] "My efforts in the future will be directed," Grant said in his second inaugural address, "by a humane course, to bring the aborigines of the country under the benign influences of education and civilization ... Wars of extermination ... are demoralizing and wicked."
Grant's policy had greater success in the Southwest. General Oliver Otis Howard negotiated peace with the Apache in 1872, convincing their leader, Cochise, to move the tribe to a new reservation, and ending a war started the year before. In Oregon, relations were less peaceful, as war with the Modocs erupted in April 1873. The Modocs refused to move to a reservation and killed the local army commander, Major General Edward Canby. Grant ordered restraint after Canby's death, disregarding Sherman's advice to seek revenge or exterminate the tribe. The army captured, tried, and executed the four Modoc warriors responsible for Canby's murder, and Grant ordered the rest of the Modoc tribe relocated to the Indian Territory.[318] In 1874, the army defeated the Comanche Indians at the Battle of Palo Duro Canyon.[319] Their villages were burned and horses slaughtered, eventually forcing them to finally settle at the Fort Sill reservation in 1875.[320] Grant pocket-vetoed a bill in 1874 protecting bison and supporting Interior Secretary Columbus Delano, who believed the killing of bison would force Plains Indians to abandon their nomadic lifestyle.[321][s]
The Plains tribes accepted the reservation system, but encounters with prospectors and settlers in search of gold in the Black Hills led to renewed conflict in the Great Sioux War of 1876, ending the understanding that had developed between Grant and Sioux Chief Red Cloud.[323] Grant was determined to enforce the treaty using the army if necessary, but after summoning Sheridan to Washington he was reminded that the post-Civil War army was undermanned and spread thinly and that the territory involved was vast, requiring great numbers of soldiers to enforce the treaty; as a result, it was never enforced.[324] During the war, Sioux warriors led by Crazy Horse killed George Armstrong Custer and his men at the Battle of the Little Big Horn, the army's most famous defeat in the Indian wars. Later, Grant castigated Custer in the press, saying "I regard Custer's massacre as a sacrifice of troops, brought on by Custer himself, that was wholly unnecessary – wholly unnecessary."[325] In spite of Grant's efforts, over 200 battles were fought with the Indians during his presidency.[326] The policy was considered humanitarian for its time but was later criticized for disregarded native cultures.[327]
Foreign affairs
Further information: Annexation of Santo Domingo, Treaty of Washington (1871), and Virginius Affair






Hamilton Fish
Secretary of State, 1869–1877





The most pressing foreign policy concerns when Grant took office were resolving the Alabama claims against Great Britain and whether to recognize Cuban belligerency.[328][t] The dispute with the United Kingdom stemmed from a complex of grievances centering on attacks on American shipping during the Civil War by the CSS Alabama, a Confederate warship constructed in England.[330] Senator Charles Sumner, Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, believed the British had violated American neutrality and demanded reparations.[331] Sumner convinced his fellow Senators to reject the Johnson administration's proposed settlement, believing that Britain should directly pay $2 billion in gold or, alternatively, cede Canada to the United States.[332] Fish and Boutwell convinced Grant that peaceful relations with Britain were more important than acquisition of territory, and the two nations agreed to negotiate along those lines.[333] To avoid jeopardizing negotiations, Grant refrained from recognizing Cuban rebels who were fighting for independence from Spain, which would have been inconsistent with American objections to the British granting belligerent status to Confederates.[329] A commission in Washington produced a treaty whereby an international tribunal would settle the damage amounts; the British admitted regret, but not fault.[u] The Senate approved the Treaty of Washington, which also settled disputes over fishing rights and maritime boundaries, by a 50–12 vote in 1871.[334]
Grant's success with Britain was undermined by his attempt to annex the Dominican Republic, an independent nation unable to pay its debt. Many Americans believed a Caribbean naval base would establish naval dominance and be useful in protecting shipping from piracy in a potential isthmian canal.[329] Anti-imperialist Republicans had previously rejected a Johnson administration treaty to establish a Samaná Bay naval base.[335] Grant took interest in Dominican annexation and sent his secretary, Orville E. Babcock, there to consult with Buenaventura Báez, the pro-annexation Dominican president.[336][v] Babcock returned in September 1869 with a draft treaty of annexation, although Fish had not given him any diplomatic authority.[338] Given such authority by Fish, Babcock visited the island nation a second time making a treaty for Dominican annexation and the lease of Samaná Bay.[339] The cabinet discussed the treaties at a meeting on December 21.[340] Fish dismissed annexation, seeing the island as politically unstable.[341] Grant supported it, believing acquisition of the majority-black nation would increase commerce, create a refuge for African Americans, and help to exploit the island's natural resources.[342] He lobbied Sumner in hopes of influencing him to help with passage of the treaties.[343] Fish added to the effort out of loyalty to Grant, but to no avail; Sumner was set against annexation and on June 30, 1870, the Senate rejected the treaties.[344] A congressional investigation headed by Senator Carl Schurz revealed speculators had promoted the treaties' passage.[345] Unwilling to admit defeat, Grant convinced Congress to send a commission to investigate.[346] Although the commission approved Grant's call for annexation in its findings, the Senate remained opposed and Grant was forced to abandon further efforts.[347] Grant retaliated by firing Sumner's friend and Minister to Great Britain, John Lothrop Motley, while he pressured the Senate to depose Sumner of his chairmanship.[348]




King Kalākaua of Hawaii meets President Grant at the White House in 1874


In October 1873, Grant's neutrality policy was shaken, when a Spanish cruiser captured a merchant ship, Virginius, flying the U.S. flag, carrying war materials and men to aid the Cuban insurrection. Spanish authorities executed the prisoners, including eight American citizens, and many Americans called for war with Spain. Grant ordered the Navy to increase its presence in the Caribbean. Fish, with Grant's support, worked to reach a peaceful resolution.[349] Spain's president, Emilio Castelar y Ripoll, expressed regret for the tragedy, surrendered the Virginius and paid a cash indemnity of $80,000 to the families of the executed Americans.[350] Realizing the Navy was susceptible to European naval powers, in June 1874, Secretary Robeson commissioned the reconstruction of five redesigned double-turreted monitor warships.[351]
The administration's diplomacy was also at work in the Pacific. In December 1874, Grant held a state dinner at the White House for the King of Hawaii, David Kalakaua, who was seeking duty-free sugar importation to the US. Grant and Fish secured a free trade treaty in 1875 with the Kingdom of Hawaii, incorporating the Pacific islands' sugar industry into the United States' economic sphere.[352]
Gold standard and the Gold Ring
Further information: Black Friday (1869)
Soon after taking office Grant took conservative steps to return the nation's currency to a more secure footing.[329] During the Civil War, Congress had authorized the Treasury to issue banknotes that, unlike the rest of the currency, were not backed by gold or silver. The "greenback" notes, as they were known, were necessary to pay the unprecedented war debts, but they also caused inflation and forced gold-backed money out of circulation; Grant determined to return the national economy to pre-war monetary standards.[353] On March 18, 1869 Grant signed the Public Credit Act of 1869 that guaranteed bondholders would be repaid in "coin or its equivalent"; while greenbacks would gradually be redeemed by the Treasury and replaced by notes backed by specie, the act committed the government to full return of the gold standard within ten years.[354][355] This followed a policy of "hard currency, economy, and gradual reduction of the national debt." [329] Grant's own ideas about the economy were simple and he relied on the advice of wealthy and financially successful businessman that he courted.[329]




A cartoon showing Jim Fisk stirring up the gold market in New York while Grant releases Treasury gold to defeat the Gold Ring.


In the Spring of 1869, understanding Grant's attraction to the wealthy, Jay Gould, a Wall Street trader and railroad magnate, and financier Jim Fisk, seeking to drive up the price of gold, plotted a scheme to entrap Grant for their own profit, telling Grant that a high gold price would help farmers.[356] To promote this self-serving theory, Gould found a willing conduit, speculator and slippery man Abel Corbin, Grant's brother-in-law, who used his connection with the president to get inside information (the collaborators were later known as the "Gold Ring.")[357] Corbin and Gould lobbied for and convinced Grant to appoint Gould's associate, Daniel Butterfield, as Assistant Treasurer, allowing Butterfield to gather information for the Ring.[358] After consulting in early September with Alexander Stewart (his erstwhile nominee for Treasury Secretary), Grant stopped the sale of gold, naively accepting it would alieviate Western farmers.[359] By mid-September, seeing that the rapid gold price increase was unnatural, Grant warned Boutwell to be on his guard against "the bears and bulls", while the conspirators bought ever more gold and the rising price affected the wider economy.[360]
While Grant was spending leisure time in south-west Pennsylvania, he received a letter, by private courier, from Corbin on September 18, urging Grant to curb government gold sales.[361] Suspicious, Grant finally realized what Gould and Fisk were up to and he became determined to break the Gold Ring. [362] Returning to Washington, Grant told Boutwell to sell gold, which would reduce its price and strengthened the dollar.[363] Boutwell did so the next day, on September 24, 1869, later known as Black Friday.[364] The sale of gold from the Treasury defeated Gould and Fisks scheme as the gold price plummeted, relieving the economic tension.[365] This caused a mild recession, but by January 1870, the economy resumed its post-war recovery.[366] Gould and Fisk managed to escape without much harm to themselves.[367] A Congressional investigation followed, chaired by James A. Garfield and cleared Grant of profiteering, but excoriated Gould and Fisk for their manipulation of the gold market and Corbin for exploiting his personal connection to Grant.[368] In an unrelated matter, Grant's two qualified appointments to the Supreme Court overturned Hepburn v. Griswold on May 1, 1871, that resulted in upholding the legality of greenbacks as legal tender.[369]
Election of 1872 and second term
Main article: United States presidential election, 1872




Cartoon by Thomas Nast on Grant's opponents in the reelection campaign


Grant was sworn in for his second term by Salmon P. Chase on March 4, 1873. In his second inaugural address, he reiterated the problems still facing the nation and focused on what he considered the chief issues of the day: freedom and fairness for all Americans while emphasizing the benefits of citizenship for freed slaves. Grant concluded his address with the words, "My efforts in the future will be directed towards the restoration of good feelings between the different sections of our common community".[370]
Despite his administration's scandals, Grant continued to be personally popular.[371] His reelection was supported by Frederick Douglas and other prominent abolitionists along with reformers of the Indian question.[372] A growing number of political reformers, however, were disappointed by the Gold Ring, Grant's support of Reconstruction, and corruption in the New York Customs House.[373] To placate them, Grant created a Civil Service Commission authorized by Congress in 1871.[374] The Commission, chaired by George William Curtis, proposed reforms, which Grant implemented by executive order in April 1872.[375] Congress appropriated funds the following month, but stopped funding the Commission in December 1875, and refused to pass legislation to implement its recommendations.[376] There was further intraparty division between the faction most concerned with the plight of the freedmen, and the faction concerned with the growth of industry and small government. During the war, both factions' interests had aligned, and in 1868 both had supported Grant. As the wartime coalition began to fray, Grant's alignment with the party's pro-Reconstruction elements alienated party leaders who favored an end to federal intervention in Southern racial issues.[377]
Many of that faction split from the party in 1872, calling themselves the Liberal Republican Party. Led by Charles Francis Adams of Massachusetts and Senator Carl Schurz of Missouri, they denounced the patronage system that Sumner, a Liberal Republican sympathizer, called "Grantism"; opposed a strong federal government; and demanded amnesty for Confederate soldiers.[378] The Liberal Republicans distrusted black suffrage and demanded literacy tests for voting while opposing federal enforcement of equal voting rights in the South.[379] They nominated Horace Greeley, a leading Republican newspaper editor and a fierce enemy of Grant. Democrats, seeking to benefit from anti-Grant sentiment, nominated Greeley as well.[380] The opposition pushed the themes that Grant was a scandal-ridden crook and a drunkard.[381] The regular Republican Party nominated Grant for reelection, with Senator Henry Wilson of Massachusetts replacing Colfax as the vice-presidential nominee. Wilson, viewed as a practical reformer and civil rights advocate, was meant to strengthen the Republican ticket, but the Crédit Mobilier bribery scandal was discovered right before the election, and implicating both Colfax and Wilson (but not Grant). To placate the burgeoning suffragist movement, the Republicans' platform included that women's rights should be treated with "respectful consideration", while Grant advocated equal rights for all citizens.[382] To the Liberals' chagrin, Greeley made Grant's Southern policy, rather than reform, the main campaign issue.[383]
The fusion effort failed and Grant was easily reelected. Liberal Republicans delivered few votes, and Greeley was only successful in areas the Democrats would have carried without him.[384] Federal prosecution of the Klan, a strong economy, debt reduction, lowered tariffs, and tax reductions, helped Grant defeat Greeley.[385] Grant won 56 percent of the popular vote and an Electoral College landslide of 286 to 66.[386][w] A majority of African Americans in the South voted for Grant, while Democratic opposition remained mostly peaceful.[387] Grant lost in six former slave states that wanted to see an end to Reconstruction.[388] The day after his Inauguration, Grant wrote a letter to Colfax expressing his faith and trust in Colfax's integrity and gave him approval to publish the letter, but the effort only served to compromise Grant's reputation.[389] In 1873 Wilson suffered a stroke; never fully recovering, he died in office on November 22, 1875.[390] With Wilson's loss, Grant relied on Fish's guidance more than ever.[391]
Panic of 1873 and loss of Congress
Grant continued to work for a strong dollar, signing into law the Coinage Act of 1873, which effectively ended the legal basis for bimetallism (the use of both silver and gold as money), establishing the gold standard in practice.[392][x] The Coinage Act discontinued the standard silver dollar and established the gold dollar as the sole monetary standard; because the gold supply did not increase as quickly as the population, the result was deflation. Silverites who wanted more money in circulation to raise prices farmers received denounced the move as the "Crime of 1873", claiming the deflation made debts more burdensome for farmers.[394]




Grant is congratulated for vetoing the "inflation bill" in 1874.


Grant's second term saw renewed economic turmoil. In September 1873, Jay Cooke & Company, a New York brokerage house, collapsed after it failed to sell all of the bonds issued by Jay Cooke's Northern Pacific Railway.[395] The collapse rippled through Wall Street, and other banks and brokerages that owned railroad stocks and bonds were also ruined.[395] On September 20, the New York Stock Exchange suspended trading for ten days.[396] Grant, who knew little about finance, traveled to New York to consult leading businessmen and bankers for advice on how to resolve the crisis, which became known as the Panic of 1873.[397] Grant believed that, as with the collapse of the Gold Ring in 1869, the panic was merely an economic fluctuation that affected bankers and brokers.[398] He instructed the Treasury to buy $10 million in government bonds, injecting cash into the system. The purchases curbed the panic on Wall Street but an industrial depression, later called the Long Depression, nonetheless swept the nation.[397] Many of the nation's railroads—89 out of 364—went bankrupt.[399]
Congress hoped inflation would stimulate the economy and passed what became known as the "Inflation Bill" in 1874. Many farmers and workingmen favored the bill, which would have added $64 million in greenbacks to circulation, but some Eastern bankers opposed it because it would have weakened the dollar.[400] Belknap, Williams, and Delano[y] told Grant a veto would hurt Republicans in the November elections. Grant believed the bill would destroy the credit of the nation, and he vetoed it despite their objections. Grant's veto placed him in the conservative faction of the Republican Party and was the beginning of the party's commitment to a strong gold-backed dollar.[402] Grant later pressured Congress for a bill to further strengthen the dollar by gradually reducing the number of greenbacks in circulation. When the Democrats gained a majority in the House after the 1874 elections, the lame-duck Republican Congress did so before the Democrats took office.[403] On January 14, 1875, Grant signed the Specie Payment Resumption Act into law, which required gradual reduction of the number of greenbacks allowed to circulate and declared that specie payment (i.e., in gold or silver) would resume in 1879.[402]
Gilded Age corruption and reform
Further information: Ulysses S. Grant presidential administration scandals and Ulysses S. Grant presidential administration reforms




Cartoonist Thomas Nast praises Grant for rejecting demands by Pennsylvania politicians to suspend civil service rules.


Grant was president during the Gilded Age, a time of massive industrial wealth, railroad speculation, and extravagance that fueled unethical behavior and influence in government offices.[404][405] Although Grant was not personally involved in scandal, multiple corruption charges swept through his administration, clouding Grant's historical reputation.[406] Grant was greatly trusting of men involved in speculation, particularly wealthy Gilded Age tycoons, loyally defending his corrupt cabinet or appointees whom he believed were innocent.[407] Grant's failure was in his poor selection of cabinet officers and how he responded to their downfalls. Grant did not stop the guilty parties' prosecutions and was often insistent about having them prosecuted. His political enemies, outraged over the scandals, were eager to discredit Reconstruction, and the moral integrity of his administration.[408] No person linked any of the scandals together, except possibly Grant's personal secretary, Orville E. Babcock, who indirectly controlled many cabinet departments and delayed federal investigations.[409][404] Historians debate how effective he was at halting corruption.[410]
In November 1871, New York Collector and a member of New York Senator Roscoe Conkling's political machine, was forced to resign. Murphy, a Grant appointee, had become embroiled in a dispute with another faction of the Republican party over the jobs at his disposal and was investigated by Congress for mismanagement and corruption in office. In December, Grant appointed Chester A. Arthur, another Conkling man, to replace Murphy, and administration of the Customs House steadily improved.[411] On March 3, 1873, Grant signed into law a congressional and presidential salary increase. The unpopular Salary Grab Act was repealed in December, although Grant was allowed to keep his pay raise.[301]
The scandals escalated during Grant's second term, even reaching into Grant's inner circle.[412] In 1874, a congressional investigation exposed corruption in the Treasury Department, known as the Sanborn incident.[413] Previously, acting Treasury Secretary William Adams Richardson, hired John B. Sanborn as an independent tax collector on a 50 percent commission basis, known as a moiety.[414] Richardson became Secretary of Treasury in March 1873.[415] Sanborn was given virtual control of the Treasury, and he used excessive intrusive methods of obtaining taxes [416] An 1874 congressional investigation exposed Sanborn's malicious profiteering and condemned Richardson for allowing Sanborn to abuse the law but did not attempt impeachment. Richardson resigned when the House motioned his censure and Grant appointed him as a judge of the Court of Claims.[413] In June 1874, Grant signed the Anti-Moiety Act, abolishing that system.[409]




Harper's Weekly cartoon on Bristow's Whiskey Ring investigation


Grant replaced Richardson as Treasury Secretary with Benjamin H. Bristow, a man known for his honesty, who began a series of reforms in the department.[417] Since the Civil War, whiskey distillers and corrupt treasury agents falsified figures on the amount of liquor produced, while certifying bogus returns, denying the treasury revenue.[418] Discovering that millions of gallons of whiskey escaped taxation, and having Grant's endorsement to act ("Let no guilty man escape"), Bristow in May 1875 struck at the Whiskey Ring.[419] He ordered federal marshals to seize 32 installations and arrest 350 men; Bristow obtained 176 indictments that led to 110 convictions, and giving $3,150,000 to the Treasury.[420] Bristow's investigation implicated Babcock and Missouri treasury agent John McDonald as part of the Whiskey Ring. When informed on separate occasions, Grant became defensive concerning Babcock, but concerning McDonald, the ringleader, Grant believed he had been betrayed.[421] In 1876, a jury acquitted Babcock at a trial influenced by Grant's deposition in Babcock's favor.[422] After the trial, Grant dismissed Babcock from the White House.[423][z] Grant freed some Ring members after a few months in prison, including McDonald, released after serving 17 months in jail.[aa][426]
Grant's Civil Service Commission had limited success. Some cabinet members implemented a merit system that increased the number of qualified candidates and relied less on Congressional patronage.[427] Delano, however, exempted his department from competitive examinations, and Congress refused to enact permanent Civil Service reform.[428] Zachariah Chandler, who succeeded Delano in 1875, reformed the Interior Department and fired corrupt clerks in the Bureau of Indian Affairs.[429] The same year, Postmaster Marshall Jewell informed Grant the Judiciary Committee had discovered Attorney General George Williams wife was involved in an extortion scandal.[430] To avoid a formal Congressional probe into the Justice Department, Grant fired Williams and appointed reformer Edwards Pierrepont in his place.[431] With Bristow, Pierrepont, and Jewell on his cabinet, Grant temporarily appeased reformers.[430] Grant suggested other reforms as well, including a proposal that states should offer free public schooling to all children; he also endorsed the Blaine Amendment, which would have forbidden government aid to schools with religious affiliations.[432]
When the Democrats took control of the House in 1875, they launched a series of investigations into corruption in federal departments.[433] The most damaging of these involved Secretary of War William W. Belknap taking quarterly kickbacks from the Fort Sill tradership, which led to his resignation in February 1876.[434] Belknap was impeached and tried by the Senate that summer, but was not convicted.[435] Congress also investigated and reprimanded Navy Secretary Robeson in July 1876 for bribery.[436] In November 1876, Grant apologized to the nation and admitted mistakes in his administration, saying, "[f]ailures have been errors of judgement, not of intent."[437]
Election of 1876
Main article: United States presidential election, 1876
Even as Grant drew cheers at the opening of the Centennial Exposition in May 1876, the collected scandals of his presidency, the country's weak economy, and the Democratic gains in the House led many in the Republican party to repudiate him in June.[438] Bristow was among the leading candidates to replace him, suggesting that a large faction desired an end to "Grantism" and feared that Grant would run for a third term.[439] Ultimately, Grant declined to run, but Bristow also failed to capture the nomination, as the convention settled on Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio, a reformer.[440] The Democrats nominated Governor Samuel J. Tilden of New York.[441] Voting irregularities in three Southern states caused the election that year to remain undecided for several months.[442] Grant told Congress to settle the matter through legislation and assured both sides that he would not use the army to force a result, except to curb violence.[443] On January 29, 1877, he signed legislation forming an Electoral Commission to decide the matter.[444] The Commission ruled that the disputed votes belonged to Hayes; to forestall Democratic protests, Republicans agreed to the Compromise of 1877, in which the last troops were withdrawn from Southern capitals.[445] The Republicans had won, but Reconstruction was over.[445] According to biographer Jean Edward Smith, "Grant's calm visage in the White House reassured the nation."[446]
Cabinet




President Ulysses S. Grant
(Henry Ulke 1875)







Grant's Cabinet, 1876–1877





The Grant Cabinet


Office
Name
Term





President
Ulysses S. Grant
1869–1877





Vice President
Schuyler Colfax
1869–1873


Henry Wilson
1873–1875


None
1875–1877





Secretary of State
Elihu B. Washburne
1869


Hamilton Fish
1869–1877





Secretary of Treasury
George S. Boutwell
1869–1873


William A. Richardson
1873–1874


Benjamin H. Bristow
1874–1876


Lot M. Morrill
1876–1877





Secretary of War
John M. Schofield[i]
1869


John A. Rawlins
1869


William W. Belknap
1869–1876


Alphonso Taft
1876


J. Donald Cameron
1876–1877





Attorney General
Ebenezer R. Hoar
1869–1870


Amos T. Akerman
1870–1871


George H. Williams
1871–1875


Edwards Pierrepont
1875–1876


Alphonso Taft
1876–1877





Postmaster General
John A. J. Creswell
1869–1874


James W. Marshall
1874


Marshall Jewell
1874–1876


James N. Tyner
1876–1877





Secretary of the Navy
Adolph E. Borie
1869


George M. Robeson
1869–1877





Secretary of the Interior
Jacob D. Cox
1869–1870


Columbus Delano
1870–1875


Zachariah Chandler
1875–1877






^ Schofield was Secretary of War under President Andrew Johnson, but stayed on temporarily when Grant assumed the presidency.[447]






Post-presidency
Main article: Post-presidency of Ulysses S. Grant
World tour and diplomacy
Main article: World tour of Ulysses S. Grant




Grant and Bismarck in 1878


After leaving the White House, Grant and his family stayed with Fish in Washington for two months before setting out on a world tour that lasted approximately two and a half years.[448] Preparing for the tour, they arrived in Philadelphia on May 10, 1877, and were honored with celebrations during the week before their departure. On May 16, Grant and Julia left for England aboard the SS Indiana.[449] During the tour the Grants made stops in Europe, the Mediterranean, and points in middle and Far East, meeting with notable dignitaries, such as Queen Victoria, Pope Leo XIII, Otto von Bismarck, Emperor Meiji and others. Grant was the first U.S. President to visit Jerusalem and the Holy Land.[450] As a courtesy to Grant, his touring party was sometimes transported to their destinations by the U.S. Navy. During the tour, the Hayes administration encouraged Grant to assume a diplomatic role to unofficially represent the United States and strengthen American interests abroad, while resolving issues for some countries in the process.[451] Homesick, the Grants left Japan sailing on the SS City of Tokio escorted by a Japanese man-of-war, crossed the Pacific and landed in San Francisco on September 20, 1879, greeted by cheering crowds.[452] Grant's world tour demonstrated to much of the world that the United States was an emerging world power.[453]

Third term attempt




Cartoonist Joseph Keppler lampooned Grant and his associates. Puck 1880


Main article: 1880 Republican National Convention
Stalwarts, led by Grant's old political ally, Roscoe Conkling, saw the ex-president's renewed popularity as a way for their faction to regain power, and sought to find ways to nominate him for the presidency in 1880. Opponents called it a violation of the unofficial two-term rule that had been the norm since George Washington. Grant said nothing publicly, but he wanted the job and encouraged his men.[454] Washburne urged him to run; Grant demurred, saying he would be happy for the Republicans to win with another candidate, though he preferred James G. Blaine to John Sherman. Even so, Conkling and John A. Logan began to organize delegates in Grant's favor. When the convention convened in Chicago in June, there were more delegates pledged to Grant than to any other candidate, but he was still short of a majority vote to capture the nomination.[455]
At the convention, Conkling nominated Grant with an elegant speech, the most famous line being: "When asked which state he hails from, our sole reply shall be, he hails from Appomattox and its famous apple tree."[455] With 370 votes needed for nomination, the first ballot had Grant at 304, Blaine at 284, Sherman at 93, and the rest scattered to minor candidates.[456] Subsequent ballots followed, with roughly the same result; neither Grant nor Blaine could win. After thirty-six ballots, Blaine's delegates deserted him and combined with those of other candidates to nominate a compromise candidate: Representative James A. Garfield of Ohio.[457] A procedural motion made the vote unanimous for Garfield, who accepted the nomination.[458] Grant gave speeches for Garfield but declined to criticize the Democratic nominee, Winfield Scott Hancock, a general who had served under him in the Army of the Potomac.[459] Garfield won the election. Grant gave Garfield his public support and pushed him to include Stalwarts in his administration.[460] On July 2, 1881, Garfield was shot by an assassin and died on September 19. On learning of Garfield's death from a reporter, Grant wept bitterly.[461]
Business reversals
When Grant had returned to America from his costly world tour, he had depleted most of his savings and needed to earn money and find a new home.[462] Wealthy friends bought him a home on Manhattan's Upper East Side, and to make an income, Grant, Jay Gould, and former Mexican Finance Secretary Matías Romero chartered the Mexican Southern Railroad, with plans to build a railroad from Oaxaca to Mexico City.[463] Grant urged Chester A. Arthur, who had succeeded Garfield as president in 1881, to negotiate a free trade treaty with Mexico. Arthur and the Mexican government agreed, but the United States Senate rejected the treaty in 1883.[463] The railroad was similarly unsuccessful, falling into bankruptcy the following year.[463]
At the same time, Grant's son Ulysses Jr. had opened a Wall Street brokerage house with Ferdinand Ward. Ward was regarded as a rising star and the firm, Grant & Ward, was initially successful.[464] In 1883, Grant joined the firm and invested $100,000 of his own money.[465] To encourage investment, Ward paid investors abnormally high interest, by pledging the company's securities on multiple loans in a process called rehypothecation.[466] Ward, in collusion with banker James D. Fish, kept secret from bank examiners, retrieved the firm's securities from the company's bank vault.[467] When the trades went bad, multiple loans came due, all backed up by the same collateral. Historians agree that Grant was likely unaware of Ward's intentions, but it is unclear how much Buck Grant knew. In May 1884, enough investments went bad to convince Ward that the firm would soon be bankrupt. Ward told Grant of the impending failure, but assured Grant that this was a temporary shortfall.[468] Grant approached businessman William Henry Vanderbilt, who gave him a personal loan of $150,000.[469] Grant invested the money in the firm, but it was not enough to save it from failure. Essentially penniless, but compelled by a sense of personal honor, he repaid what he could with his Civil War mementos and the sale or transfer of all other assets.[470] Vanderbilt took title to Grant's home, although he allowed the Grants to continue to reside there, and pledged to donate the souvenirs to the federal government and insisted the debt had been paid in full.[471] Grant was distraught over Ward's deception and asked privately how he could ever "trust any human being again."[472] In March 1885, as his health was failing, he testified against both Ward and Fish.[473] Ward was convicted of fraud in October 1885, months after Grant's death, and served six and a half years in prison.[474]
Memoirs, pension, and death






Grant working on his memoirs in June 1885, less than a month before his death






Grant's funeral train at West Point




To restore his family's income and reputation, Grant wrote several articles on his Civil War campaigns for The Century Magazine at $500 each. The articles were well received by critics, and the editor, Robert Underwood Johnson, suggested that Grant write a book of memoirs, as Sherman and others had done. Grant's articles would serve as the basis for several chapters.[475]
In the summer of 1884, Grant complained of a sore throat but put off seeing a doctor until late October when he learned it was cancer, possibly caused by his frequent cigar smoking.[476][ab] Grant chose not to reveal the seriousness of his condition to his wife, who soon found out from Grant's doctor.[478] Before being diagnosed, Grant was invited to a Methodist service for Civil War veterans in Ocean Grove, New Jersey, on August 4, 1884, receiving a standing ovation from more than ten thousand veterans and others; it would be his last public appearance.[479] In March of the following year, the New York Times announced that Grant was dying of cancer and a nationwide public concern for the former president began.[480] Knowing of Grant and Julia's financial difficulties, Congress sought to honor him and restored him to the rank of General of the Army with full retirement pay (Grant's assumption of the Presidency in 1869 had required that he resign his commission and forfeit his pension).[481]
Grant was nearly broke and worried constantly about leaving his wife a suitable amount of money to live on. Century magazine offered Grant a book contract with a 10 percent royalty, but Grant's friend Mark Twain, understanding how bad Grant's financial condition was, made him an offer for his memoirs which paid an unheard-of 75 percent royalty.[482] To provide for his family, Grant worked intensely on his memoirs at his home in New York City. His former staff member Adam Badeau assisted him with much of the research, while his son Frederick located documents and did much of the fact-checking.[483] Because of the summer heat and humidity, his doctors recommended that he move upstate to a cottage at the top of Mount McGregor, offered by a family friend.[484]
Grant finished his memoir and died only a few days later.[485] Grant's memoirs treat his early life and time in the Mexican–American War briefly and are inclusive of his life up to the end of the Civil War.[486] The Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant, was a critical and commercial success. Julia Grant received about $450,000 in royalties.[482] Grant's successful autobiography pioneered a method for ex-presidents and veterans to earn money.[487] The memoir has been highly regarded by the public, military historians, and literary critics.[488] Grant portrayed himself in the persona of the honorable Western hero, whose strength lies in his honesty and straightforwardness. He candidly depicted his battles against both the Confederates and internal army foes.[489] Twain called the Memoirs a "literary masterpiece." Given over a century of favorable literary analysis, reviewer Mark Perry states that the Memoirs are "the most significant work" of American non-fiction.[490]
After a year-long struggle with cancer, surrounded by his family, Grant died at 8 o'clock in the morning in the Mount McGregor cottage on July 23, 1885, at the age of 63.[491] Sheridan, then Commanding General of the Army, ordered a day-long tribute to Grant on all military posts, and President Grover Cleveland ordered a thirty-day nationwide period of mourning. After private services, the honor guard placed Grant's body on a special funeral train, which traveled to West Point and New York City. A quarter of a million people viewed it in the two days before the funeral. Tens of thousands of men, many of them veterans from the Grand Army of the Republic marched with Grant's casket drawn by two dozen black stallions[492] to Riverside Park in the Morningside Heights neighborhood of Upper Manhattan. His pallbearers included Union generals Sherman and Sheridan, Confederate generals Simon Bolivar Buckner and Joseph E. Johnston, Admiral David Dixon Porter, and Senator John A. Logan, the head of the GAR.[493] Following the casket in the seven-mile-long procession were President Cleveland, the two living former presidents Hayes and Arthur, all of the President's Cabinet, as well as the justices of the Supreme Court.[494]
Attendance at the New York funeral topped 1.5 million.[493] Ceremonies were held in other major cities around the country, while Grant was eulogized in the press and likened to George Washington and Abraham Lincoln.[495] Grant's body was laid to rest in Riverside Park, first in a temporary tomb, and then—twelve years later, on April 17, 1897—in the General Grant National Memorial, also known as "Grant's Tomb", the largest mausoleum in North America.[493]
Historical reputation




   Commanding General Grant
Constant Mayer's portrait of 1866



Further information: Historical reputation of Ulysses S. Grant and Historical rankings of presidents of the United States
Many historians and biographers have been intrigued and challenged by contradictions in Grant's life, and few presidential reputations have shifted as dramatically as his.[496] At his death, Grant was seen as "a symbol of the American national identity and memory".[497] Soon afterward, Grant's reputation fell under severe criticism as national reconciliation took hold among whites throughout the country.[496] Later accounts portrayed his administration as corrupt; as the popularity of the pro-Confederate Lost Cause theory and the Dunning School movement grew early in the 20th century, a more negative view of Grant became common.[498] In 1917, historian Louis Arthur Coolidge bucked the trend of negativity and said Grant's "success as President" was "hardly less significant than his success at war."[499] In 1931, historians Paxson and Bach noted that Grant's presidency "had some achievements, after all."[500] In 1934, historian Robert R. McCormick said Grant's military triumphs were neglected due in part to the "malicious and deliberate design" of Lost Cause veterans and writers.[501] In the 1950s, historians Bruce Catton and T. Harry Williams began a reassessment of Grant's military career, shifting the analysis of Grant as victor by brute force to that of successful, skillful, modern strategist and commander.[502] William S. McFeely won the Pulitzer Prize for his critical 1981 biography that credited Grant's initial presidential efforts on civil rights, but lamented his failure to carry out lasting progress.[503]
In the 21st century Grant's reputation among historians has improved markedly.[504] Historians' opinions of Grant's presidency now better appreciate Grant's personal integrity, Reconstruction efforts and peace policy towards Indians, even when they fell short.[497][505] In 2016, Ronald C. White continued this trend with a biography that historian T. J. Stiles said, "solidifies the positive image amassed in recent decades, blotting out the caricature of a military butcher and political incompetent, promoted by Lost Cause and Jim Crow era historians."[506][ac] Like White's book, Ron Chernow's 2017 biography continued the elevation of Grant's historical reputation.[508] In a 2017 book review, former U.S. President Bill Clinton offered praise for "Grant’s significant achievements at the end of the war and after." [509]
Memorials and presidential library




Grant National Memorial, known as "Grant's Tomb", largest mausoleum in North America


See also: Ulysses S. Grant cultural depictions
Several memorials honor Grant. In addition to his mausoleum – Grant's Tomb in New York City – there is the Ulysses S. Grant Memorial at the foot of Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C.[510] Created by sculptor Henry Merwin Shrady and architect Edward Pearce Casey, and dedicated in 1922, it overlooks the Capitol Reflecting Pool.[511] In 2015, restoration work began, which is expected to be completed before the bicentennial of Grant's birth in 2022.[512]
The Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site near St. Louis, and several other sites in Ohio and Illinois memorialize Grant's life.[513] There are smaller memorials in Chicago's Lincoln Park and Philadelphia's Fairmount Park. Named in his honor are Grant Park, as well as several counties in western and midwestern states. On June 3, 1891, a bronze statue of Grant by Danish sculptor Johannes Gelert was dedicated at Grant Park in Galena, Illinois.[514][515] From 1890 to 1940, part of what is now Kings Canyon National Park was called General Grant National Park, named for the General Grant sequoia.[516]
In May 2012, the Ulysses S. Grant Foundation, on the institute's fiftieth anniversary, selected Mississippi State University as the permanent location for Ulysses S. Grant's presidential library.[517] Historian John Y. Simon edited Grant's letters into a 32-volume scholarly edition published by Southern Illinois University Press.[518]
Grant has appeared on the front of the United States fifty-dollar bill since 1913. In 1921, the Ulysses S. Grant Centenary Association was founded with the goal of coordinating special observances and erecting monuments in recognition of Grant's historical role. The venture was financed by the minting of 10,000 gold dollars (depicted below) and 250,000 half dollars. The coins were minted and issued in 1922, commemorating the 100th anniversary of Grant's birth.[519][520] Grant has also appeared on several U.S. postage stamps, the first one issued in 1890, five years after his death.[521]





Grant has appeared on the United States fifty-dollar bill since 1913.



Grant on the one-dollar gold piece, issued on the 100th anniversary of his birth. See also: Grant half dollar.



The first U.S. postage stamp honoring Grant, issued 1890



Ulysses S. Grant honored on currency and postage





See also

Gallery of images of Ulysses S. Grant
List of American Civil War battles
List of American Civil War generals (Union)
Grant's Farm



Biography portal
United States Army portal
American Civil War portal
Military of the United States portal
Government of the United States portal
Politics portal


Notes




^ Assumed common name, Ulysses S. Grant, at West Point
^ Grant's step-grandmother Sarah Simpson, an educated woman who read French classical literature, spoke up for the name Ulysses, the legendary, ancient Greek hero.[10]
^ Biographer Edward G. Longacre attributes Grant's parents' decision to their recognition of his hatred of music.
^ According to Grant, the S. did not stand for anything.[21] Hamer believed it stood for Simpson.[22]
^ Several scholars, including Jean Edward Smith, Ron Chernow, and Charles B. Flood said that Longstreet was Grant's best man and the two other officers were Grant's groomsmen.[40] All three served in the Confederate Army and surrendered to Grant at Appomattox.[41]
^ On June 15, 1846, the Oregon Treaty between the United States and Great Britain ceded the Oregon Territory to the United States formerly ending British-American joint occupation without war.[62]
^ William McFeely said that Grant left the army simply because he was "profoundly depressed" and that the evidence as to how much and how often Grant drank remains elusive.[67] Jean Edward Smith maintains Grant's resignation was too sudden to be a calculated decision.[68] Buchanan never mentioned it again until asked about it during the Civil War.[71] The effects and extent of Grant's drinking on his military and public career are debated by historians.[72] Lyle Dorsett said Grant was an "alcoholic" but functioned amazingly well. William Farina maintains Grant's devotion to family kept him from drinking to excess and sinking into debt.[73]
^ In 1903, August Busch Sr. purchased land that included Grant's original 1850's farm and Busch's family called it Grant's Farm. In 1910 the Busch family built a mansion on the farm. Open to the public, Grant's Farm has become an institution in St. Louis.[84]
^ Jesse's tannery business was later known as "Grant & Perkins" in 1862.[90]
^ Frémont was dismissed when he refused Lincoln's order to overturn his proclamation to emancipate Confederate slaves.[113] Frémont was briefly replaced by Major General David Hunter serving as the Department of the West's last commander before it was broken up.[119]
^ See topographical map
^ In response to allegations of Grant's drinking, his staff officer, William R. Rowley, maintained that the allegation was a fabricated lie. Other witnesses claimed that Grant was sober on the morning of April 6.
^ Grant made amends with the Jewish community during his presidency, appointing them to various positions in his administration.[169]
^ Meade had followed Halleck's cautious approach to fighting, and Grant was there to give him direction and encouragement to be more aggressive.[190]
^ Grant was considered one of the top equestrians in the United States. He rode several other horses during the Civil War.[197]
^ Johnson had already dismissed four other military district commanders.[253]
^ John Schofield, who was Secretary of War under Johnson, was asked by Grant to remain in that position until he could appoint his own man in office.[282]
^ Grant's religious faith also influenced his policy towards Indians, believing that the "Creator" did not place races of men on earth for the "stronger" to destroy the "weaker".[313]
^ Bison were hunted almost to the point of extinction during the latter 1800s, Yellowstone National Park was the only remaining place in the country where free-roaming herds persisted.[322]
^ Urged by his Secretary of War Rawlins, Grant initially supported recognition of Cuban belligerency, but Rawlins's death on September 6, 1869, removed any cabinet support for military intervention.[329]
^ The international tribunal awarded the United States $15,500,000.[334]
^ The Báez government was under an insurgency led by Gregorio Luperón. Báez had arrested an American, Davis Hatch, who had supported Luperon. Davis was held without trial and originally threatened with execution, compromising negotiations. (The sentence was later reduced to banishment from the island.)[337]
^ Greeley died after election day but before the day the Electoral College voted, as a result, Greeley's running mate, Benjamin Gratz Brown, received most of the electoral votes Greeley would have had.[386]
^ The gold standard and deflation economy remained in effect into the mid-1890s.[393]
^ Grant and Delano, his second Secretary of Interior, were third cousins.[401]
^ McFeely, writing in 1981, believed that Grant knew of Babcock's guilt, while Smith, in 2001, believed the evidence against Babcock was circumstantial at best.[424]
^ Grant had appointed McDonald supervisor of internal revenue in St. Louis and depended on him to keep him informed of Carl Schurz, who was plotting against Grant and forming a Liberal Republican insurgency.[425]
^ Today, medical historians believed he suffered from a T1N1 carcinoma of the tonsillar fossa.[477]
^ White said Grant, "demonstrated a distinctive sense of humility, moral courage, and determination," and as president he "stood up for African-Americans, especially fighting against voter suppression perpetuated by the Ku Klux Klan."[507]




References


^ McFeely 1981, p. 6.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 3.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 21–22.
^ White 2016, p. 6.
^ Hesseltine 1957, p. 4.
^ White 2016, p. 8.
^ White 2016, pp. 8–9.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 5–6; White 2016, p. 9.
^ Simpson 2014, pp. 2–3; White 2016, pp. 9–10.
^ White 2016, pp. 9–10.
^ Longacre 2006, pp. 6–7.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 497; White 2016, pp. 16, 18.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 8, 10, 140–141; White 2016, p. 21.
^ Brands 2012, p. 8; White 2016, p. 19.
^ Longacre 2006, pp. 6–7; Waugh 2009, p. 10.
^ Simpson 2014, pp. 2–3; Longacre 2006, pp. 6–7.
^ Waugh 2009, p. 10.
^ White 2016, p. 20; Simpson 2014, p. 20.
^ White 2016, p. 25.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 12; Smith 2001, pp. 24, 83.
^ Smith 2001, p. 83.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 12; Smith 2001, p. 24.
^ White 2016, pp. 25, 43; Cullum 1891, pp. 170–171; Simpson 2014, pp. 10–11.
^ White 2016, p. 41.
^ White 2016, p. 30.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 24; Smith 2001, p. 28.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 10.
^ Smith 2001, p. 27; McFeely 1981, pp. 16–17.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 16–17; Smith 2001, pp. 26–27.
^ Simpson 2014, p. 13–14; Smith 2001, pp. 26–28.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 12–13.
^ White 2016, pp. 38, 44; Cullum 1891, pp. 170–171; White 2016.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 16, 19.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 26–28; Longacre 2006, p. 24.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 28–29; Brands 2012, p. 15.
^ Smith 2001, p. 28.
^ a b Smith 2001, pp. 30–33.
^ Waugh 2009, p. 33; Lasner 2002; King 2012.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 73–74; Waugh 2009, p. 33; Chernow 2017, p. 62; White 2016, p. 102.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 62; Smith 2001, p. 73; Flood 2005, p. 2007.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 62.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 20, 26; Bonekemper 2011, p. 8; Simpson 2014, p. 49.
^ Smith 2001, p. 73.
^ Simpson 2014, p. 49.
^ a b Encyclopedia of the Mexican-American War 2013, p. 271.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 35–37; Brands 2012, pp. 15–17.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 30–31; Brands 2012, p. 23.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 32–36; Brands 2012, p. 43.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 56–57; McFeely 1981, p. 34.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 34–35.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 41–42.
^ a b McFeely 1981, p. 36.
^ Simpson 2014, p. 44; Encyclopedia of the Mexican-American War 2013, p. 271.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 67–68, 70, 73; Brands 2012, pp. 49–52.
^ Simpson 2014, p. 458.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 31, 37.
^ White 2016, p. 75.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 44.
^ Smith 2001, p. 76.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 76–77.
^ Smith 2001, p. 78.
^ Encyclopedia of the Mexican-American War 2013, pp. 477–478.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 48–49.
^ a b White 2016, p. 487.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 52; Cullum 1891, p. 171.
^ White 2016, p. 118.
^ a b McFeely 1981, p. 55.
^ a b Smith 2001, p. 87.
^ Cullum 1891, p. 171; Chernow 2017, pp. 85–86.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 86–87; White 2016, pp. 118–120; McFeely 1981, p. 55.
^ Smith 2001, p. 88.
^ Farina 2007, p. 202.
^ Farina 2007, pp. 13, 202; Dorsett 1983.
^ Longacre 2006, pp. 55–58.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 87–88; Lewis 1950, pp. 328–332.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 77–78.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 58–60.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 61.
^ Smith 2001, p. 91.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 58–60; Chernow 2017, p. 94.
^ White 2016, p. 128.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 62; Brands 2012, p. 86; White 2016, p. 128.
^ Brands 2012; White 2016.
^ Herrold 2017.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 94–95; White 2016, p. 130.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 94–95; McFeely 1981, p. 69; White 2016, p. 130.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 64; Brands 2012, pp. 89–90; White 2016, pp. 129–131.
^ White 2016, p. 131; Simon 1969, pp. 4–5.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 65–66; White 2016, pp. 133, 136.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 66.
^ White 2016, p. 136.
^ White 2016, pp. 135–137.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 69–70.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 86–87.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 69–70; Simon 1969, pp. 4–5.
^ White 2016, pp. 139–140; Smith 2001, p. 97.
^ White 2016, p. 140.
^ Brands 2012, p. 123.
^ Brands 2012, p. 121.
^ White 2016, pp. 140–143; Brands 2012, pp. 121–122; McFeely 1981, p. 73.
^ Brands 2012, p. 121; White 2016, p. 142.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 73.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 122–123.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 80.
^ Smith 2001, p. 83; Flood 2005, p. 43.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 45–46.
^ Smith 2001, p. 113.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 117–118; Catton 1963, p. 29.
^ Catton 1998, p. 68.
^ White 2016, p. 159.
^ Flood 2005, p. 63; White 2016, p. 159.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 91.
^ a b White 2016, p. 168.
^ White 2016, pp. 168–171.
^ White 2016, p. 172.
^ White 2016, pp. 172–173; Groom 2012, pp. 94, 101–103.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 92–94.
^ White 2016, p. 168; McFeely 1981, p. 94.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 89.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 138–142; Groom 2012, pp. 101–103.
^ Smith 2001, p. 146.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 141–164; Brands 2012, pp. 164–165.
^ Groom 2012, pp. 138, 143–144.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 164–165; Smith 2001, pp. 125–134.
^ Groom 2012, p. 18.
^ White 2016, p. 210; Barney 2011, p. 287.
^ Smith 2001, p. 185.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 111–112; Groom 2012, p. 63; White 2016, p. 211.
^ Groom 2012, pp. 62–65; McFeely 1981, pp. 112.
^ White 2016, p. 211.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 111; Bonekemper 2012, pp. 51, 94; Catton 1963, pp. 228, 230–231; Barney 2011, p. 287.
^ White 2016, pp. 217–218.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 51, 58–59, 63–64.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 114; Flood 2005, pp. 109, 112; Bonekemper 2012, pp. 51, 58–59, 63–64.
^ Simpson 2014, p. 134.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 59, 63–64; Smith 2001, p. 206.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 115-116.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 115.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 187–188; Grant 1885, p. Chap XXV.
^ Bonekemper 2012, p. 94; White 2016, p. 221.
^ White 2016, pp. 223–224.
^ Kaplan 2015, pp. 1109–1119; White 2016, pp. 223–225.
^ Smith 2001, p. 204; Barney 2011, p. 289.
^ White 2016, p. 229.
^ White 2016, p. 230; Groom 2012, pp. 363–364.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 188–191; White 2016, pp. 230–231.
^ White 2016, p. 225–226.
^ Longacre 2006, p. 137; White 2016, p. 231.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 211–212.
^ Badeau 1887, p. 126.
^ Flood 2005, p. 133.
^ White 2016, p. 243.
^ Catton 1960, p. 112.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 221–223.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 147–148; White 2016, p. 246.
^ White 2016, p. 248.
^ Catton 1960, pp. 119, 291; White 2016, pp. 248–249.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 223, 225; White 2016, p. 250.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 147–148.
^ White 2016, pp. 246–247.
^ Smith 2001.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 143–144; Sarna 2012a, p. 37.
^ Brands 2012, p. 218.
^ Sarna 2012b; Smith 2001, p. 225.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 226–227; Simpson 2014, pp. 164–165; Brands 2012, pp. 217–219.
^ Brands 2012, p. 220; Smith 2001, pp. 226–227.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 226–227.
^ Ash 2010, p. 368.
^ Sarna 2012a, pp. 89, 147; White 2016, p. 494.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 148–149.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 226–228.
^ Flood 2005, p. 160.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 164–165.
^ Smith 2001, p. 231.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 122–138; Smith 2001, pp. 206–257.
^ Catton 1968, p. 8.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 136.
^ Catton 1968, p. 7.
^ Brands 2012, p. 265; Cullum 1891, p. 172; Newell & Shrader 2011, p. 328.
^ Flood 2005, p. 196.
^ Flood 2005, p. 201.
^ Brands 2012, p. 267; McFeely 1981, p. 145.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 147; Smith 2001, pp. 267–268; Brands 2012, pp. 267–268.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 214–215.
^ Flood 2005, p. 216.
^ Flood 2005, pp. 217–218.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 148–150.
^ Flood 2005, p. 232; McFeely 1981, p. 148; Cullum 1891, p. 172.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 156.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 292–293.
^ Wheelan 2014, p. 20.
^ Catton 1960, pp. 190, 193; Wheelan 2014, p. 20.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 157; Wheelan 2014, p. 20.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 157–175; Smith 2001, pp. 313–339, 343–368; Wheelan 2014, p. 20.
^ a b McFeely 1981, pp. 162–163.
^ Smith 2001, p. 303.
^ Smith 2001, p. 302-303.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 378.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 396–397.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 303, 314; Chernow 2017, pp. 376–377.
^ Smith 2001, p. 314; Chernow 2017, pp. 376–377.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 378–379, 384; Bonekemper 2012, p. 463.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 165.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 385–387, 394–395; Bonekemper 2012, p. 463.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 389, 392–395.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 169.
^ Bonekemper 2011, pp. 41–42.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 157–175; Smith 2001, pp. 313–39, 343–68.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 178–186.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 179; Smith 2001, pp. 369–395; Catton 1968, pp. 308–309.
^ Catton 1968, p. 309.
^ Catton 1968, p. 294.
^ a b Catton 1960, pp. 223, 228; Smith 2001, p. 387.
^ Catton 1960, p. 235; Smith 2001, pp. 388–389.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 388–389.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 389–390.
^ Smith 2001, p. 390.
^ Bonekemper 2012, p. 359.
^ Bonekemper 2012, p. 353.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 213–214.
^ Bonekemper 2012, pp. 365–366.
^ White 2016, pp. 403–404.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 401–403.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 504; Smith 2001, pp. 401–403.
^ White 2016, p. 405.
^ Grant 1885, p. Chapter LXVII; Smith 2001, p. 404.
^ White 2016, pp. 405–406.
^ Goethals 2015, p. 92; Smith 2001, p. 405.
^ White 2016, p. 407.
^ Catton 1960, p. 304.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 212, 219–220; Catton 1960, p. 304.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 224.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 375–376.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 409–412.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 227–229.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 410–411; Chernow 2017, pp. 556–557.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 232–233.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 234.
^ Smith 2001, p. 434n.
^ Foner 2015a.
^ Brands 2012, p. 390; Smith 2001, p. 420; McFeely 1981, pp. 238–241.
^ Brands 2012, p. 390.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 565.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 240–241; Smith 2001, pp. 420–421.
^ a b Simon 2002, p. 243.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 548.
^ a b Brands 2012, pp. 397–398.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 392, 396.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 243–244.
^ Brands 2012, p. 396; Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 432–433; Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ Smith 2001, p. 438; Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ a b White 2016, p. 453.
^ a b Simon 2002, p. 244; Chernow 2017, p. 594.
^ a b c Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ Simon 2002, p. 244; Chernow 2017, pp. 594–595.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 603.
^ White 2016, p. 454–455; Simon 2002, pp. 244.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 611.
^ White 2016, pp. 458–459; Simon 2002, p. 244.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 244–245.
^ Peters & Woolley 2018a.
^ a b Simon 2002, p. 245.
^ Peters & Woolley 2018b.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 264–267.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 459–460.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 468–469.
^ Smith 2001, p. 461.
^ Foner 2014, pp. 243–244.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 284; Smith 2001, p. 461; White 2016, p. 471.
^ White 2016, p. 463.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 287–288.
^ Patrick 1968, p. 166.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 305.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 468–473; Chernow 2017, p. 635.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 465–466; White 2016, pp. 475, 530; Chernow 2017, pp. 635–636.
^ a b c d Simon 2002, pp. 246–247.
^ White 2016, pp. 507, 564.
^ Smith 2001, p. 472.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 469–470.
^ a b White 2016, pp. 474–475.
^ White 2016, p. 473.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 507–508, 562–563.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 387–389.
^ White 2016, pp. 494–495.
^ Maslin, Janet (10 October 2017). "In Ron Chernow's 'Grant,' an American Giant's Makeover Continues" – via www.nytimes.com. 
^ "Thomas Jefferson Statue". Washington D.C.: Architect of the Capitol. April 29, 2016. Retrieved October 19, 2017. 
^ Scher 2015, p. 83; Simon 2002, p. 247.
^ a b Simon 2002.
^ Goethals 2015, p. 96; Kaczorowski 1995, p. 155.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 435,465; Chernow 2017, pp. 686–687; Simon 2002, p. 247.
^ Brands 2012, p. 465.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 247–248.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 543–545.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 545–546; White 2016, p. 521.
^ Smith 2001, p. 547.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 547–548.
^ Wang 1997, p. 102; Kaczorowski 1995, p. 182.
^ Osborne & Bombaro 2015, p. 54.
^ Richter 2012, pp. 72, 527–528, 532.
^ a b Smith 2001, pp. 552–553.
^ Kaczorowski 1995, p. 184.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 538–541; Foner 2014, p. 528.
^ Nystrom 2010, p. 176; Foner 2014, p. 555.
^ Brands 2012, p. 553.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 420–422.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 816–817.
^ Brands 2012, p. 552.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 418–419.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 418–419; Franklin 1974, p. 235.
^ Brands 2012, p. 570.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 603–604.
^ a b White 2016, p. 491.
^ White 2016, pp. 490–491; Simon 2002, p. 250; Smith 2001, pp. 472–473.
^ Smith 2001, p. 535; Simon 2002, p. 250.
^ Waltmann 1971, p. 327.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 308–309; Brands 2012, p. 502.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 532–535.
^ Coffey 2011, p. 604.
^ Coffey 2011, pp. 604–605.
^ Taylor 2011, pp. 3187–3188; Pritchard 1999, p. 5.
^ NPS: Bison Ecology
^ Brands 2012, pp. 501–503; McFeely 1981, pp. 436–437.
^ Smith 2001, p. 538.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 565–566; Donovan 2008, pp. 115, 322–323.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 316.
^ Smith 2001, p. 541.
^ Simon 2002, p. 249; Smith 2001, p. 491.
^ a b c d e f Simon 2002, p. 249.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 334–336; Simon 2002, p. 249.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 352–354; Simon 2002, p. 249.
^ Smith 2001, p. 508; Simon 2002, p. 249.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 508–511.
^ a b Smith 2001, pp. 512–515.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 336–338; Brands 2012, p. 452; White 2016, p. 507.
^ White 2016; McFeely 1981, pp. 336–338; McFeely 1974, p. 137.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 341-342.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 500–502; McFeely 1974, p. 137; White 2016, p. 508.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 500–502; White 2016, p. 508; Simon 2002, p. 249.
^ White 2016.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 500–502.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 139; Brands 2012, pp. 455–456.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 339–341; White 2016, pp. 509–511.
^ White 2016, p. 511–512; Pletcher 1998, p. 167.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 138.
^ Brands 2012, p. 461.
^ Brands 2012, p. 461; Smith 2001, pp. 505–506.
^ Simon 2002, p. 250; McFeely 1981, pp. 349–352.
^ White 2016, p. 506.
^ Nevins 1936, pp. 667–669, 682.
^ Friedman 1985, pp. 405–406.
^ Kreiser 2013, p. 19.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 279.
^ White 2016, pp. 476–478; Simon 2002, p. 248.
^ Burdekin & Siklos 2013, pp. 24–25.
^ Simon 2002, p. 248; Chernow 2017, p. 672.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 437–443; McFeely 1974, p. 134; Chernow 2017, p. 673.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 136, 323–324; Chernow 2017, p. 674.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 437–443; Simon 2002.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 134; Smith 2001, pp. 486–489.
^ Simon 2002, p. 248; Chernow 2017, pp. 675-676.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 134; Smith 2001, pp. 486–489; Simon 2002, p. 248; Chernow 2017, pp. 675-676.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 486–489.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 135.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 445, 636.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 328; Smith 2001, p. 490.
^ Smith 2001, p. 490.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 445–446; Simon 2002, p. 248.
^ Simon 2002, pp. 248-249.
^ White 2016, pp. 540–541.
^ Foner 2014, pp. 499–500.
^ White 2016, p. 535.
^ Foner 2014, p. 500–507.
^ Patrick 1968, p. 172.
^ Simon 2002, p. 250.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 589–590; Patrick 1968, p. 173.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 488–489.
^ Wang 1997, p. 103; DiNunzio 1973, pp. 367–370.
^ Wang 1997, pp. 103–104.
^ Brands 2012, p. 495.
^ Deskins, Walton & Puckett 2010, p. 200.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 749–750.
^ Foner 2014, p. 509.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 384.
^ Simon 2002, p. 250; Chernow 2017, p. 749.
^ a b Brands 2012, p. 499.
^ Foner 2014, p. 508.
^ Goethals 2015, p. 98.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 508–509; White 2016, p. 539; Chernow 2017, pp. 752–753.
^ White 2016, p. 545; Diller 1996, p. 1545.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 385.
^ Venable 2011, pp. 66–68.
^ Burdekin & Siklos 2013, p. 25.
^ Weinstein 1967, pp. 307–326.
^ a b Brands 2012, p. 517.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 393.
^ a b Smith 2001, pp. 576–579.
^ Brands 2012, p. 518.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 391; Smith 2001, pp. 375–377.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 395.
^ Porter 2005, p. 185.
^ a b Smith 2001, pp. 580–581.
^ White 2016, p. 550.
^ a b Woodward 1957, passim.
^ White 2016, pp. 538, 541.
^ McFeely 1974, pp. 133–134; Chernow 2017, p. 825.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 587, 592; McFeely 1981, pp. 407–415; White 2016, pp. 538–539; Chernow 2017, p. 672.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 285.
^ a b McFeely 1974, pp. 133–134.
^ White 2016, p. 539.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 145.
^ White 2016, p. 554.
^ a b McFeely 1974, pp. 147–148.
^ Smith 2001, p. 578; McFeely 1974, p. 147.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 147.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 147; Smith 2001, p. 578.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 556–557; Kohn 2000, p. 417; Nevins 1929, p. 56; McFeely 1974, p. 148.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 798.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 556–557; White 2016, pp. 754.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 156; Nevins 1929, p. 56; Smith 2001, p. 584; Kohn 2000, p. 417.
^ Smith 2001, p. 591; Chernow 2017, pp. 798–799.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 592–593.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 591–593.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 415; Smith 2001, p. 591.
^ White 2016, p. 561.
^ Cooper 2016, p. 137.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 589–590; Simon 2002, p. 250.
^ Smith 2001, p. 589.
^ Simon 2002, p. 250; Patrick 1968, p. 172.
^ a b Chernow 2017, p. 787.
^ White 2016, p. 557; Chernow 2017, p. 787–788.
^ Crapol 2000, p. 42.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 429.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 560–561; Donovan 2008, p. 104; Simon 2002, p. 252.
^ Simon 2002, p. 252.
^ McFeely 1974, p. 153.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 441–442.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 440–441; Patrick 1968, p. 255.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 440–441.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 586, 596.
^ Smith 2001, p. 597.
^ Smith 2001, p. 598.
^ Smith 2001, pp. 601–603.
^ Smith 2001, p. 602.
^ a b Smith 2001, p. 604.
^ Smith 2001, p. 603.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 291.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 448–449; White 2016, p. 587.
^ Young 1879a, p. 5; White 2016, p. 590.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 872.
^ Campbell 2016, pp. xi–xii, 2–3.
^ Smith 2001, p. 613; Chernow 2017, pp. 881–883.
^ Chernow 2017, pp. 871.
^ Hesseltine 1957, pp. 432–439.
^ a b Brands 2012, pp. 600–601.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 479–481.
^ Brands 2012, p. 602.
^ Smith 2001, p. 617.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 604–605.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 607–609.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 613–614.
^ Brands 2012, p. 611.
^ a b c McFeely 1981, pp. 486–489.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 488–491.
^ Brands 2012, p. 619.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 488–491; White 2016, p. 269.
^ White 2016, pp. 627–629.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 620–621; White 2016, pp. 627–629.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 492–493.
^ Perry 2004, p. xxix.
^ White 2016, pp. 632–633; Brands 2012, pp. 620–621.
^ Smith 2001, p. 621.
^ Badeau 1887, p. 447; Mackowski & White 2015, p. 169.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 620–621.
^ McFeely 1981.
^ White 2016, p. 636; Waugh 2009, p. 277.
^ Renehan & Lowry 1995, pp. 377–383.
^ White 2016, p. 637.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 495–496.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 622–62; Smith 2001, p. 625.
^ Smith 2001, p. 625; White 2016, p. 641.
^ a b McFeely 1981, pp. 501–505.
^ Brands 2012, p. 625.
^ White 2016, p. 646.
^ Brands 2012, pp. 629–630.
^ Smith 2001, p. 627.
^ Zimmerman 2010.
^ Wilson 1962, pp. 131–173.
^ Russell 1990, pp. 189–209.
^ Perry 2004, pp. 234–235.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 517.
^ Chernow 2017, p. 955.
^ a b c Brands 2012, pp. 633–635.
^ Smith 2001, p. 19.
^ Waugh 2009, pp. 215–259.
^ a b Foner 2012.
^ a b Waugh 2009, p. 2.
^ McFeely 1981, pp. 521–522; White 2016, p. xxiii; Foner 2015b.
^ Coolidge 1917, p. vii.
^ Paxson & Bach 1931, p. 500.
^ McCormick 1934, pp. vii, x.
^ Rafuse 2007, p. 851.
^ McFeely 1981, p. 522.
^ "Total Scores/Overall Rankings | C-SPAN Survey on Presidents 2017". www.c-span.org. Retrieved 2017-08-26. 
^ The Economist, essay
^ Stiles 2016.
^ Hunt 2017.
^ Maslin, Janet (October 10, 2017). "In Ron Chernow's 'Grant,' an American Giant's Makeover Continues". The New York Times. Retrieved October 13, 2017. 
^ Clinton, Bill (October 12, 2017). "President Clinton Looks Back at President Grant". The New York Times. New York. Retrieved October 17, 2017. 
^ Smithsonian Institution, Eassy, 2014
^ Capitol Visiting Center, Washington D.C.
^ "Ulysses S. Grant Memorial Restoration to Begin". Retrieved June 27, 2016. 
^ "Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site". National Park Service. 2014. 
^ Price & Hendricks 2007, p. 45.
^ "Grant in Sculpture – Part II". grantstomb.org. 
^ National Park Service (2015). "When Two Parks Meet: The History of the Generals Highway in Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks". 
^ See website
^ See Catalog Archived December 18, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. A search engine is at Ulysses S Grant Digital Collections at Mississippi State U
^ "Silver Commemoratives, 1922". NGC. Retrieved November 25, 2016. 
^ "1922 Grant Half Dollar". SDL Numismatic Properties. 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2016. 
^ Haimann 2006.


Bibliography
Main article: Bibliography of Ulysses S. Grant

Biographical, political, and financial

Badeau, Adam (1887). Grant in Peace: From Appomattox to Mount McGregor. New York: D.Appleton. OCLC 558211659. 
Brands, H. W. (2012). The Man Who Saved the Union: Ulysses S. Grant in War and Peace. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-53241-5. 
Burdekin, Richard C.K.; Siklos, Pierre L. (2013). "Gold Resumption and the Deflation of the 1870s". In Randall E. Parker, Robert M. Whaples. Routledge Handbook of Major Events in Economic History. New York City: Routledge. ISBN 9780415677035. CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
Campbell, Edwina S. (2016). Citizen of a Wider Commonwealth: Ulysses S. Grant's Postpresidential Diplomacy. Southern Illinois University: Southern Illinois University Press. ISBN 080933478X. 
Chernow, Ron (2017). Grant. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-5942-0487-6. 
Coolidge, Louis (1917). Ulysses S. Grant. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, New York. 
Cooper, Edward S. (2016). John McDonald and the Whiskey Ring: From Thug to Grant's Inner Circle. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-6839-30136. 
Crapol, Edward P. (2000). James G. Blaine: Architect of Empire. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8420-2605-5. 
Deskins, Donald Richard; Walton, Hanes; Puckett, Sherman C. (2010). Presidential Elections, 1789–2008: County, State, and National Mapping of Election Data. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0472116973. 
DiNunzio, Mario R. (Winter 1973). "Lyman Trumbull, the States' Rights Issue, and the Liberal Republican Revolt". Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society (1908–1984). 66 (4): 364–375. JSTOR 40190731. 
Dorsett, Lyle W. (1983). "The Problem of Ulysses S. Grant's Drinking During the Civil War". Hayes Historical Journal. 4 (2): 37–49. 
Dowdall, Denise M. (2012). From Cincinnati to the Colorado Ranger – the Horsemanship of Ulysses S. Grant. Lulu.com. ISBN 9780957402126. 
Foner, Eric (2014). Reconstruction America's Unfinished Revolution 1863–1877 Updated Version. New York: Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-06-235451-8. 
Franklin, John Hope (1974). The Enforcement of the Civil Rights Act of 1875. Prologue. 
Goethals, George R. (2015). Presidential Leadership and African Americans. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-138-81424-0. 
Hesseltine, William B. (1957) [1935]. Ulysses S. Grant: Politician. New York City: F. Ungar Pub. Co. ISBN 1-931313-85-7. 
Kaczorowski, Robert J. (1995). "Federal Enforcement of Civil Rights During the First Reconstruction". Fordham Urban Law Journal. 23 (1): 155–186. ISSN 2163-5978. 
King, Gilbert (2012). "General Grant in Love and War". Smithsonian institution. Retrieved April 28, 2017. 
Kohn, George C. (2000). The New Encyclopedia of American Scandal. New York: Facts On File, Inc. ISBN 0-8160-4420-1. 
Kreiser, Christine (2013). "Royal Visit". American History. 47 (6): 19. ISSN 1076-8866. 
Longacre, Edward G. (2006). General Ulysses S. Grant: The Soldier and the Man. Cambridge, Massachusetts: First Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-3068-1636-9. 
Mackowski, Chris; White, Kristopher D. (2015). Grant's Last Battle: The Story Behind the Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant. El Dorado Hills, California: Savas Beatie LLC. ISBN 978-1-61121-160-3. 
McFeely, William S. (1981). Grant: A Biography. Norton. ISBN 0-393-01372-3. 
McFeely, William S. (1974). Woodward C. Vann, ed. Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct. New York City: Delacorte Press. pp. 133–162. ISBN 0-440-05923-2. 
Nevins, Allan (1929). Dictionary of American Biography Bristow, Benjamin Helm. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 55–56. 
Nevins, Allan (1936). Hamilton Fish: The Inner History of the Grant Administration. 2. New York: Dodd, Mead. ASIN B00085BDXU. 
Nystrom, Justin (2010). New Orleans after the Civil War: Race, Politics, and a New Birth of Freedom. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-9434-3. 
Patrick, Rembert W. (1968). The Reconstruction of the Nation. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-501016-7. 
Paxson, Frederic Logan; Bach, Christian A. (1931). "Ulysses S. Grant". Dictionary of American Biography. VII. New York: C. Scribner's Sons. pp. 492–501. 
Perry, Mark (2004). Grant and Twain: The Story of a Friendship That Changed America. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-679-64273-0. 
Pletcher, David M. (1998). The Diplomacy of Trade and Investment: American Economic Expansion in the Hemisphere, 1865–1900. Columbia: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 0-8262-1127-5. 
Pritchard, James A. (1999). Preserving Yellowstone's Natural Conditions: Science and the Perception of Nature. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 0-8032-3722-7. 
Porter, Lorle (2005). Politics & Peril: Mount Vernon, Ohio in the Nineteenth Century. Zanesville, Ohio: New Concord Press. ISBN 1887932259. 
Richter, William L. (2012). Historical Dictionary of the Civil War and Reconstruction (2 ed.). Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8108-7817-4. 
Renehan, A; Lowry, J C (July 1995). "The Oral Tumours of two American Presidents: What If They Were Alive Today?". Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 88 (7): 377–383. PMC 1295266 . PMID 7562805. 
Scher, Richard K. (2015) [1997]. Politics in the New South: Republicanism, Race and Leadership in the Twentieth Century. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1563248481. 
Simon, John Y. (1969). "The Papers of Ulysses S. Grant, Volume 02: April–September 1861". Mississippi State University Online Edition: Southern Illinois University Press. 
Simon, John Y. (2002). "Ulysses S. Grant". In Graff, Henry. The Presidents: A Reference History (7th ed.). pp. 245–260. ISBN 0-684-80551-0. 
Simpson, Brooks D. (2014) [2000]. Ulysses S. Grant: Triumph Over Adversity, 1822–1865. Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-395-65994-9. 
Smith, Jean Edward (2001). Grant. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-84927-5. 
Taylor, M. Scott (December 2011). "Buffalo Hunt: International Trade and the Virtual Extinction of the North American Bison". The American Economic Review. 101 (7): 3162–3195. JSTOR 41408734. 
Venable, Shannon (2011). Gold: A Cultural Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-38430-1. 
Waltmann, Henry G. (Winter 1971). "Circumstantial Reformer: President Grant & the Indian Problem". Arizona and the West. 13 (4): 323–342. JSTOR 40168089. 
Wang, Xi (1997). The Trial of Democracy: Black Suffrage and Northern Republicans, 1860–1910. Athens, Georgia: The University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-4206-1. 
Waugh, Joan (2009). U.S. Grant: American Hero, American Myth. The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-3317-9. 
Weinstein, Allen (1967). "Was There a 'Crime of 1873'?: The Case of the Demonetized Dollar". Journal of American History. 54 (2): 307–326. JSTOR 1894808. 
White, Ronald C. (2016). American Ulysses: A Life of Ulysses S. Grant. Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-5883-6992-5. 
Woodward, C. Vann (April 1957). "The Lowest Ebb". American Heritage. 8 (3): 53–108. ISBN 9780820309330. ISSN 0002-8738. 
Haimann, Alexander T. (2006). "5-cent Grant". Smithsonian National Postal Museum. Retrieved November 14, 2016. 
"Three Great American Disinflations: 1. introduction". U.S.Federal Reserve Board. Retrieved December 17, 2016. 

"Today's historians have a higher opinion of Ulysses S. Grant". The Economist. 5 October 2017. 
Military

Ash, Stephen V. (2010). "Chapter 15: Civil War Exodus: The Jews and Grant's General Order No. 11". In Sarna, Jonathan D.; Mendelsohn, Adam D. Jews and the Civil War: A Reader. New York: New York University Press. pp. 363–384. ISBN 9780814708590. 
Barney, William L. (2011). The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Civil War. Oxford: Oxford University Press, Inc. ISBN 0199782016. 
Bonekemper, Edward H. (2012). Grant and Lee. Washington DC: Regnery History. ISBN 978-1-62157-010-3. 
Catton, Bruce (1998). This Hallowed Ground: A History of the Civil War. New York, New York: Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-307-94708-6. 
—— (1960). The Civil War. New York: American Heritage. ISBN 0-618-00187-5. 
—— (1963). Terrible Swift Sword. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 9781842122938. OCLC 7474086. 
—— (1968). Grant Takes Command. Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN 0-316-13210-1. 
Coffey, David (2011). Spencer C. Tucker, ed. The Encyclopedia of North American Indian Wars, 1607–1890: A Political, Social, and Military History. 1. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-697-8. 
Cullum, George W. (1891). "Biographical Register of the Officers and Graduates of the U.S. Military Academy". Boston: Houghton Mifflin And Company. 
Donovan, James (2008). A Terrible Glory: Custer and the Little Bighorn – The Last Great Battle of the American West. Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-06747-8. 
Farina, William (2007). Ulysses S. Grant, 1861–1864: His Rise from Obscurity to Military Greatness. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Co. ISBN 978-0-7864-2977-6. 
Flood, Charles Bracelen (2005). Grant and Sherman: The Friendship That Won the Civil War. New York: Harper Perennial. ISBN 0-06-114871-7. 
Friedman, Norman (1985). U.S. Battleships: An Illustrated Design History. Annapolis, Maryland: United States Naval Institute. ISBN 0-87021-715-1. 
Groom, Winston (2012). Shiloh 1862. National Geographic Society. ISBN 978-1-4262-0879-9. 
Lewis, Lloyd (1950). Captain Sam Grant. Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN 0-316-52348-8. 
McCormick, Robert R. (1934). Ulysses S. Grant The Great Soldier of America. New York: D. Appleton-Century Company Incorporated. 
Newell, Clayton R.; Shrader, Charles R. (2011). Of Duty Well and Faithfully Done: A History of the Regular Army in the Civil War. University of Nebraska: Board of Regents of the University of Nebraska. ISBN 978-0-8032-1910-6. 
Sarna, Jonathan D. (2012a). When General Grant Expelled the Jews. New York: Schocken Books. ISBN 978-0-8052-4279-9. 
—— (March 13, 2012b). "When Gen. Grant Expelled the Jews". Slate. 
Tucker, Spencer C., ed. (2013). The Encyclopedia of the Mexican-American War: A Political, Social, and Military History. 1. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-853-8. 
Wheelan, Joseph (2014). Bloody Spring: Forty Days that Sealed the Confederacy's Fate. Boston: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-82206-3. 

Primary sources

Grant, Ulysses S. (1885). Personal Memoirs of U.S. Grant. C.L. Webster & Co.  – Many editions in paper and online; ends in 1865
Simon, John Y., ed. (1967–2009). "The Papers of Ulysses S. Grant". Mississippi State University Online Edition. 
Peters, Gerhard; Woolley, John T. (2018b). "1868 Democratic Party Platform". The American Presidency Project. 
Peters, Gerhard; Woolley, John T. (2018a). "Republican Party Platform of 1868". The American Presidency Project. 
Young, John Russell (1879a). Around the World with General Grant, Vol. I. New York: The American News Company. 

Historiography

Bonekemper, Edward H. (April 2011). "The Butcher's Bill: Ulysses S. Grant Is Often Referred to as a 'Butcher,' But Does Robert E. Lee Actually Deserve That Title?". Civil War Times. 52 (1): 36–43. OCLC 67618265. 
Diller, Daniel C. (1996). Michael Nelson, ed. Guide to the Presidency. New York: Routledge. ISBN 1-56802-018-X. 
Foner, Eric (November 2, 2012). "'The Man Who Saved the Union: Ulysses Grant in War and Peace' by H. W. Brands (book review)". The Washington Post. Washington, D.C. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. 
—— (March 28, 2015a). "Why Reconstruction Matters". New York Times Opinion. 
——— (July 23, 2015b). "Ulysses S. Grant Died 130 Years Ago. Racists Hate Him, But Historians No Longer Do". Huffington Post. 
Herrold, Benjamin (April 9, 2017). "Grant's Farm in St. Louis offers history, family entertainment". Missouri Farmer Today. 
Hunt, Linda Lawrence (July 27, 2017). "'American Ulysses' writer Ronald C. White explains why Grant is so often misunderstood". The Christian Science Monitor. Boston, Massachusetts: The Christian Science Monitor. 
Kaplan, Mike (October 2015). "Grant's Drinking or... The Beast That Will Not Die". Journal of Military History. 79 (4): 1109–1119. 
Lasner, Lynn Fabian (January 2002). "The Rise and Fall and Rise of Ulysses S. Grant". Humanities. 23 (1). 
Osborne, John M.; Bombaro, Christine (2015). "Forgotten Abolitionist: John A. J. Creswell of Maryland". scholar.dickinson.edu (PDF). Carlisle, PA: Dickinson College. 
Price, Kay; Hendricks, Marian (2007). Galena. Charleston, South Carolina: Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 978-0738551142. 
Rafuse, Ethan S. (July 2007). "Still a Mystery? General Grant and the Historians, 1981–2006". Journal of Military History. 71 (3): 849–74. doi:10.1353/jmh.2007.0230. 
Russell, Henry M. W. (Spring 1990). "The Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant: The Rhetoric of Judgment". Virginia Quarterly Review. 66 (2): 189–209. ISSN 0042-675X. 
Stiles, T. J. (October 19, 2016). "Ulysses S. Grant: New Biography of 'A Nobody From Nowhere'". New York Times. 
Wilson, Edmund (1962). Patriotic Gore: Studies in the Literature of the American Civil War. ISBN 0-393-31256-9. 
Zimmerman, Jonathan (November 12, 2010). "Why should we pay our ex-presidents?". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved November 23, 2016. 
"General Ulysses S. Grant Memorial, (sculpture)". CollectionsSearchCenter. Smithsonian Institution. 2014. 
"The Brink of Extinction—and recovery". Bison Ecology. National Park Service, Yellowstone National Park. Retrieved December 26, 2016. 
"Ulysses S. Grant Memorial". U. S. Government: Capitol Visiting Center. Retrieved June 27, 2016. 


External links

Find more aboutUlysses S. Grantat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Data from Wikidata



Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site Missouri – National Park Service
Ulysses S. Grant Presidential Library
Ulysses S. Grant: A Resource Guide – Library of Congress (COLLECTION: Ulysses S. Grant Papers)
Video:"Life Portrait of Ulysses S. Grant", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, July 12, 1999
Works by Ulysses S. Grant at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Ulysses S. Grant at Internet Archive
Works by Ulysses S. Grant at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Ulysses S. Grant Personal Manuscripts







v
t
e


Ulysses S. Grant






18th President of the United States (1869–1877)
Commanding General of the United States Army 1865-1869





Life and politics



Early life and career
Birth Place
Boyhood home
Grant Schoolhouse
Point Pleasant, Ohio
White Haven home

farm


Galena home








Military Career



Military Service
Commanding General of the United States Army
American Civil War

Battle of Shiloh
Battle of Appomattox Court House


Campaigns

Vicksburg Campaign
Chattanooga Campaign
Overland Campaign
Petersburg Campaign
Appomattox Campaign


General of the Army
Reconstruction Era





Presidency



First inauguration
Second inauguration
Scandals
Reforms
Peace Policy
Department of Justice
Fifteenth Amendment
Treaty of Washington
Korean Expedition
Comstock Laws
Panic of 1873
1875 Civil Rights Act
Modoc War
Great Sioux War
Pardons
Cabinet
Judicial appointments
State of the Union addresses

1869
1870
1871
1872
1873
1874
1875
1876







Elections



Republican National Convention, 1868
1872
United States presidential election, 1868
1872





Post-presidency



Later life
Bid for a Third Term
World tour of Ulysses S. Grant





Legacy



Bibliography
Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant
Grant's Tomb
Grant Park
Grant Memorial
Presidential library
Grantism
General Grant ship
General Grant tree

grove


Grant Cottage State Historic Site
Lee and Grant at Appomattox
The Peacemakers
Cultural depictions
U.S. Postage stamps
Currency

$50 Bill


Grant High School
U.S. Grant Hotel





Family



Julia Grant (wife)
Jesse Root Grant (father)
Frederick Dent Grant (son)
Ulysses S. Grant Jr. (son)
Jesse R. Grant (son)
Nellie Grant (daughter)
Ulysses S. Grant III (grandson)
Chapman Grant (grandson)
Ulysses S. Grant IV (grandson)
Julia Dent Cantacuzène Spiransky-Grant (granddaughter)
Cincinnati (horse)








← Andrew Johnson
Rutherford B. Hayes →


 Category










Articles related to Ulysses S. Grant











v
t
e


Presidents of the United States (list)







George Washington (1789–1797)
John Adams (1797–1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809)
James Madison (1809–1817)
James Monroe (1817–1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825–1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829–1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837–1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841–1845)
James K. Polk (1845–1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849–1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850–1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853–1857)
James Buchanan (1857–1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865–1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869–1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877–1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881–1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885–1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889–1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893–1897)
William McKinley (1897–1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909)
William H. Taft (1909–1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913–1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921–1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929–1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945–1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961–1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–1969)
Richard Nixon (1969–1974)
Gerald Ford (1974–1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977–1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981–1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989–1993)
Bill Clinton (1993–2001)
George W. Bush (2001–2009)
Barack Obama (2009–2017)
Donald Trump (2017–present)









Presidency timelines




Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt

first 100 days


Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama

first 100 days


Trump

first 100 days











 Book
 Category












v
t
e


United States Republican Party



Chairpersons
of the RNC



Morgan
Raymond
Ward
Claflin
Morgan
Chandler
Cameron
Jewell
Sabin
Jones
Quay
Clarkson
Carter
Hanna
Payne
Cortelyou
New
Hitchcock
Hill
Rosewater
Hilles
Wilcox
Hays
Adams
Butler
Work
Huston
Fess
Sanders
Fletcher
Hamilton
Martin
Walsh
Spangler
Brownell
Reece
Scott
Gabrielson
Summerfield
Roberts
Hall
Alcorn
T. B. Morton
Miller
Burch
Bliss
R. Morton
Dole
Bush
Smith
Brock
Richards
Laxalt/Fahrenkopf
Reagan/Fahrenkopf
Atwater
Yeutter
Bond
Barbour
Nicholson
Gilmore
Racicot
Gillespie
Mehlman
Martínez
Duncan
Steele
Priebus
Romney McDaniel





Presidential tickets



Frémont/Dayton
Lincoln/Hamlin
Lincoln/Johnson
Grant/Colfax
Grant/Wilson
Hayes/Wheeler
Garfield/Arthur
Blaine/Logan
Harrison/Morton
Harrison/Reid
McKinley/Hobart
McKinley/Roosevelt
Roosevelt/Fairbanks
Taft/Sherman
Taft/Sherman/Butler
Hughes/Fairbanks
Harding/Coolidge
Coolidge/Dawes
Hoover/Curtis (twice)
Landon/Knox
Willkie/McNary
Dewey/Bricker
Dewey/Warren
Eisenhower/Nixon (twice)
Nixon/Lodge
Goldwater/Miller
Nixon/Agnew (twice)
Ford/Dole
Reagan/G. H. W. Bush (twice)
G. H. W. Bush/Quayle (twice)
Dole/Kemp
G. W. Bush/Cheney (twice)
McCain/Palin
Romney/Ryan
Trump/Pence





Parties by state
and territory




State



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming





Territory



American Samoa
District of Columbia
Guam
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands








Conventions
(list)



1856 (Philadelphia)
1860 (Chicago)
1864 (Baltimore)
1868 (Chicago)
1872 (Philadelphia)
1876 (Cincinnati)
1880 (Chicago)
1884 (Chicago)
1888 (Chicago)
1892 (Minneapolis)
1896 (Saint Louis)
1900 (Philadelphia)
1904 (Chicago)
1908 (Chicago)
1912 (Chicago)
1916 (Chicago)
1920 (Chicago)
1924 (Cleveland)
1928 (Kansas City)
1932 (Chicago)
1936 (Cleveland)
1940 (Philadelphia)
1944 (Chicago)
1948 (Philadelphia)
1952 (Chicago)
1956 (San Francisco)
1960 (Chicago)
1964 (San Francisco)
1968 (Miami Beach)
1972 (Miami Beach)
1976 (Kansas City)
1980 (Detroit)
1984 (Dallas)
1988 (New Orleans)
1992 (Houston)
1996 (San Diego)
2000 (Philadelphia)
2004 (New York)
2008 (St. Paul)
2012 (Tampa)
2016 (Cleveland)





Affiliated
organizations




Fundraising groups



National Republican Congressional Committee
National Republican Senatorial Committee
Republican Conference of the United States House of Representatives
Republican Conference of the United States Senate
Republican Governors Association





Sectional groups



College Republicans

Chairmen


Congressional Hispanic Conference
International Democrat Union
Log Cabin Republicans
Republican Jewish Coalition
Republican National Hispanic Assembly
Republicans Abroad
Teen Age Republicans
Young Republicans





Factional groups



Republican Main Street Partnership
Republican Majority for Choice
Republican Liberty Caucus
Republican National Coalition for Life
Republican Study Committee
ConservAmerica
Liberty Caucus
Freedom Caucus
Ripon Society
The Wish List








Related articles



History
Primaries
Debates
2009 chairmanship election
2011 chairmanship election
2013 chairmanship election
2015 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election
Bibliography
Timeline of modern American conservatism






 Republican Party portal










v
t
e


Cabinet of President Ulysses S. Grant (1869–77)



Secretary of State



Elihu B. Washburne (1869)
Hamilton Fish (1869–77)








Secretary of the Treasury



George S. Boutwell (1869–73)
William A. Richardson (1873–74)
Benjamin H. Bristow (1874–76)
Lot M. Morrill (1876–77)





Secretary of War



John A. Rawlins (1869)
William W. Belknap (1869–76)
Alphonso Taft (1876)
J. Donald Cameron (1876–77)





Attorney General



Ebenezer R. Hoar (1869–70)
Amos T. Akerman (1870–71)
George H. Williams (1871–75)
Edwards Pierrepont (1875–76)
Alphonso Taft (1876–77)





Postmaster General



John A. J. Creswell (1869–74)
James W. Marshall (1874)
Marshall Jewell (1874–76)
James N. Tyner (1876–77)





Secretary of the Navy



Adolph E. Borie (1869)
George M. Robeson (1869–77)





Secretary of the Interior



Jacob D. Cox (1869–70)
Columbus Delano (1870–75)
Zachariah Chandler (1875–77)












v
t
e


Leaders of the United States Army



Senior Officer /
Commanding General



Washington
Knox
Doughty
Harmar
St. Clair
Wayne
Wilkinson
Washington
Hamilton
Wilkinson
Dearborn
J. Brown
Macomb
W. Scott
McClellan
Halleck
Grant
Sherman
Sheridan
Schofield
Miles










Chiefs of Staff



Young
Chaffee
Bates
Bell
Wood
Wotherspoon
H. Scott
Bliss
March
Pershing
Hines
Summerall
MacArthur
Craig
Marshall
Eisenhower
Bradley
Collins
Ridgway
Taylor
Lemnitzer
Decker
Wheeler
Johnson
Westmoreland
B. Palmer
Abrams
Weyand
Rogers
Meyer
Wickham
Vuono
Sullivan
Reimer
Shinseki
Schoomaker
Casey
Dempsey
Odierno
Milley





Vice Chiefs of Staff



Collins
Haislip
Hull
Bolte
W. Palmer
Lemnitzer
Decker
Eddleman
Hamlett
Abrams
Haines
B. Palmer
Haig
Weyand
Kerwin
Kroesen
Vessey
Wickham
Thurman
A. Brown
RisCassi
Sullivan
Reimer
Peay
Tilelli
Griffith
Crouch
Shinseki
Keane
Casey
Cody
Chiarelli
Austin
Campbell
Allyn
McConville












v
t
e


American Civil War








Origins










Origins
Issues






Timeline leading to the War
Antebellum era
Bleeding Kansas
Border states
Compromise of 1850
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Lincoln-Douglas debates
Missouri Compromise
Popular sovereignty
Secession
States' rights
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers





Slavery



African Americans
Cornerstone Speech
Emancipation Proclamation
Fugitive slave laws
Plantations in the American South
Slave Power
Slavery in the United States
Treatment of slaves in the United States
Uncle Tom's Cabin





Abolitionism



Susan B. Anthony
John Brown
Frederick Douglass
William Lloyd Garrison
Elijah Parish Lovejoy
J. Sella Martin
Lysander Spooner
George Luther Stearns
Thaddeus Stevens
Charles Sumner
Harriet Tubman
Underground Railroad



















Combatants
Theaters
Campaigns
Battles
States










Combatants




Union (USA)



Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Revenue Cutter Service





Confederacy (CSA)



Army
Navy
Marine Corps








Theaters



Eastern
Western
Lower Seaboard
Trans-Mississippi
Pacific Coast
Union naval blockade





Major Campaigns



Anaconda Plan
Blockade runners
New Mexico
Jackson's Valley
Peninsula
Northern Virginia
Maryland
Stones River
Vicksburg
Tullahoma
Gettysburg
Morgan's Raid
Bristoe
Knoxville
Red River
Overland
Atlanta
Valley 1864
Bermuda Hundred
Richmond-Petersburg
Franklin–Nashville
Price's Raid
Sherman's March
Carolinas
Appomattox





Major battles



Fort Sumter
1st Bull Run
Wilson's Creek
Fort Donelson
Pea Ridge
Hampton Roads
Shiloh
New Orleans
Corinth
Seven Pines
Seven Days
2nd Bull Run
Antietam
Perryville
Fredericksburg
Stones River
Chancellorsville
Gettysburg
Vicksburg
Chickamauga
Chattanooga
Wilderness
Spotsylvania
Cold Harbor
Atlanta
Mobile Bay
Franklin
Nashville
Five Forks






Involvement (by 
state or territory)




AL
AK
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY
















Leaders







Confederate




Military



R. H. Anderson
Beauregard
Bragg
Buchanan
Cooper
Early
Ewell
Forrest
Gorgas
Hill
Hood
Jackson
A. S. Johnston
J. E. Johnston
Lee
Longstreet
Morgan
Mosby
Price
Semmes
E. K. Smith
Stuart
Taylor
Wheeler





Civilian



Benjamin
Bocock
Breckinridge
Davis
Hunter
Mallory
Memminger
Seddon
Stephens








Union




Military



Anderson
Buell
Burnside
Butler
Du Pont
Farragut
Foote
Frémont
Grant
Halleck
Hooker
Hunt
McClellan
McDowell
Meade
Meigs
Ord
Pope
D. D. Porter
Rosecrans
Scott
Sheridan
Sherman
Thomas





Civilian



Adams
Chase
Ericsson
Hamlin
Lincoln
Pinkerton
Seward
Stanton
Stevens
Wade
Welles



















Aftermath







U.S. Constitution



Reconstruction amendments

13th Amendment
14th Amendment
15th Amendment







Reconstruction



Alabama Claims
Brooks–Baxter War
Carpetbaggers
Colfax Riot of 1873
Eufaula Riot of 1874
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedman's Savings Bank
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
Kirk-Holden War
Knights of the White Camelia
Ku Klux Klan
Memphis Riot of 1866
Meridian Riot of 1871
New Orleans Riot of 1866
Pulaski (Tennessee) Riot of 1867
Reconstruction acts

Habeas Corpus Act 1867
Enforcement Act of 1870
Enforcement Act of February 1871
Enforcement Act of April 1871


Reconstruction treaties

Indian Council at Fort Smith


Red Shirts
Redeemers
Confederate refugees

Confederados


Scalawags
South Carolina riots of 1876
Southern Claims Commission
Homestead acts

Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Timber Culture Act of 1873


White League





post-Reconstruction



Commemoration

Centennial
Civil War Discovery Trail
Civil War Roundtables
Civil War Trails Program
Civil War Trust
Confederate History Month
Confederate monuments and memorials
Historical reenactment
Robert E. Lee Day


Disenfranchisement

Black Codes
Jim Crow


Lost Cause mythology
Modern display of the Confederate flag
Sons of Confederate Veterans
Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War
Southern Historical Society
United Daughters of the Confederacy





Monuments and memorials



Union

List of Union Civil War monuments and memorials
List of memorials to the Grand Army of the Republic
Memorials to Abraham Lincoln




Confederate

List of Confederate monuments and memorials
Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
List of memorials to Robert E. Lee
List of memorials to Jefferson Davis
Annapolis

Roger B. Taney Monument


Baltimore

Confederate Soldiers and Sailors Monument
Confederate Women's Monument
Roger B. Taney Monument
Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson Monument


Durham, North Carolina

Robert E. Lee Monument


New Orleans

Battle of Liberty Place Monument
Jefferson Davis Monument
General Beauregard Equestrian Statue
Robert E. Lee Monument









Cemeteries



Confederate Memorial Day
Ladies' memorial associations
U.S. Memorial Day
U.S. national cemeteries





Veterans



1913 Gettysburg Reunion
Confederate Veteran
Grand Army of the Republic
Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.
Old soldiers' homes
Southern Cross of Honor
United Confederate Veterans



















Related topics










Related topics




Military



Arms
Campaign Medal
Cavalry
Confederate Home Guard
Confederate railroads
Confederate Revolving Cannon
Field artillery
Medal of Honor recipients
Medicine
Leadership
Naval battles
Official Records
Partisan rangers
POW camps
Rations
Signal Corps
Turning point
Union corps badges
U.S. Balloon Corps
U.S. Home Guard
U.S. Military Railroad





Political



Committee on the Conduct of the War
Confederate States Presidential Election of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
Copperheads
Emancipation Proclamation
Habeas Corpus Act of 1863
Hampton Roads Conference
National Union Party
Radical Republicans
Trent Affair
Union leagues
U.S. Presidential Election of 1864
War Democrats





Other topics



Bibliography
Confederate war finance

Confederate States dollar


Espionage

Confederate Secret Service


Great Revival of 1863
Music
Naming the war
Native Americans

Cherokee
Choctaw


New York City Gold Hoax of 1864
New York City Riot of 1863
Photographers
Richmond Riot of 1863
Sexuality
Supreme Court cases
Tokens
U.S. Sanitary Commission





















v
t
e


Reconstruction Era



Participants





Federal government




Presidents

Abraham Lincoln
Andrew Johnson
Ulysses S. Grant
Rutherford B. Hayes





Congress

38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
Radical Republicans
African-American Senators
African-American Representatives
Reconstruction Amendments
United States Congress Joint Committee on Reconstruction





Federal judiciary

Taney Court
Chase Court
Waite Court





Federal bureaucracy

Edwin Stanton
Freedmen's Bureau
Justice Department








State governments




Southern United States
Confederate States of America





Others



African-Americans

Freedman
Free people of color


Carpetbaggers
Ku Klux Klan
Scalawag
Redeemers
White League
Red Shirts
Democratic Party

Bourbon Democrat
Horatio Seymour
Samuel J. Tilden


Republican Party

Stalwart
Charles Sumner
Thaddeus Stevens
Lyman Trumbull
Benjamin Wade
John Bingham
James Mitchell Ashley


Freedman's Savings Bank








Timeline




Prelude



American Indian Wars
Slavery in the United States
A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792)
The Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women (1838)
Woman in the Nineteenth Century (1839)
Seneca Falls Convention (1848)
National Women's Rights Convention (1850)
American Civil War
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
District of Columbia Compensated Emancipation Act (1862)
Militia Act of 1862





1863



Emancipation Proclamation
General Order No. 143
Lincoln's presidential Reconstruction
Ten Percent Plan
National Bank Act
Women's Loyal National League
New York City draft riots





1864



Wade–Davis Bill
1864 National Union National Convention
1864 Democratic National Convention
United States presidential election, 1864





1865



13th Amendment
Abraham Lincoln's second inaugural address
Black Codes
Sherman's Special Field Orders, No. 15
Freedmen's Bureau

Freedmen's Bureau bills


Confederates surrender at Appomattox
Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
Shaw University
New Departure
1865 State of the Union Address
Ku Klux Klan





1866



Civil Rights Act of 1866
Memphis riots of 1866
New Orleans riot
Swing Around the Circle
Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Cherokee Reconstruction Treaty of 1866
Choctaw and Chickasaw Treaty of Washington of 1866
Tennessee readmitted to Union
Petition for Universal Freedom
National Labor Union
United States House of Representatives elections, 1866
United States Senate elections, 1866
Ex parte Garland
Ex parte Milligan
Slave Kidnapping Act of 1866





1867



Command of the Army Act
Tenure of Office Act
Indian Peace Commission
Knights of the White Camelia
Pulaski riot
Reconstruction Acts
Constitutional conventions of 1867
Habeas Corpus Act 1867
Peonage Act of 1867





1868



14th Amendment
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
Arkansas readmitted to Union
Florida readmitted to Union
North Carolina readmitted to Union
South Carolina readmitted to Union
Louisiana readmitted to Union
Alabama readmitted to Union
1868 Democratic National Convention
1868 Republican National Convention
United States presidential election, 1868
Opelousas massacre
Fourth Reconstruction Act
Georgia v. Stanton
St. Landry riot of 1868





1869



National Woman Suffrage Association
American Woman Suffrage Association
Alabama Claims
Annexation of Santo Domingo
Board of Indian Commissioners
Public Credit Act of 1869
Black Friday (1869)
Ex parte McCardle
First Transcontinental Railroad





1870



15th Amendment
Enforcement Act of 1870
Justice Department
Naturalization Act of 1870
Kirk-Holden War
Shoffner Act





1871



Ku Klux Klan hearings
First Enforcement Act of 1871
Second Enforcement Act of 1871
Alcorn State University
Meridian race riot of 1871
Treaty of Washington
New York custom house ring
Civil service commission
United States expedition to Korea





1872



General Mining Act of 1872
Crédit Mobilier Scandal
1872 Democratic National Convention
1872 Republican National Convention
United States presidential election, 1872
Modoc War
Star route scandal
Salary Grab Act
Amnesty Act





1873



Panic of 1873
Colfax Massacre
Timber Culture Act
Slaughter-House Cases
Virginius Affair
Coinage Act of 1873
Long Depression
Comstock laws





1874



Brooks–Baxter War
Battle of Liberty Place
Coushatta Massacre
Red River War
Timber Culture Act
White League
Election Riot of 1874
Vicksburg Riot of 1874
Black Hills Gold Rush
Sanborn incident
Anti-Moiety Acts





1875



United States v. Cruikshank
Civil Rights Act of 1875
Red Shirts
Mississippi Plan
Clifton Riot of 1875
Yazoo City Riot of 1875
Specie Payment Resumption Act
Whiskey Ring
Wheeler Compromise
Delano affair
Pratt & Boyd





1876



Hamburg Massacre
South Carolina civil disturbances of 1876
1876 Republican National Convention
1876 Democratic National Convention
Disputed presidential election of 1876
Ellenton Riot of 1876
Great Sioux War of 1876
Battle of the Little Bighorn
United States v. Reese
Trader post scandal
Centennial Exposition
Cattellism
Safe burglary conspiracy





1877



Electoral Commission
Compromise of 1877
Nez Perce War
Desert Land Act
Great Railroad Strike of 1877





Aftermath



Posse Comitatus Act (1878)
Civil Rights Cases (1883)
United States v. Harris (1883)
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
Williams v. Mississippi (1898)
Giles v. Harris (1903)
Disenfranchisement








Aspects




Historiography



Bibliography of the Reconstruction Era
James Shepherd Pike
The Prostrate State (1874)
James Bryce
The American Commonwealth (1888)
Claude Bowers
The Tragic Era (1929)
Columbia University
John Burgess
Walter Lynwood Fleming
Dunning School
Charles A. Beard
Howard K. Beale
W. E. B. Du Bois
Black Reconstruction (1935)
C. Vann Woodward
Joel Williamson
William R. Brock
American Crisis (1963)
John Hope Franklin
From Slavery to Freedom (1947)
After Slavery (1965)
Leon Litwack
Been in the Storm So Long (1979)
Eric Foner
Reconstruction (1988)
Kenneth M. Stampp
Steven Hahn
A Nation under Our Feet (2003)





Memory



Winslow Homer
A Visit from the Old Mistress (1876)
Thomas Dixon, Jr.
The Leopard's Spots (1902)
The Clansman (1905)
D. W. Griffith
The Birth of a Nation (1915)
United Daughters of the Confederacy
Gone with the Wind (1939)
David W. Blight
Race and Reunion (2001)





Legacy



Women's suffrage in the United States
Labor history of the United States
Gilded Age
Jim Crow Era
Civil Rights Movement
American frontier





Other topics



History of the United States (1865–1918)
Industrialization
Suffrage
Habeas corpus
Race (human categorization)
White supremacy
Paramilitary
Forty acres and a mule
Reconstruction Treaties
Whitecapping











Category












v
t
e


Hall of Fame for Great Americans






John Adams
John Quincy Adams
Jane Addams
Louis Agassiz
Susan B. Anthony
John James Audubon
George Bancroft
Clara Barton
Henry Ward Beecher
Alexander Graham Bell
Daniel Boone
Edwin Booth
Louis Brandeis
Phillips Brooks
William Cullen Bryant
Luther Burbank
Andrew Carnegie
George Washington Carver
William Ellery Channing
Rufus Choate
Henry Clay
Grover Cleveland
James Fenimore Cooper
Peter Cooper
Charlotte Cushman
James Buchanan Eads
Thomas Alva Edison
Jonathan Edwards
Ralph Waldo Emerson
David Farragut
Stephen Foster
Benjamin Franklin
Robert Fulton
Josiah W. Gibbs
William C. Gorgas
Ulysses S. Grant
Asa Gray
Alexander Hamilton
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Joseph Henry
Patrick Henry
Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
Mark Hopkins
Elias Howe
Washington Irving
Andrew Jackson
Thomas J. Jackson
Thomas Jefferson
John Paul Jones
James Kent
Sidney Lanier
Robert E. Lee
Abraham Lincoln
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
James Russell Lowell
Mary Lyon
Edward MacDowell
James Madison
Horace Mann
John Marshall
Matthew Fontaine Maury
Albert A. Michelson
Maria Mitchell
James Monroe
Samuel F. B. Morse
William T. G. Morton
John Lothrop Motley
Simon Newcomb
Thomas Paine
Alice Freeman Palmer
Francis Parkman
George Peabody
William Penn
Edgar Allan Poe
Walter Reed
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Theodore Roosevelt
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
William Tecumseh Sherman
John Philip Sousa
Joseph Story
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Gilbert Stuart
Sylvanus Thayer
Henry David Thoreau
Mark Twain
Lillian Wald
Booker T. Washington
George Washington
Daniel Webster
George Westinghouse
James McNeill Whistler
Walt Whitman
Eli Whitney
John Greenleaf Whittier
Emma Willard
Frances E. Willard
Roger Williams
Woodrow Wilson
Orville Wright
Wilbur Wright












v
t
e


(1864 ←) United States presidential election, 1868 (1872 →)



Democratic Party
Convention




Nominee



Horatio Seymour





VP nominee



Francis P. Blair Jr.





Candidates



George H. Pendleton
Thomas A. Hendricks
Winfield S. Hancock
Andrew Johnson
Sanford E. Church
Asa Packer
James E. English
Joel Parker
James R. Doolittle
Stephen J. Field
Francis P. Blair Jr.
Salmon P. Chase
John T. Hoffman








Republican Party
Convention




Nominee



Ulysses S. Grant





VP nominee



Schuyler Colfax











Other 1868 elections: House
Senate












v
t
e


(1868 ←) United States presidential election, 1872 (1876 →)



Republican Party
Convention




Nominee



Ulysses S. Grant





VP nominee



Henry Wilson








Liberal Republican Party




Nominee



Horace Greeley





VP nominee



Benjamin G. Brown





Candidates



Charles F. Adams
Lyman Trumbull
Benjamin G. Brown
David Davis
Andrew Curtin
Salmon P. Chase








Democratic Party
Convention




Nominee



Horace Greeley





VP nominee



Benjamin G. Brown





Candidates



Jeremiah S. Black
James A. Bayard
William S. Groesbeck













Third party and independent candidates



Labor Reform Party




Nominee



David Davis





VP nominee



Joel Parker





Candidates



Charles O'Conor (declined nomination)








People's (Equal Rights) Party




Nominee



Victoria Woodhull





VP nominee



Frederick Douglass














Other 1872 elections: House
Senate












v
t
e


(1872 ←) United States presidential election, 1876 (1880 →)



Republican Party
Convention




Nominee



Rutherford B. Hayes





VP nominee



William A. Wheeler





Candidates



James G. Blaine
Benjamin Bristow
Oliver P. Morton
Roscoe Conkling
John F. Hartranft
Marshall Jewell
Elihu B. Washburne
William A. Wheeler
Ulysses S. Grant








Democratic Party
Convention




Nominee



Samuel J. Tilden





VP nominee



Thomas A. Hendricks





Candidates



Thomas A. Hendricks
Winfield S. Hancock
William Allen
Thomas F. Bayard
Joel Parker













Third party and independent candidates



Greenback Party




Nominee



Peter Cooper





VP nominee



Samuel F. Cary





Candidates



Andrew Curtin
William Allen








Prohibition Party




Nominee



Green C. Smith





VP nominee



Gideon T. Stewart








American Party




Nominee



James Walker





VP nominee



Donald Kirkpatrick














See also: Electoral Commission
Other 1876 elections: House
Senate












v
t
e


(1876 ←) United States presidential election, 1880 (1884 →)



Republican Party
Convention




Nominee



James Garfield





VP nominee



Chester A. Arthur





Candidates



Ulysses S. Grant
James G. Blaine
John Sherman
George F. Edmunds
Elihu B. Washburne
William Windom








Democratic Party
Convention




Nominee



Winfield S. Hancock





VP nominee



William H. English





Candidates



Thomas F. Bayard
Samuel J. Randall
Henry B. Payne
Samuel J. Tilden
Allen G. Thurman
Stephen J. Field
William R. Morrison
Thomas A. Hendricks













Third party and independent candidates



Greenback Party
Convention





Nominee



James B. Weaver





VP nominee



Barzillai J. Chambers





Candidates



Hendrick B. Wright
Stephen D. Dillaye
Benjamin Butler
Solon Chase
Edward P. Allis
Alexander Campbell
Thompson H. Murch








Prohibition Party




Nominee



Neal Dow





VP nominee



Henry A. Thompson








American Party




Nominee



John W. Phelps





VP nominee



Samuel C. Pomeroy














Other 1880 elections: House
Senate














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 66505625
LCCN: n80126151
ISNI: 0000 0001 2137 2776
GND: 118718436
SELIBR: 188594
SUDOC: 027484270
BNF: cb12157552z (data)
NDL: 00467455
IATH: w6p26x22











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ulysses_S._Grant&oldid=818559475"					Categories: Ulysses S. Grant1822 births1885 deaths19th-century American politicians19th-century American writers19th-century MethodistsAmerican memoiristsAmerican MethodistsAmerican military personnel of the Mexican–American WarAmerican Odd FellowsAmerican people of English descentAmerican slave ownersCongressional Gold Medal recipientsDeaths from cancer in New York (state)Deaths from throat cancerFreemen of the City of LondonGeorge Washington University trusteeHall of Fame for Great Americans inducteesMembers of the Aztec Club of 1847People from Clermont County, OhioPeople of the Reconstruction EraPeople of Illinois in the American Civil WarPresidents of the National Rifle AssociationPresidents of the United StatesRepublican Party Presidents of the United StatesRepublican Party (United States) presidential nomineesSons of the American RevolutionUnion Army generalsUnited States Military Academy alumniUnited States presidential candidates, 1868United States presidential candidates, 1872United States presidential candidates, 1880Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesFeatured articlesUse mdy dates from June 2014CS1 maint: Uses editors parameterArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers