This article is about the civil war period. For admission of states into the United States, see Admission to the Union.




Map of the division of the states during the American Civil War (1861-1865). Blue (the U.S. Army's uniform color) indicates the northern Union states; light blue represents four Union states that permitted slavery (border states) and anti-slavery West Virginia. Red represents southern seceded states in rebellion, also known as the Confederate States of America. Uncolored areas were U.S. territories, with the exception of the Indian Territory (later Oklahoma).






The flag of the United States of America from 1861 to 1863, with 34 stars for all the 34 states. The southern states were still represented in the number of stars in the flag because the Confederacy's declaration of secession from the Union was still considered illegal by the United States and President Abraham Lincoln. In 1863, a star was added to represent the new 35th state of West Virginia of the loyal northwestern counties of the seceded Commonwealth of Virginia, and in 1864, a 36th star for the new western state of Nevada (previously the Nevada Territory)






The Great Seal of the United States of America during the war.


During the American Civil War (1861–1865), the Union referred to the United States of America and specifically to the national government of President Abraham Lincoln and the 20 free states, 4 border, and slave states (some with split governments and troops sent both north and south) that supported it. The Union was opposed by 11 southern slave states (or 13, according to the Southern view and one western territory) that formed the Confederate States of America, or also known as "the Confederacy".
All of the Union's states provided soldiers for the United States Army (also known as the Union Army), though the border areas also sent tens of thousands of soldiers south into the Confederacy. The Border states were essential as a supply base for the Union invasion of the Confederacy, and Lincoln realized he could not win the war without control of them, especially Maryland, which lay north of the national capital of Washington, D.C.. The Northeast and upper Midwest provided the industrial resources for a mechanized war producing large quantities of munitions and supplies, as well as financing for the war. The Midwest provided soldiers, food, horses, financial support, and training camps. Army hospitals were set up across the Union. Most states had Republican Party governors who energetically supported the war effort and suppressed anti-war subversion in 1863–64. The Democratic Party strongly supported the war at the beginning in 1861 but by 1862, was split between the War Democrats and the anti-war element led by the "Copperheads". The Democrats made major electoral gains in 1862 in state elections, most notably in New York. They lost ground in 1863, especially in Ohio. In 1864, the Republicans campaigned under the National Union Party banner, which attracted many War Democrats and soldiers and scored a landslide victory for Lincoln and his entire ticket against opposition candidate George B. McClellan, former General-in-Chief of the Union Army and its eastern Army of the Potomac.
The war years were quite prosperous except where serious fighting and guerrilla warfare took place along the southern border. Prosperity was stimulated by heavy government spending and the creation of an entirely new national banking system. The Union states invested a great deal of money and effort in organizing psychological and social support for soldiers' wives, widows, and orphans, and for the soldiers themselves. Most soldiers were volunteers, although after 1862 many volunteered to escape the draft and to take advantage of generous cash bounties on offer from states and localities. Draft resistance was notable in some larger cities, especially New York City with its massive anti-draft riots of July 1863 and in some remote districts such as the coal mining areas of Pennsylvania.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Size and strength
3 Public opinion
4 President Lincoln
5 Congress

5.1 Opposition
5.2 Copperheads


6 Soldiers

6.1 Recruiting volunteers

6.1.1 Motivations of soldiers
6.1.2 The paperwork war


6.2 Medical conditions
6.3 Prisoners of war
6.4 Draft riots


7 Economy

7.1 Financing the war

7.1.1 Tariffs


7.2 Land grants
7.3 Agriculture
7.4 Cotton trade


8 Society

8.1 Religion

8.1.1 Methodists


8.2 Family

8.2.1 Children




9 Unionists in South and Border states
10 Guerrilla warfare

10.1 Missouri
10.2 Kentucky


11 Union states

11.1 Union Territories


12 See also
13 Notes
14 Bibliography

14.1 Surveys
14.2 Politics
14.3 Constitutional and legal
14.4 Economic
14.5 Intellectual and cultural
14.6 Medical
14.7 Race
14.8 Religion and ethnicity
14.9 Social and demographic history
14.10 Soldiers
14.11 State and local
14.12 Women and family
14.13 Primary sources


15 External links



Etymology[edit]




Charleston Mercury Secession Broadside, 1860 - "The Union" had been a way to refer to the American Republic


In the context of the American Civil War, the Union is sometimes referred to as "the North", both then and now, as opposed to the Confederacy, which was "the South". The Union never recognized the legitimacy of the Confederacy's secession and maintained at all times that it remained entirely a part of the United States of America. In foreign affairs the Union was the only side recognized by all other nations, none of which officially recognized the Confederate government. The term "Union" occurs in the first governing document of the United States, the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union. The subsequent Constitution of 1787 was issued and ratified in the name not of the states, but of "We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union ...". Union, for the United States of America, is then repeated in such clauses as the Admission to the Union clause in Article IV, Section 3.
Even before the war started, the phrase "preserve the Union" was commonplace, and a "union of states" had been used to refer to the entire United States of America. Using the term "Union" to apply to the non-secessionist side carried a connotation of legitimacy as the continuation of the pre-existing political entity.[1]
Confederates generally saw the Union states as being opposed to slavery, occasionally referring to them as abolitionists, as in reference to the U.S. Navy as the "Abolition fleet" and the U.S. Army as the "Abolition forces".[2]
Size and strength[edit]




The Union had large advantages in men and resources at the start of the war, and the ratio grew steadily in favor of the Union. In the chart, "cauc men" means white men (Caucasian).


Unlike the Confederacy, the Union had a large industrialized and urbanized area (the Northeast), and more advanced commercial, transportation and financial systems than the rural South.[3] Additionally, the Union states had a manpower advantage of 5 to 2 at the start of the war.[4]
Year by year, the Confederacy shrank and lost control of increasing quantities of resources and population. Meanwhile, the Union turned its growing potential advantage into a much stronger military force. However, much of the Union strength had to be used to garrison conquered areas, and to protect railroads and other vital points. The Union's great advantages in population and industry would prove to be vital long-term factors in its victory over the Confederacy, but it took the Union a long while to fully mobilize these resources.





Union states
in the
American Civil War





California
Connecticut
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Maine
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New York
Ohio
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
Vermont
Wisconsin




Border states




Delaware
Maryland




Dual governments




Missouri
Kentucky
West Virginia
Virginia
Tennessee




Territories and D.C.




Arizona
Colorado
Dakota
District of Columbia
Idaho
Indian Territory
Montana
Nebraska
New Mexico
Utah
Washington







v
t
e





Public opinion[edit]
The attack on Fort Sumter rallied the North to the defense of American nationalism. Historian, Allan Nevins, says:

The thunderclap of Sumter produced a startling crystallization of Northern sentiment ... Anger swept the land. From every side came news of mass meetings, speeches, resolutions, tenders of business support, the muster of companies and regiments, the determined action of governors and legislatures.[5]

McClintock states:

At the time, Northerners were right to wonder at the near unanimity that so quickly followed long months of bitterness and discord. It would not last throughout the protracted war to come – or even through the year – but in that moment of unity was laid bare the common Northern nationalism usually hidden by the fierce battles more typical of the political arena."[6]

Historian Michael Smith, argues that, as the war ground on year after year, the spirit of American republicanism grew stronger and generated fears of corruption in high places. Voters became afraid of power being centralized in Washington, extravagant spending, and war profiteering. Democratic candidates emphasized these fears. The candidates added that rapid modernization was putting too much political power in the hands of Eastern financiers and industrialists. They warned that the abolition of slavery would bring a flood of freed blacks into the labor market of the North.
Republicans responded with claims of defeatism. They indicted Copperheads for criminal conspiracies to free Confederate prisoners of war, and played on the spirit of nationalism and the growing hatred of the slaveowners, as the guilty party in the war.[7]
President Lincoln[edit]
Main article: Presidency of Abraham Lincoln
Historians have overwhelmingly praised the "political genius" of Abraham Lincoln's performance as President.[8] His first priority was military victory. This required that he master entirely new skills as a strategist and diplomat. He oversaw supplies, finances, manpower, the selection of generals, and the course of overall strategy. Working closely with state and local politicians, he rallied public opinion and (at Gettysburg) articulated a national mission that has defined America ever since. Lincoln's charm and willingness to cooperate with political and personal enemies made Washington work much more smoothly than Richmond, the Confederate capital, and his wit smoothed many rough edges. Lincoln's cabinet proved much stronger and more efficient than Davis's, as Lincoln channeled personal rivalries into a competition for excellence rather than mutual destruction. With William Seward at State, Salmon P. Chase at the Treasury, and (from 1862) Edwin Stanton at the War Department, Lincoln had a powerful cabinet of determined men. Except for monitoring major appointments and decisions, Lincoln gave them free rein to end the Confederate rebellion.[9] Cabinet (government)
Congress[edit]
The Republican Congress passed many major laws that reshaped the nation's economy, financial system, tax system, land system, and higher education system. These included: the Morrill tariff, the Homestead Act, the Pacific Railroad Act, and the National Banking Act.[10] Lincoln paid relatively little attention to this legislation as he focused on war issues but he worked smoothly with powerful Congressional leaders such as Thaddeus Stevens (on taxation and spending), Charles Sumner (on foreign affairs), Lyman Trumbull (on legal issues), Justin Smith Morrill (on land grants and tariffs) and William Pitt Fessenden (on finances).[11]
Military and reconstruction issues were another matter. Lincoln, as the leader of the moderate and conservative factions of the Republican Party, often crossed swords with the Radical Republicans, led by Stevens and Sumner. Author, Bruce Tap, shows that Congress challenged Lincoln's role as commander-in-chief through the Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War. It was a joint committee of both houses that was dominated by the Radical Republicans, who took a hard line against the Confederacy. During the 37th and 38th Congresses, the committee investigated every aspect of Union military operations, with special attention to finding commanders culpable for military defeats. It assumed an inevitable Union victory. Failure was perceived to indicate evil motivations or personal failures. The committee distrusted graduates of the US Military Academy at West Point, since many of the academy's alumni were leaders of the enemy army. Members of the committee much preferred political generals with a satisfactory political record. Some of the committee suggested that West-Pointers who engaged in strategic maneuver were cowardly or even disloyal. It ended up endorsing incompetent but politically correct generals.[12]
Opposition[edit]




An anti-Lincoln Copperhead pamphlet from 1864


The opposition came from Copperhead Democrats, who were strongest in the Midwest and wanted to allow Confederate secession. In the East, opposition to the war was strongest among Irish Catholics, but also included business interests connected to the South typified by August Belmont. The Democratic Party was deeply split. In 1861 most Democrats supported the war. However, the party increasingly split down the middle between the moderates who supported the war effort, and the peace element, including Copperheads, who did not. It scored major gains in the 1862 elections, and elected the moderate Horatio Seymour as governor of New York. They gained 28 seats in the House of Representatives but Republicans retained control of both the House and the Senate.




Lincoln met with his Cabinet for the first reading of the Emancipation Proclamation draft on July 22, 1862


The 1862 election for the Indiana legislature was especially hard-fought. Though the Democrats gained control of the legislature, they were unable to impede the war effort. Republican Governor Oliver P. Morton was able to maintain control of the state's contribution to the war effort despite the Democrat majority.[13] Washington was especially helpful in 1864 in arranging furloughs to allow Hoosier soldiers to return home so they could vote in elections.[14] Across the North in 1864, the great majority of soldiers voted Republican. Men who had been Democrats before the war often abstained or voted Republican.[15]
As the federal draft laws tightened, there was serious unrest among Copperhead strongholds, such as the Irish in the Pennsylvania coal mining districts. The government needed the coal more than the draftees, so it ignored the largely non-violent draft dodging there.[16][17] The violent New York City draft riots of 1863 were suppressed by the U.S. Army firing grape shot down cobblestone city streets.[18][19]
The Democrats nominated George McClellan, a War Democrat for the 1864 presidential election but gave him an anti-war platform. In terms of Congress the opposition against the war was nearly powerless – as was the case in most states. In Indiana and Illinois pro-war governors circumvented anti-war legislatures elected in 1862. For 30 years after the war the Democrats carried the burden of having opposed the martyred Lincoln, who was viewed by many as the salvation of the Union and the destroyer of slavery.[20]
Copperheads[edit]
Main article: Copperheads (politics)
The Copperheads were a large faction of northern Democrats who opposed the war, demanding an immediate peace settlement. They said they wanted to restore "the Union as it was" (that is, with the South and with slavery) but they realized that the Confederacy would never voluntarily rejoin the U.S.[21] The most prominent Copperhead was Ohio's Clement L. Vallandigham, a Congressman and leader of the Democratic Party in Ohio. He was defeated in an intense election for governor in 1863. Republican prosecutors in the Midwest accused some Copperhead activists of treason in a series of trials in 1864.[22]
Copperheadism was a grassroots movement, strongest in the area just north of the Ohio River, as well as some urban ethnic wards. Some historians have argued that it represented a traditionalistic element alarmed at the rapid modernization of society sponsored by the Republican Party. It looked back to Jacksonian Democracy for inspiration – with ideals that promoted an agrarian rather than industrialized concept of society. Weber (2006) argues that the Copperheads damaged the Union war effort by fighting the draft, encouraging desertion and forming conspiracies.[23] However, other historians say the Copperheads were a legitimate opposition force unfairly treated by the government, adding that the draft was in disrepute and that the Republicans greatly exaggerated the conspiracies for partisan reasons.[24] Copperheadism was a major issue in the 1864 presidential election – its strength waxed when Union armies were doing poorly and waned when they won great victories. After the fall of Atlanta in September 1864, military success seemed assured and Copperheadism collapsed.[21]
Soldiers[edit]
Recruiting volunteers[edit]




Union soldiers on the Mason's Island (Theodore Roosevelt Island) in 1861


Enthusiastic young men clamored to join the Union army in 1861. They came with family support for reasons of patriotism and excitement. Washington decided to keep the small regular army intact; it only had 16,000 men and was needed to guard the frontier. Its officers could, however, join the temporary new volunteer army that was formed, with expectations that their experience would lead to rapid promotions. The problem with volunteering, however, was its serious lack of planning, leadership, and organization at the highest levels. Washington called on the states for troops, and every northern governor set about raising and equipping regiments, and sent the bills to the War Department. The men could elect the junior officers, while the governor appointed the senior officers, and Lincoln appointed the generals. Typically, politicians used their local organizations to raise troops and were in line (if healthy enough) to become colonel. The problem was that the War Department, under the disorganized leadership of Simon Cameron, also authorized local and private groups to raise regiments. The result was widespread confusion and delay.
Pennsylvania, for example, had acute problems. When Washington called for 10 more regiments, enough men volunteered to form 30. However, they were scattered among 70 different new units, none of them a complete regiment. Not until Washington approved gubernatorial control of all new units was the problem resolved. Allan Nevins is particularly scathing of this in his analysis: "A President more exact, systematic and vigilant than Lincoln, a Secretary more alert and clearheaded than Cameron, would have prevented these difficulties."[25]




Union soldiers before Marye's Heights, Fredericksburg in May 1863


By the end of 1861, 700,000 soldiers were drilling in Union camps. The first wave in spring was called up for only 90 days, then the soldiers went home or reenlisted. Later waves enlisted for three years.
The new recruits spent their time drilling in company and regiment formations. The combat in the first year, though strategically important, involved relatively small forces and few casualties. Sickness was a much more serious cause of hospitalization or death.
In the first few months, men wore low quality uniforms made of "shoddy" material, but by fall, sturdy wool uniforms—in blue—were standard. The nation's factories were converted to produce the rifles, cannons, wagons, tents, telegraph sets, and the myriad of other special items the army needed.
While business had been slow or depressed in spring 1861, because of war fears and Southern boycotts, by fall business was hiring again, offering young men jobs that were an alternative way to help win the war. Nonpartisanship was the rule in the first year, but by summer 1862, many Democrats had stopped supporting the war effort, and volunteering fell off sharply in their strongholds.
The calls for more and more soldiers continued, so states and localities responded by offering cash bonuses. By 1863, a draft law was in effect, but few men actually were drafted and served, since the law was designed to get them to volunteer or hire a substitute. Others hid away or left the country. With the Emancipation Proclamation taking effect in January 1863, localities could meet their draft quota by sponsoring regiments of ex-slaves organized in the South.[26]




Soldiers of the Fourth United States Colored Infantry at Fort Lincoln, in 1865


Michigan was especially eager to send thousands of volunteers.[27] A study of the cities of Grand Rapids and Niles shows an overwhelming surge of nationalism in 1861, whipping up enthusiasm for the war in all segments of society, and all political, religious, ethnic, and occupational groups. However, by 1862 the casualties were mounting, and the war was increasingly focused on freeing the slaves in addition to preserving the Union. Copperhead Democrats called the war a failure, and it became an increasingly partisan Republican effort.[28] Michigan voters remained evenly split between the parties in the presidential election of 1864.[29]
Motivations of soldiers[edit]
Perman (2010) says historians are of two minds on why millions of men seemed so eager to fight, suffer, and die over four years:

Some historians emphasize that Civil War soldiers were driven by political ideology, holding firm beliefs about the importance of liberty, Union, or state rights, or about the need to protect or to destroy slavery. Others point to less overtly political reasons to fight, such as the defense of one's home and family, or the honor and brotherhood to be preserved when fighting alongside other men. Most historians agree that, no matter what he thought about when he went into the war, the experience of combat affected him profoundly and sometimes affected his reasons for continuing to fight.[30]

The paperwork war[edit]
On the whole, the national, state, and local governments handled the avalanche of paperwork effectively. Skills developed in insurance and financial companies formed the basis of systematic forms, copies, summaries, and filing systems used to make sense of masses of human data. The leader in this effort, John Shaw Billings, later developed a system of mechanically storing, sorting, and counting numerical information using punch cards. Nevertheless, old-fashioned methodology had to be recognized and overcome. An illustrative case study came in New Hampshire, where the critical post of state adjutant general was held in 1861–64 by elderly politician Anthony C. Colby (1792–1873) and his son Daniel E. Colby (1816–1891). They were patriotic, but were overwhelmed with the complexity of their duties. The state lost track of men who enlisted after 1861; it had no personnel records or information on volunteers, substitutes, or draftees, and there was no inventory of weaponry and supplies. Nathaniel Head (1828–1883) took over in 1864, obtained an adequate budget and office staff, and reconstructed the missing paperwork. As result, widows, orphans, and disabled veterans received the postwar payments they had earned.[31]
Medical conditions[edit]
Main article: Medicine in the American Civil War




Field hospital after the Battle of Savage's Station (1862)


More soldiers died of disease than from battle injuries, and even larger numbers were temporarily incapacitated by wounds, disease, and accidents. The Union responded by building army hospitals in every state.
The hygiene of the camps was poor, especially at the beginning of the war when men who had seldom been far from home were brought together for training with thousands of strangers. First came epidemics of the childhood diseases of chicken pox, mumps, whooping cough, and especially, measles. Operations in the South meant a dangerous and new disease environment, bringing diarrhea, dysentery, typhoid fever, and malaria. There were no antibiotics, so the surgeons prescribed coffee, whiskey, and quinine. Harsh weather, bad water, inadequate shelter in winter quarters, poor policing of camps, and dirty camp hospitals took their toll.[32] This was a common scenario in wars from time immemorial, and conditions faced by the Confederate army were even worse. What was different in the Union was the emergence of skilled, well-funded medical organizers who took proactive action, especially in the much enlarged United States Army Medical Department,[33] and the United States Sanitary Commission, a new private agency.[34] Numerous other new agencies also targeted the medical and morale needs of soldiers, including the United States Christian Commission, as well as smaller private agencies, such as the Women's Central Association of Relief for Sick and Wounded in the Army (WCAR), founded in 1861 by Henry Whitney Bellows, a Unitarian minister, and the social reformer Dorothea Dix. Systematic funding appeals raised public consciousness as well as millions of dollars. Many thousands of volunteers worked in the hospitals and rest homes, most famously poet Walt Whitman. Frederick Law Olmsted, a famous landscape architect, was the highly efficient executive director of the Sanitary Commission.[35]
States could use their own tax money to support their troops, as Ohio did. Under the energetic leadership of Governor David Tod, a War Democrat who won office on a coalition "Union Party" ticket with Republicans, Ohio acted vigorously. Following the unexpected carnage at the battle of Shiloh in April 1862, Ohio sent three steamboats to the scene as floating hospitals equipped with doctors, nurses, and medical supplies. The state fleet expanded to 11 hospital ships, and the state set up 12 local offices in main transportation nodes, to help Ohio soldiers moving back and forth.[36]
The Christian Commission comprised 6,000 volunteers who aided chaplains in many ways.[37] For example, its agents distributed Bibles, delivered sermons, helped with sending letters home, taught men to read and write, and set up camp libraries.[38]
The Army learned many lessons and modernized its procedures,[39] and medical science—especially surgery—made many advances.[40] In the long run, the wartime experiences of the numerous Union commissions modernized public welfare, and set the stage for large—scale community philanthropy in America based on fund raising campaigns and private donations.[41]
Additionally, women gained new public roles. For example, Mary Livermore (1820–1905), the manager of the Chicago branch of the US Sanitary Commission, used her newfound organizational skills to mobilize support for women's suffrage after the war. She argued that women needed more education and job opportunities to help them fulfill their role of serving others.[42]
The Sanitary Commission collected enormous amounts of statistical data, and opened up the problems of storing information for fast access and mechanically searching for data patterns.[43] The pioneer was John Shaw Billings (1838–1913). A senior surgeon in the war, Billings built two of the world's most important libraries, Library of the Surgeon General's Office (now the National Library of Medicine) and the New York Public Library; he also figured out how to mechanically analyze data by turning it into numbers and punching onto the computer punch card as developed by his student Herman Hollerith. Hollerith's company became International Business Machines (IBM) in 1911.[44]
Prisoners of war[edit]
Main article: American Civil War prison camps
Both sides operated prison camps; they handled about 400,000 captives, but many other prisoners were quickly released and never sent to camps. The Record and Pension Office in 1901 counted 211,000 Northerners who were captured. In 1861–63 most were immediately paroled; after the parole exchange system broke down in 1863, about 195,000 went to Confederate prison camps. Some tried to escape but few succeeded. By contrast 464,000 Confederates were captured (many in the final days) and 215,000 imprisoned. Over 30,000 Union and nearly 26,000 Confederate prisoners died in captivity. Just over 12% of the captives in Northern prisons died, compared to 15.5% for Southern prisons.[45][46]
Draft riots[edit]




New York City draft riots


Discontent with the 1863 draft law led to riots in several cities and in rural areas as well. By far the most important were the New York City draft riots of July 13 to July 16, 1863.[47] Irish Catholic and other workers fought police, militia and regular army units until the Army used artillery to sweep the streets. Initially focused on the draft, the protests quickly expanded into violent attacks on blacks in New York City, with many killed on the streets.[48]
Small-scale riots broke out in ethnic German and Irish districts, and in areas along the Ohio River with many Copperheads. Holmes County, Ohio was an isolated parochial area dominated by Pennsylvania Dutch and some recent German immigrants. It was a Democratic stronghold and few men dared speak out in favor of conscription. Local politicians denounced Lincoln and Congress as despotic, seeing the draft law as a violation of their local autonomy. In June 1863, small-scale disturbances broke out; they ended when the Army sent in armed units.[49][50][51]
Economy[edit]
The Union economy grew and prospered during the war while fielding a very large army and navy.[52] The Republicans in Washington had a Whiggish vision of an industrial nation, with great cities, efficient factories, productive farms, all national banks, all knit together by a modern railroad system, to be mobilized by the United States Military Railroad. The South had resisted policies such as tariffs to promote industry and homestead laws to promote farming because slavery would not benefit. With the South gone and Northern Democrats weak, the Republicans enacted their legislation. At the same time they passed new taxes to pay for part of the war and issued large amounts of bonds to pay for most of the rest. Economic historians attribute the remainder of the cost of the war to inflation. Congress wrote an elaborate program of economic modernization that had the dual purpose of winning the war and permanently transforming the economy.[53]
Financing the war[edit]
In 1860 the Treasury was a small operation that funded the small-scale operations of the government through land sales and customs based on a low tariff.[54] Peacetime revenues were trivial in comparison with the cost of a full-scale war but the Treasury Department under Secretary Salmon P. Chase showed unusual ingenuity in financing the war without crippling the economy.[55] Many new taxes were imposed and always with a patriotic theme comparing the financial sacrifice to the sacrifices of life and limb. The government paid for supplies in real money, which encouraged people to sell to the government regardless of their politics. By contrast the Confederacy gave paper promissory notes when it seized property, so that even loyal Confederates would hide their horses and mules rather than sell them for dubious paper. Overall the Northern financial system was highly successful in raising money and turning patriotism into profit, while the Confederate system impoverished its patriots.[56]
The United States needed $3.1 billion to pay for the immense armies and fleets raised to fight the Civil War—over $400 million just in 1862 alone.[57] Apart from tariffs, the largest revenue by far came from new excise taxes—a sort of value added tax—that was imposed on every sort of manufactured item. Second came much higher tariffs, through several Morrill tariff laws. Third came the nation's first income tax; only the wealthy paid and it was repealed at war's end.




1862 Greenbacks


Apart from taxes, the second major source of income was government bonds. For the first time bonds in small denominations were sold directly to the people, with publicity and patriotism as key factors, as designed by banker Jay Cooke. State banks lost their power to issue banknotes. Only national banks could do that and Chase made it easy to become a national bank; it involved buying and holding federal bonds and financiers rushed to open these banks. Chase numbered them, so that the first one in each city was the "First National Bank".[58] Third, the government printed paper money called "greenbacks". They led to endless controversy because they caused inflation.[59]
The North's most important war measure was perhaps the creation of a system of national banks that provided a sound currency for the industrial expansion. Even more important, the hundreds of new banks that were allowed to open were required to purchase government bonds. Thereby the nation monetized the potential wealth represented by farms, urban buildings, factories, and businesses, and immediately turned that money over to the Treasury for war needs.[60]
Tariffs[edit]
Secretary Chase, though a long-time free-trader, worked with Morrill to pass a second tariff bill in summer 1861, raising rates another 10 points in order to generate more revenues.[61] These subsequent bills were primarily revenue driven to meet the war's needs, though they enjoyed the support of protectionists such as Carey, who again assisted Morrill in the bill's drafting. The Morrill Tariff of 1861 was designed to raise revenue. The tariff act of 1862 served not only to raise revenue but also to encourage the establishment of factories free from British competition by taxing British imports. Furthermore, it protected American factory workers from low paid European workers, and as a major bonus attracted tens of thousands of those Europeans to immigrate to America for high wage factory and craftsman jobs.[62]
Customs revenue from tariffs totaled $345 million from 1861 through 1865 or 43% of all federal tax revenue.
Land grants[edit]
The U.S. government owned vast amounts of good land (mostly from the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 and the Oregon Treaty with Britain in 1846). The challenge was to make the land useful to people and to provide the economic basis for the wealth that would pay off the war debt. Land grants went to railroad construction companies to open up the western plains and link up to California. Together with the free lands provided farmers by the Homestead Law the low-cost farm lands provided by the land grants sped up the expansion of commercial agriculture in the West.
The 1862 Homestead Act opened up the public domain lands for free. Land grants to the railroads meant they could sell tracts for family farms (80 to 200 acres) at low prices with extended credit. In addition the government sponsored fresh information, scientific methods and the latest techniques through the newly established Department of Agriculture and the Morrill Land Grant College Act.[63][64]
Agriculture[edit]
Agriculture was the largest single industry and it prospered during the war.[65][66] Prices were high, pulled up by a strong demand from the army and from Britain (which depended on American wheat for a fourth of its food imports). The war acted as a catalyst that encouraged the rapid adoption of horse-drawn machinery and other implements. The rapid spread of recent inventions such as the reaper and mower made the work force efficient, even as hundreds of thousands of farmers were in the army. Many wives took their place and often consulted by mail on what to do; increasingly they relied on community and extended kin for advice and help.[67]
The Union used hundreds of thousands of animals. The Army had plenty of cash to purchase them from farmers and breeders but especially in the early months the quality was mixed.[68] Horses were needed for cavalry and artillery.[69] Mules pulled the wagons. The supply held up, despite an unprecedented epidemic of glanders, a fatal disease that baffled veterinarians.[70] In the South, the Union army shot all the horses it did not need to keep them out of Confederate hands.
Cotton trade[edit]
The Treasury started buying cotton during the war, for shipment to Europe and northern mills. The sellers were Southern planters who needed the cash, regardless of their patriotism. The Northern buyers could make heavy profits, which annoyed soldiers like Ulysses Grant. He blamed Jewish traders and expelled them from his lines in 1862 but Lincoln quickly overruled this show of anti-semitism. Critics said the cotton trade helped the South, prolonged the war and fostered corruption. Lincoln decided to continue the trade for fear that Britain might intervene if its textile manufacturers were denied raw material. Another goal was to foster latent Unionism in Southern border states. Northern textile manufacturers needed cotton to remain in business and to make uniforms, while cotton exports to Europe provided an important source of gold to finance the war.[71]
Society[edit]
Religion[edit]
The Protestant religion was quite strong in the North in the 1860s. The United States Christian Commission sent agents into the Army camps to provide psychological support as well as books, newspapers, food and clothing. Through prayer, sermons and welfare operations, the agents ministered to soldiers' spiritual as well as temporal needs as they sought to bring the men to a Christian way of life.[72] Most churches made an effort to support their soldiers in the field and especially their families back home. Much of the political rhetoric of the era had a distinct religious tone.[73]
The Protestant clergy in America took a variety of positions. In general, the pietistic denominations such as the Methodists, Northern Baptists and Congregationalists strongly supported the war effort. Catholics, Episcopalians, Lutherans and conservative Presbyterians generally avoided any discussion of the war, so it would not bitterly divide their membership. The Quakers, while giving strong support to the abolitionist movement on a personal level, refused to take a denominational position. Some clergymen who supported the Confederacy were denounced as Copperheads, especially in the border regions.[74][75]
Methodists[edit]
Many Northerners had only recently become religious (following the Second Great Awakening) and religion was a powerful force in their lives. No denomination was more active in supporting the Union than the Methodist Episcopal Church. Carwardine[76] argues that for many Methodists, the victory of Lincoln in 1860 heralded the arrival of the kingdom of God in America. They were moved into action by a vision of freedom for slaves, freedom from the persecutions of godly abolitionists, release from the Slave Power's evil grip on the American government and the promise of a new direction for the Union.[76] Methodists formed a major element of the popular support for the Radical Republicans with their hard line toward the white South. Dissident Methodists left the church.[77] During Reconstruction the Methodists took the lead in helping form Methodist churches for Freedmen and moving into Southern cities even to the point of taking control, with Army help, of buildings that had belonged to the southern branch of the church.[78][79]
The Methodist family magazine Ladies' Repository promoted Christian family activism. Its articles provided moral uplift to women and children. It portrayed the War as a great moral crusade against a decadent Southern civilization corrupted by slavery. It recommended activities that family members could perform in order to aid the Union cause.[80]
Family[edit]
Historian Stephen M. Frank reports that what it meant to be a father varied with status and age. He says most men demonstrated dual commitments as providers and nurturers and believed that husband and wife had mutual obligations toward their children. The war privileged masculinity, dramatizing and exaggerating, father-son bonds. Especially at five critical stages in the soldier's career (enlistment, blooding, mustering out, wounding and death) letters from absent fathers articulated a distinctive set of 19th-century ideals of manliness.[81]
Children[edit]
There were numerous children's magazines such as Merry's Museum, The Student and Schoolmate, Our Young Folks, The Little Pilgrim, Forrester's Playmate, and The Little Corporal. They showed a Protestant religious tone and "promoted the principles of hard work, obedience, generosity, humility, and piety; trumpeted the benefits of family cohesion; and furnished mild adventure stories, innocent entertainment, and instruction".[82] Their pages featured factual information and anecdotes about the war along with related quizzes, games, poems, songs, short oratorical pieces for "declamation", short stories and very short plays that children could stage. They promoted patriotism and the Union war aims, fostered kindly attitudes toward freed slaves, blackened the Confederates cause, encouraged readers to raise money for war-related humanitarian funds, and dealt with the death of family members.[83] By 1866, the Milton Bradley Company was selling "The Myriopticon: A Historical Panorama of the Rebellion" that allowed children to stage a neighborhood show that would explain the war. It comprised colorful drawings that were turned on wheels and included pre-printed tickets, poster advertisements, and narration that could be read aloud at the show.[84]
Caring for war orphans was an important function for local organizations as well as state and local government.[85] A typical state was Iowa, where the private "Iowa Soldiers Orphans Home Association" operated with funding from the legislature and public donations. It set up orphanages in Davenport, Glenwood and Cedar Falls. The state government funded pensions for the widows and children of soldiers.[86] Orphan schools like the Pennsylvania Soldiers' Orphan School, also spoke of the broader public welfare experiment that began as part of the aftermath of the Civil War. These orphan schools were created to provide housing, care, and education for orphans of Civil War soldiers. They became a matter of state pride, with orphans were paraded around at rallies to display the power of a patriotic schooling.[87]
All the northern states had free public school systems before the war but not the border states. West Virginia set up its system in 1863. Over bitter opposition it established an almost-equal education for black children, most of whom were ex-slaves.[88] Thousands of black refugees poured into St. Louis, where the Freedmen's Relief Society, the Ladies Union Aid Society, the Western Sanitary Commission, and the American Missionary Association (AMA) set up schools for their children.[89]
Unionists in South and Border states[edit]




Confederate soldiers hanging pro-Union bridge-burning conspirators


People loyal to the U.S. federal government and opposed to secession living in the border states (where slavery was legal in 1861) were termed Unionists. Confederates sometimes styled them "Homemade Yankees". However, Southern Unionists were not necessarily northern sympathizers and many of them, although opposing secession, supported the Confederacy once it was a fact. East Tennessee never supported the Confederacy, and Unionists there became powerful state leaders, including governors Andrew Johnson and William G. Brownlow. Likewise, large pockets of eastern Kentucky were Unionist and helped keep the state from seceding.[90] Western Virginia, with few slaves and some industry, was so strongly Unionist that it broke away and formed the new state of West Virginia.[91]
Still, nearly 120,000 Unionists from the South served in the Union Army during the Civil War and Unionist regiments were raised from every Confederate state except South Carolina. Among such units was the 1st Alabama Cavalry Regiment, which served as William Sherman's personal escort on his march to the sea. Southern Unionists were extensively used as anti-guerrilla paramilitary forces.[92] During Reconstruction many of these Unionists became "Scalawags", a derogatory term for Southern supporters of the Republican Party.[93]
Guerrilla warfare[edit]
Besides organized military conflict, the border states were beset by guerrilla warfare. In such a bitterly divided state, neighbors frequently used the excuse of war to settle personal grudges and took up arms against neighbors.
Missouri[edit]
Main article: Missouri in the Civil War




Quantrill's 1863 raid burned the town of Lawrence and killed 164 defenders


Missouri was the scene of over 1000 engagements between Union and Confederate forces, and uncounted numbers of guerrilla attacks and raids by informal pro-Confederate bands.[94] Western Missouri was the scene of brutal guerrilla warfare during the Civil War. Roving insurgent bands such as Quantrill's Raiders and the men of Bloody Bill Anderson terrorized the countryside, striking both military installations and civilian settlements. Because of the widespread attacks and the protection offered by Confederate sympathizers, Federal leaders issued General Order No. 11 in 1863, and evacuated areas of Jackson, Cass, and Bates counties. They forced the residents out to reduce support for the guerrillas. Union cavalry could sweep through and track down Confederate guerrillas, who no longer had places to hide and people and infrastructure to support them. On short notice, the army forced almost 20,000 people, mostly women, children and the elderly, to leave their homes. Many never returned and the affected counties were economically devastated for years after the end of the war.[95] Families passed along stories of their bitter experiences down through several generations – Harry Truman's grandparents were caught up in the raids and he would tell of how they were kept in concentration camps.[96]
Some marauding units became organized criminal gangs after the war. In 1882, the bank robber and ex-Confederate guerrilla Jesse James was killed in Saint Joseph. Vigilante groups appeared in remote areas where law enforcement was weak, to deal with the lawlessness left over from the guerrilla warfare phase. For example, the Bald Knobbers were the term for several law-and-order vigilante groups in the Ozarks. In some cases, they too turned to illegal gang activity.[97]
Kentucky[edit]
Main article: Kentucky in the Civil War
In response to the growing problem of locally organized guerrilla campaigns throughout 1863 and 1864, in June 1864, Maj. Gen. Stephen G. Burbridge was given command over the state of Kentucky. This began an extended period of military control that would last through early 1865, beginning with martial law authorized by President Abraham Lincoln. To pacify Kentucky, Burbridge rigorously suppressed disloyalty and used economic pressure as coercion. His guerrilla policy, which included public execution of four guerrillas for the death of each unarmed Union citizen, caused the most controversy. After a falling out with Governor Thomas E. Bramlette, Burbridge was dismissed in February 1865. Confederates remembered him as the "Butcher of Kentucky".[98]
Union states[edit]

Washington, D.C

List of Wikipedia articles on Union states and major cities:





California
Connecticut
Delaware*
Illinois
Indiana

Indianapolis


Iowa
Kansas




Kentucky†*

Lexington
Louisville


Maine
Maryland*

Baltimore






Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri†*

St. Louis


Nevada
New Hampshire




New Jersey
New York

New York City


Ohio

Cincinnati
Cleveland


Oregon




Pennsylvania

Harrisburg
Philadelphia
Pittsburgh


Rhode Island
Vermont
Virginia†*
West Virginia*
Wisconsin





* Border states with slavery in 1861
†Had two state governments, one Unionist one Confederate, both claiming to be the legitimate government of their state. Kentucky and Missouri's Confederate governments never had significant control of their state.
West Virginia separated from Virginia and became part of the Union during the war, on June 20, 1863. Nevada also joined the Union during the war, becoming a state on October 31, 1864.
Union Territories[edit]
The Union controlled territories in April, 1861 were:[99]

Colorado Territory
Dakota Territory
Indian Territory (disputed with the Confederacy)
Nebraska Territory
Nevada Territory (became a state in 1864)
New Mexico Territory

Arizona Territory (split off in 1863)


Utah Territory
Washington Territory

Idaho Territory (split off in 1863)

Montana Territory (split off in 1864)





The Indian Territory saw its own civil war, as the major tribes held slaves and endorsed the Confederacy.[100]
See also[edit]

American Civil War
Confederate States of America
American Civil War prison camps

Notes[edit]


^ Stampp, Kenneth M. (1980). "The Concept of a Perpetual Union". The Imperiled Union: Essays on the Background of the Civil War. p. 30. 
^ The war of the rebellion: a compilation of the official records of the Union and Confederate armies. 1. 14. pp. 185–1,015. Retrieved March 19, 2016. 
^ Donald, David Herbert & Randall, J. G. (1961). The Civil War and Reconstruction (2nd ed.). pp. 3–13. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Gary W. Gallagher (2001). The American Civil War: The War in the East 1861 – May 1863. Osprey Publishing. p. 22. 
^ Nevins, Allan (1959). The War for the Union: The Improvised War 1861–1862. pp. 74–75. 
^ McClintock, Russell (2008). Lincoln and the Decision for War: The Northern Response to Secession. p. 255.  Pages 254–74 provide details of support across the North.
^ Smith, Michael Thomas (2011). The Enemy Within: Fears of Corruption in the Civil War North. 
^ Goodwin, Doris Kearns (2005). Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln. 
^ Paludsn, Phillip Shaw (1994). The Presidency of Abraham Lincoln. pp. 21–48. 
^ Leonard P. Curry, Blueprint for Modern America: Nonmilitary Legislation of the First Civil War Congress (1968)
^ Robert Cook, "Stiffening Abe: William Pitt Fessenden and the Role of the Broker Politician in the Civil War Congress," American Nineteenth Century History, June 2007, Vol. 8 Issue 2, pp 145–167
^ Bruce Tap, "Inevitability, masculinity, and the American military tradition: the committee on the conduct of the war investigates the American Civil War," American Nineteenth Century History, (2004) 5#2 pp 19–46
^ Kenneth M. Stampp, Indiana Politics during the Civil War (1949) online edition
^ Steven E. Woodworth (2011). This Great Struggle: America's Civil War. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 311. 
^ Jonathan W. White (2014). Emancipation, the Union Army, and the Reelection of Abraham Lincoln. LSU Press. p. 116. 
^ Arnold Shankman, "Draft Resistance in Civil War Pennsylvania." Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography (1977) pp:190-204. online
^ Robert M. Sandow, Deserter Country:Civil War Opposition in the Pennsylvania Appalachians (2009)
^ Adrian Cook, (1974). The Armies of the Streets: The New York City Draft Riots of 1863. University Press of Kentucky. 
^ A. Hunter Dupree and Leslie H. Fishel, Jr. "An Eyewitness Account of the New York Draft Riots, July, 1863", Mississippi Valley Historical Review (1960) 47#3 pp:472–479 In JSTOR
^ Joel Silbey, A respectable minority: the Democratic Party in the Civil War era, 1860–1868 (1977) online edition
^ a b Joanna D. Cowden "The Politics of Dissent: Civil War Democrats in Connecticut," The New England Quarterly, Vol. 56, No. 4 (December 1983), pp. 538–554 in JSTOR
^ Lewis J. Wertheim, "The Indianapolis Treason Trials, the Elections of 1864 and the Power of the Partisan Press." Indiana Magazine of History 1989 85(3): 236–250.
^ Jennifer L. Weber, Copperheads: The Rise and Fall of Lincoln's Opponents in the North (2006)
^ Frank L. Klement, Lincoln's Critics: The Copperheads of the North (1999)
^ Nevins, Allan (1959). War for the Union: Vol 5. The Improvised War, 1861–1862. p. 235. 
^ Gallman, J. Matthew (1994). The North Fights the Civil War. pp. 56–73. 
^ Robert E., Mitchell, "Civil War Recruiting and Recruits from Ever-Changing Labor Pools: Midland County, Michigan, as a Case Study," Michigan Historical Review, 35 (Spring 2009), 29–60.
^ Martin J. Hershock, "Copperheads and Radicals: Michigan Partisan Politics during the Civil War Era, 1860–1865," Michigan Historical Review (1992) 18#1 pp 28–69
^ Peter Bratt, "A Great Revolution in Feeling: The American Civil War in Niles and Grand Rapids, Michigan," Michigan Historical Review (2005) 31#2 pp 43–66.
^ Michael Perman and Amy Murrell Taylor, eds. (2010). Major Problems in the Civil War and Reconstruction. Cengage. p. 178. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Richard F. Miller, ed., States at war: a reference guide for Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont in the Civil War (2013) 1: 366-67
^ Kenneth Link, "Potomac Fever: The Hazards of Camp Life," Vermont History, April 1983, Vol. 51 Issue 2, pp 69–88
^ Mary C. Gillett, The Army Medical Department, 1818–1865 (1987)
^ William Quentin Maxwell, Lincoln's Fifth Wheel: The Political History of the U.S. Sanitary Commission (1956)
^ Justin Martin, Genius of Place: The Life of Frederick Law Olmsted (2011) pp 178–230
^ Eugene E. Roseboom, The Civil War Era, 1850–1873 (1944) p 396
^ M. Hamlin Cannon, "The United States Christian Commission," Mississippi Valley Historical Review Vol. 38, No. 1 (June, 1951), pp. 61–80 in JSTOR
^ David M. Hovde, "The U.S. Christian Commission's Library and Literacy Programs for the Union Military Forces in the Civil War," Libraries & Culture Vol. 24, No. 3 (Summer, 1989), pp. 295–316 in JSTOR
^ Frank R. Freemon, "Lincoln finds a surgeon general: William A. Hammond and the transformation of the Union Army Medical Bureau." Civil War History (1987) 33#1 pp: 5–21.
^ Shauna Devine, Learning from the Wounded: The Civil War and the Rise of American Medical Science (2014).
^ Robert H. Bremner, "The Impact of the Civil War on Philanthropy and Social Welfare," Civil War History, December 1966, Vol. 12 Issue 4, pp 293–303
^ Wendy Hamand Venet, "The Emergence of a Suffragist: Mary Livermore, Civil War activism, and the Moral Power of Women," Civil War History, June 2002, Vol. 48 Issue 2, pp 143–64 in Project MUSE
^ James H. Cassedy, "Numbering the North's Medical Events: Humanitarianism and Science in Civil War Statistics," Bulletin of the History of Medicine, Summer 1992, Vol. 66 Issue 2, pp 210–233
^ Carleton B. Chapman, Order out of chaos: John Shaw Billings and America's coming of age (1994)
^ James Ford Rhodes (1904). History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850: 1864–1866. Harper & Brothers. pp. 507–8. 
^ Michael B. Chesson, "Prison Camps and Prisoners of War," in Steven E. Woodworth, ed. The American Civil War (1996), pp 466–78 online
^ Barnet Schecter, The Devil's Own Work: The Civil War Draft Riots and the Fight to Reconstruct America (2005)
^ The New York City Draft Riots In the Shadow of Slavery: African Americans in New York City, 1626–1863, by Leslie M. Harris
^ Kenneth H. Wheeler, "Local Autonomy and Civil War Draft Resistance: Holmes County, Ohio," Civil War History, (1999) 45@2 pp 147–58
^ Shannon Smith Bennett, "Draft Resistance and Rioting." in by Maggi M. Morehouse and Zoe Trodd, eds., Civil War America: A Social and Cultural History with Primary Sources (2013) ch. 1
^ Shannon M. Smith, "Teaching Civil War Union Politics: Draft Riots in the Midwest." OAH Magazine of History (2013) 27#2 pp: 33-36. online
^ Emerson David Fite, Social and industrial conditions in the North during the Civil War (1910) online edition
^ Heather Cox Richardson, The Greatest Nation of the Earth: Republican Economic Policies during the Civil War (1997)
^ Jane Flaherty, "'The Exhausted Condition of the Treasury' on the Eve of the Civil War," Civil War History, (2009) 55#2 pp. 244–277 in Project MUSE
^ John Niven, Salmon P. Chase: a biography (1995) p. 331
^ Jane Flaherty, The revenue imperative (2009)
^ Jerry W. Markham, A financial history of the United States (2001) vol 3 p 220
^ Bray Hammond, Sovereignty and the Empty Purse: Banks and Politics in the Civil War (1970).
^ Wesley C. Mitchell, A history of the greenbacks: with special reference to the economic consequences of their issue: 1862–65 (1903) online edition
^ Hammond, Sovereignty and the Empty Purse: Banks and Politics in the Civil War (1970).
^ Richardson, 100, 113
^ James L. Huston, "A Political Response to Industrialism: The Republican Embrace of Protectionist Labor Doctrines," Journal of American History, (1983) 70#1 pp 35–57 in JSTOR
^ Harold M. Hyman, American Singularity: The 1787 Northwest Ordinance, the 1862 Homestead and Morrill Acts, and the 1944 GI Bill (U of Georgia Press, 2008)
^ Sarah T. Phillips et al. "Reflections on One Hundred and Fifty Years of the United States Department of Agriculture," Agricultural History (2013) 87#3 pp 314–367.
^ Fite, Social and industrial conditions in the North during the Civil War, (1910) pp 1–23; Paludan, A People's Contest" pp 159–69
^ Paul W. Gates, Agriculture and the Civil War (1965) covers 1850–1870
^ J.L. Anderson, "The Vacant Chair on the Farm: Soldier Husbands, Farm Wives, and the Iowa Home Front, 1861–1865," Annals of Iowa, Summer/Fall 2007, Vol. 66 Issue 3/4, pp 241–265
^ Gervase Phillips, "Warhorses of the U.S. Civil War," History Today, (December 2005) 55#12 online
^ Spencer Jones, "The Influence of Horse Supply Upon Field Artillery in the American Civil War," Journal of Military History, (April 2010), 74#2 pp 357–377,
^ G. Terry Sharrer, "The great glanders epizootic, 1861–1866," Agricultural History, (Win 1995) 69#1 pp 79–97 in JSTOR
^ David S. Surdam, "Traders or traitors: Northern cotton trading during the Civil War," Business & Economic History, Winter 1999, Vol. 28 Issue 2, pp 299–310 online
^ M. Hamlin Cannon, "The United States Christian Commission", Mississippi Valley Historical Review, (1951) 38#1 pp:61–80. in JSTOR
^ Randall M. Miller, Harry S. Stout and Charles Reagan Wilson, eds. Religion and the American Civil War (Oxford University Press, 1998) p 4
^ Timothy L. Wesley. The Politics of Faith during the Civil War (Louisiana State University Press, 2013)
^ George C. Rable, God's Almost Chosen Peoples: A Religious History of the American Civil War (University of North Carolina Press, 2010).
^ a b Richard Carwardine, "Methodists, Politics, and the Coming of the American Civil War," Church History, September 2000, Vol. 69 Issue 3, pp 578–609 in JSTOR
^ Ralph E. Morrow, "Methodists and 'Butternuts' in the Old Northwest," Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society Vol. 49, No. 1 (Spring, 1956), pp. 34–47 in JSTOR
^ William W. Sweet, "Methodist Church Influence in Southern Politics," Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. 1, No. 4 (March 1915), pp. 546–560 in JSTOR
^ Ralph E. Morrow, "Northern Methodism in the South during Reconstruction," Mississippi Valley Historical Review Vol. 41, No. 2 (September 1954), pp. 197–218 in JSTOR
^ Kathleen L. Endres, "A Voice for the Christian Family: The Methodist Episcopal 'Ladies' Repository' in the Civil War," Methodist History, January 1995, Vol. 33 Issue 2, p84-97,
^ Stephen M. Frank, "'Rendering aid and comfort': Images of fatherhood in the letters of Civil War soldiers from Massachusetts and Michigan," Journal of Social History, Fall 1992, Vol. 26 Issue 1, pp 5–31 in JSTOR
^ James Marten, Children for the Union: The War Spirit of the Northern Home Front (2004) p. 17
^ James Marten, "For the good, the true, and the beautiful: Northern children's magazines and the Civil War," Civil War History, March 1995, Vol. 41 Issue 1, pp 57–75
^ James Marten, "History in a Box: Milton Bradley's Myriopticon," Journal of the History of Childhood & Youth, Winter 2009, Vol. 2 Issue 1, pp 5–7
^ Marten, Children for the Union pp 107, 166
^ George Gallarno, "How Iowa Cared for Orphans of Her Soldiers of the Civil War," Annals of Iowa, January 1926, Vol. 15 Issue 3, pp 163–193
^ James Marten, "Children and Youth during the Civil War Era," (New York University Press) Winter 2012, pp 188-195
^ F. Talbott, "Some Legislative and Legal Aspects of the Negro Question in West Virginia during the Civil War and Reconstruction," West Virginia History, January 1963, Vol. 24 Issue 2, pp 110–133
^ Lawrence O. Christensen, "Black Education in Civil War St. Louis," Missouri Historical Review, April 2001, Vol. 95 Issue 3, pp 302–316
^ Kent Dollar et al. eds. Sister States, Enemy States: The Civil War in Kentucky and Tennessee (2009)
^ William A. Link, "'This Bastard New Virginia': Slavery, West Virginia Exceptionalism, and the Secession Crisis," West Virginia History, Spring 2009, Vol. 3 Issue 1, pp 37–56
^ Richard N. Current, Lincoln's Loyalists: Union Soldiers from the Confederacy (1994)
^ James Alex Baggett, The Scalawags: Southern Dissenters in the Civil War and Reconstruction (2003)
^ Michael Fellman, Inside War: The Guerrilla Conflict in Missouri during the Civil War (1989)
^ Sarah Bohl, "A War on Civilians: Order Number 11 and the Evacuation of Western Missouri," Prologue, April 2004, Vol. 36 Issue 1, pp 44–51
^ Michael R. Gardner, et al. Harry Truman and Civil Rights: Moral Courage and Political Risks (2003) p. 4
^ Elmo Ingenthron and Hartman, Bald Knobbers: Vigilantes on the Ozarks Frontier (1988)
^ Louis De Falaise, "General Stephen Gano Burbridge's Command in Kentucky," Register of the Kentucky Historical Society, April 1971, Vol. 69 Issue 2, pp 101–127
^ Ray C. Colton, The Civil War in the Western Territories: Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico and Utah (1984)
^ John Spencer and Adam Hook, The American Civil War in Indian Territory (2006)


Bibliography[edit]
Main article: American Civil War bibliography
Surveys[edit]

Cashin, Joan E. ed. The War Was You and Me: Civilians in the American Civil War (2001),
Fellman, Michael et al. This Terrible War: The Civil War and its Aftermath (2nd ed. 2007), 544 page university textbook
Flaherty, Jane. "'The Exhausted Condition of the Treasury' on the Eve of the Civil War," Civil War History, Volume 55, Number 2, June 2009, pp. 244–277 in Project MUSE
Ford, Lacy K., ed. A Companion to the Civil War and Reconstruction. (2005). 518 pp. 23 essays by scholars excerpt and text search
Gallman, J. Matthew. The North Fights the Civil War: The Home Front (1994), survey
Gallman, J. Matthew. Northerners at War: Reflections on the Civil War Home Front (2010), essays on specialized issues
McPherson, James M. Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era (1988), 900 page survey; Pulitzer prize
Nevins, Allan. War for the Union, an 8-volume set (1947–1971). the most detailed political, economic and military narrative; by Pulitzer Prize winner; vol 1–4 cover 1848–61; vol 5. The Improvised War, 1861–1862; 6. War Becomes Revolution, 1862–1863; 7. The Organized War, 1863–1864; 8. The Organized War to Victory, 1864–1865
Resch, John P. et al., Americans at War: Society, Culture and the Homefront vol 2: 1816–1900 (2005)

Politics[edit]

Bogue, Allan G. The Congressman's Civil War (1989)
Carman, Harry J. and Reinhard H. Luthin. Lincoln and the Patronage (1943), details on each state
Donald, David Herbert. Lincoln (1999) the best biography; excerpt and text search
Engle, Stephen D. Gathering to Save a Nation: Lincoln and the Union's War Governors (u of North Carolina Press, 2016). 725 pp.
Fish, Carl Russell. "Lincoln and the Patronage," American Historical Review (1902) 8#1 pp. 53–69 in JSTOR
Gallagher, Gary W. The Union War (2011), emphasizes that the North fought primarily for nationalism and preservation of the Union
Goodwin, Doris Kearns. Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln (2005) excerpts and text search, on Lincoln's cabinet
Green, Michael S. Freedom, Union, and Power: Lincoln and His Party during the Civil War. (2004). 400 pp.
Harris, William C. Lincoln and the Union Governors (Southern Illinois University Press, 2013) 162 pp.
Hesseltine, William B. Lincoln and the War Governors (1948)
Kleppner, Paul. The Third Electoral System, 1853–1892: Parties, Voters, and Political Culture (1979), statistical study of voting patterns.
Lawson, Melinda. Patriot Fires: Forging a New American Nationalism in the Civil War North (University Press of Kansas, 2002).
Luthin, Reinhard H. The first Lincoln campaign (1944) on election of 1860
Neely, Mark. The Divided Union: Party Conflict in the Civil War North (2002)
Paludan, Philip S. The Presidency of Abraham Lincoln (1994), thorough treatment of Lincoln's administration
Rawley, James A. The Politics of Union: Northern Politics during the Civil War (1974).
Richardson, Heather Cox. The Greatest Nation of the Earth: Republican Economic Policies during the Civil War (1997) online edition
Silbey, Joel. A Respectable Minority: The Democratic Party in the Civil War Era (1977).
Smith, Adam I. P. No Party Now: Politics in the Civil War North (Oxford University Press, 2006)
Smith, Michael Thomas. The Enemy Within: Fears of Corruption in the Civil War North (2011) online review
Weber, Jennifer L. Copperheads: The Rise and Fall of Lincoln's Opponents in the North (2006) excerpt and text search

Constitutional and legal[edit]

Hyman Harold. "A More Perfect Union ": The Impact of the Civil War and Reconstruction on the Constitution (1973)
Neely; Mark E., Jr. The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties (1991).
Neely, Jr., Mark E. Lincoln and the Triumph of the Nation: Constitutional Conflict in the American Civil War (U of North Carolina Press; 2011); 408 covers the U.S. and the Confederate constitutions and their role in the conflict.
Paludan, Phillip S. "The American Civil War Considered as a Crisis in Law and Order," American Historical Review, Vol. 77, No. 4 (October 1972), pp. 1013–1034 in JSTOR

Economic[edit]

Brandes, Stuart. Warhogs: A History of War Profits in America (1997), pp 67–88; a scholarly history of the munitions industry; concludes profits were not excessive
Clark, Jr., John E. Railroads in the Civil War: The Impact of Management on Victory and Defeat (2004)
Cotterill, R. S. "The Louisville and Nashville Railroad 1861–1865," American Historical Review (1924) 29#4 pp. 700–715 in JSTOR
Fite, Emerson David. Social and industrial conditions in the North during the Civil War (1910) online edition, old but still quite useful
Hammond, Bray. "The North's Empty Purse, 1861–1862," American Historical Review, October 1961, Vol. 67 Issue 1, pp 1–18 in JSTOR
Hill, Joseph A. "The Civil War Income Tax," Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 8, No. 4 (July 1894), pp. 416–452 in JSTOR; appendix in JSTOR
Merk, Frederick. Economic history of Wisconsin during the Civil War decade (1916) online edition
Smith, Michael Thomas. The Enemy Within: Fears of Corruption in the Civil War North (2011) details on Treasury Department, government contracting, and the cotton trade
Weber, Thomas. The northern railroads in the Civil War, 1861–1865 (1999)
Wilson, Mark R. The Business of Civil War: Military Mobilization and the State, 1861–1865. (2006). 306 pp. excerpt and text search

Intellectual and cultural[edit]

Aaron, Daniel. The Unwritten War: American Writers and the Civil War (2nd ed. 1987)
Brownlee, Peter John et al. eds. Home Front: Daily Life in the Civil War North (2013) online review
Foote, Lorien and Kanisorn Wongsrichanalai. So Conceived and So Dedicated: Intellectual Life in the Civil War Era North (2015)
Gallman, J. Matthew. Defining Duty in the Civil War: Personal Choice, Popular Culture, and the Union Home Front (2015) how civilians defined their roles. online review
Fredrickson, George M. The inner Civil War: Northern intellectuals and the crisis of the Union (1993)
Stevenson, Louise A. The Victorian Homefront: American Thought and Culture, 1860–1880 (1991).
Wilson, Edmund. Patriotic Gore: Studies in the Literature of the American Civil War (1962)

Medical[edit]

Adams, George Worthington. Doctors in Blue: The Medical History of the Union Army in the Civil War (1996), 253pp; excerpt and text search
Clarke, Frances M. War Stories: Suffering and Sacrifice in the Civil War North (University of Chicago Press, 2012)
Grant, S-M. "'Mortal in this season': Union Surgeons and the Narrative of Medical Modernisation in the American Civil War." Social History of Medicine (2014): hku010.
Maxwell, William Quentin. Lincoln's Fifth Wheel: The Political History of the U.S. Sanitary Commission (1956) online edition
Schroeder-Lein, Glenna R. The Encyclopedia of Civil War Medicine (2012) excerpt and text search. 456pp

Race[edit]

McPherson, James M. Marching Toward Freedom: The Negro's Civil War (1982); first edition was The Negro's Civil War: How American Negroes Felt and Acted During the War for the Union (1965),
Quarles, Benjamin. The Negro in the Civil War (1953), standard history excerpt and text search
Voegeli, V. Jacque. Free But Not Equal: The Midwest and the Negro during the Civil War (1967).

Religion and ethnicity[edit]

Brodrecht, Grant R. "Our Country: Northern Evangelicals and the Union during the Civil War and Reconstruction." Ph.D. diss., University of Notre Dame, 2008.
Burton, William L. Melting Pot Soldiers: The Union Ethnic Regiments (1998)
Kamphoefner, Walter D. "German-Americans and Civil War Politics: A Reconsideration of the Ethnocultural Thesis." Civil War History 37 (1991): 232–246.
Kleppner, Paul. The Third Electoral System, 1853–1892: Parties, Voters, and Political Culture (1979).
Miller, Randall M., Harry S. Stout and Charles Reagan Wilson, eds. Religion and the American Civil War (1998) online edition
Miller, Robert J. Both Prayed to the Same God: Religion and Faith in the American Civil War. (2007). 260pp
Moorhead, James. American Apocalypse: Yankee Protestants and the Civil War, 1860–1869 (1978).
Noll, Mark A. The Civil War as a Theological Crisis. (2006). 199 pp.
Stout, Harry S. Upon the Altar of the Nation: A Moral History of the Civil War. (2006). 544 pp.

Social and demographic history[edit]

Brownlee, Peter John, et al. Home Front: Daily Life in the Civil War North (University of Chicago Press, 2013) 193 pp. heavily illustrated.
Morehouse, Maggi M. and Zoe Trodd, eds. Civil War America: A Social and Cultural History with Primary Sources (2013), 29 short essays by scholars excerpt
Raus, Edmund J. Banners South: Northern Community at War (2011) about Cortland New York
Vinovskis, Maris A., ed. Toward a Social History of the American Civil War: Exploratory Essays (1991), new social history; quantitative studies
Vinovskis, Maris A., ed. "Have Social Historians Lost the Civil War? Some Preliminary Demographic Speculations," Journal of American History Vol. 76, No. 1 (June 1989), pp. 34–58 in JSTOR
Veit, Helen Zoe, ed. Food in the Civil War Era: The North (Michigan State University Press, 2014)

Soldiers[edit]

Geary James W. We Need Men: The Union Draft in the Civil War (1991).
Geary James W. "Civil War Conscription in the North: A Historiographical Review." Civil War History 32 (September 1986): 208–228.
Hams, Emily J. "Sons and Soldiers: Deerfield, Massachusetts, and the Civil War," Civil War History 30 (June 1984): 157–71
Hess, Earl J. "The 12th Missouri Infantry: A Socio-Military Profile of a Union Regiment," Missouri Historical Review 76 (October 1981): 53–77.
Cimbala, Paul A. and Randall M. Miller, eds. Union Soldiers and the Northern Home Front: Wartime Experiences, Postwar Adjustments. (2002)
Current, Richard N. (1994). Lincoln's Loyalists: Union Soldiers from the Confederacy. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-508465-9. 
McPherson, James. For Cause and Comrades: Why Men Fought in the Civil War (1998), based on letters and diaries
Miller, William J. Training of an Army: Camp Curtin and the North's Civil War (1990)
Mitchell; Reid. The Vacant Chair. The Northern Soldier Leaves Home (1993).
Rorabaugh, William J. "Who Fought for the North in the Civil War? Concord, Massachusetts, Enlistments," Journal of American History 73 (December 1986): 695–701 in JSTOR
Roseboom, Eugene H. The Civil War Era, 1850–1873 (1944), Ohio
Scott, Sean A. "'Earth Has No Sorrow That Heaven Cannot Cure': Northern Civilian Perspectives on Death and Eternity during the Civil War," Journal of Social History (2008) 41:843–866
Wiley, Bell I. The Life of Billy Yank: The Common Soldier of the Union (1952)

State and local[edit]

Tucker, Spencer, ed. American Civil War: A State-by-State Encyclopedia (2 vol 2015) 1019pp excerpt
Aley, Ginette et al. eds. Union Heartland: The Midwestern Home Front during the Civil War (2013)
Bak, Richard. A Distant Thunder: Michigan in the Civil War. (2004). 239 pp.
Baker, Jean H. The Politics of Continuity: Maryland Political Parties from 1858 to 1870 (1973)
Baum, Dale. The Civil War Party System: The Case of Massachusetts, 1848–1876 (1984)
Bradley, Erwin S. The Triumph of Militant Republicanism: A Study of Pennsylvania and Presidential Politics, 1860–1872 (1964)
Castel, Albert. A Frontier State at War: Kansas, 1861–1865 (1958)
Cole, Arthur Charles. The Era of the Civil War 1848–1870 (1919) on Illinois
Coulter, E. Merton. The Civil War and Readjustment in Kentucky (1926),
Current, Richard N. The History of Wisconsin: The Civil War Era, 1848–1873 (1976).
Dee, Christine, ed. Ohio's war: the Civil War in documents (2006), primary sources excerpt and text search
Dilla, Harriette M. Politics of Michigan, 1865–1878 (Columbia University Press, 1912) online at Google books
Gallman, Matthew J. Mastering Wartime: A Social History of Philadelphia During the Civil War. (1990)
Hall, Susan G. Appalachian Ohio and the Civil War, 1862–1863 (2008)
Holzer, Harold. State of the Union: New York and the Civil War (2002) Essays by scholars
Hubbard, Mark. Illinois's War: The Civil War in Documents (2012) excerpt and text search
Karamanski, Theodore J. Rally 'Round the Flag: Chicago and the Civil War (1993).
Leech, Margaret. Reveille in Washington, 1860–1865 (1941), Pulitzer Prize
McKay Ernest A. The Civil War and New York City (1990)
Miller, Richard F. ed. States at War, Volume 1: A Reference Guide for Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont in the Civil War (2013) excerpt
* Miller, Richard F. ed. States at War, Volume 2: A Reference Guide for New York in the Civil War (2014) excerpt
Nation, Richard F. and Stephen E. Towne. Indiana's War: The Civil War in Documents (2009), primary sources excerpt and text search
Niven, John. Connecticut for the Union: The Role of the State in the Civil War (Yale University Press, 1965)
O'Connor, Thomas H. Civil War Boston (1999)
Parrish, William E. A History of Missouri, Volume III: 1860 to 1875 (1973) (ISBN 0-8262-0148-2)
Pierce, Bessie. A History of Chicago, Volume II: From Town to City 1848–1871 (1940)
Schouler, William (1868). A History of Massachusetts in the Civil War. Boston: E.P. Dutton & Co. OCLC 2662693. 
Ponce, Pearl T. Kansas's War: The Civil War in Documents (2011) excerpt and text search
Raus, Edmund J. Banners South: Northern Community at War (2011) about Cortland New York
Roseboom, Eugene. The Civil War Era, 1850-1873, History of Ohio, vol. 4 (1944) online, Detailed scholarly history
Siddali, Silvana R. Missouri's War: The Civil War in Documents (2009), primary sources excerpt and text search
Stampp, Kenneth M. Indiana politics during the Civil War (1949)
Taylor, Paul. "Old Slow Town": Detroit during the Civil War (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2013). x, 248 pp.
Thornbrough, Emma Lou. Indiana in the Civil War Era, 1850–1880 (1965)
Ware, Edith E. Political Opinion in Massachusetts during the Civil War and Reconstruction, (1916). full text online

Women and family[edit]

Anderson, J. L. "The Vacant Chair on the Farm: Soldier Husbands, Farm Wives, and the Iowa Home Front, 1861–1865," Annals of Iowa (2007) 66: 241–265
Attie, Jeanie. Patriotic Toil: Northern Women and the American Civil War (1998). 294 pp.
Bahde, Thomas. "'I never wood git tired of wrighting to you.'" Journal of Illinois History (2009). 12:129-55
Giesberg, Judith. Army at Home: Women and the Civil War on the Northern Home Front (2009) excerpt and text search
Giesberg, Judith Ann. "From Harvest Field to Battlefield: Rural Pennsylvania Women and the U.S. Civil War," Pennsylvania History (2005). 72: 159–191
Harper, Judith E. Women during the Civil War: An Encyclopedia. (2004). 472 pp.
Marten, James. Children for the Union: The War Spirit on the Northern Home Front. Ivan R. Dee, 2004. 209 pp.
Massey, Mary. Bonnet Brigades: American Women and the Civil War (1966), excellent overview North and South; reissued as Women in the Civil War (1994)

Giesberg, Judith. "Mary Elizabeth Massey and the Civil War Centennial." Civil War History 61.4 (2015): 400-406. online


Rodgers, Thomas E. "Hoosier Women and the Civil War Home Front," Indiana Magazine of History 97#2 (2001), pp. 105–128 in JSTOR
Silber, Nina. Daughters of the Union: Northern Women Fight the Civil War. (Harvard UP, 2005). 332 pp.
Venet, Wendy Hamand. A Strong-Minded Woman: The Life of Mary Livermore. (U. of Massachusetts Press, 2005). 322 pp.

Primary sources[edit]

American Annual Cyclopaedia for 1861 (N.Y.: Appleton's, 1864), an extensive collection of reports on each state, Congress, military activities and many other topics; annual issues from 1861 to 1901
Appletons' annual cyclopedia and register of important events: Embracing political, military, and ecclesiastical affairs; public documents; biography, statistics, commerce, finance, literature, science, agriculture, and mechanical industry, Volume 3 1863 (1864), thorough coverage of the events of 1863
Angle, Paul M. and Earl Schenck Miers, eds. Tragic Years, 1860–1865: A Documentary History of the American Civil War – Vol. 1 1960 online edition
Carter, Susan B., ed. The Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition (5 vols), 2006; online at many universities
Commager, Henry Steele, ed. The Blue and the Gray. The Story of the Civil War as Told by Participants. (1950), excerpts from primary sources
Dee, Christine, ed. Ohio's War: The Civil War in Documents. (2007). 244 pp.
Freidel Frank, ed. Union Pamphlets of the Civil War, 1861–1865 (2 vol. 1967)
Hesseltine, William B. ed.; The Tragic Conflict: The Civil War and Reconstruction (1962), excerpts from primary sources online edition
Marten, James, ed.. Civil War America: Voices from the Home Front. (2003). 346 pp.
Risley, Ford, ed. The Civil War: Primary Documents on Events from 1860 to 1865. (2004). 320 pp.
Siddali, Silvana R. Missouri's War: The Civil War in Documents (2009), 256pp excerpt and text search
Sizer, Lyde Cullen and Jim Cullen, ed. The Civil War Era: An Anthology of Sources. (2005). 434 pp.
Smith, Charles Winston and Charles Judah, eds. Life in the North during the Civil War: A Source History (1966)
Voss-Hubbard, Mark, ed. Illinois's War: The Civil War in Documents (2013) online review
diaries, journals. reminiscences
The Peoples Contest: A Civil War era digital archiving project", access to primary sources from Pennsylvania, especially newspapers and other resources

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Union (American Civil War)



Lincoln Administration links
Civil War Soldiers
Abraham Lincoln online, texts
"Home Front: Daily Life in the Civil War North" visual exhibit at the Newberry Library from 2013
"Financial Measures," by Nicolay and Hay (1889)
"Lincoln Reelected," by Nicolay and Hay (1889)
"First Plans for Emancipation," by Nicolay and Hay (1889)
"Emancipation Announced," by Nicolay and Hay (1889)







v
t
e


American Civil War








Origins










Origins
Issues






Timeline leading to the War
Antebellum era
Bleeding Kansas
Border states
Compromise of 1850
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Lincoln-Douglas debates
Missouri Compromise
Popular sovereignty
Secession
States' rights
President Lincoln's 75,000 volunteers





Slavery



African Americans
Cornerstone Speech
Emancipation Proclamation
Fugitive slave laws
Plantations in the American South
Slave Power
Slavery in the United States
Treatment of slaves in the United States
Uncle Tom's Cabin





Abolitionism



Susan B. Anthony
John Brown
Frederick Douglass
William Lloyd Garrison
Elijah Parish Lovejoy
J. Sella Martin
Lysander Spooner
George Luther Stearns
Thaddeus Stevens
Charles Sumner
Harriet Tubman
Underground Railroad



















Combatants
Theaters
Campaigns
Battles
States










Combatants




Union (USA)



Army
Navy
Marine Corps
Revenue Cutter Service





Confederacy (CSA)



Army
Navy
Marine Corps








Theaters



Eastern
Western
Lower Seaboard
Trans-Mississippi
Pacific Coast
Union naval blockade





Major Campaigns



Anaconda Plan
Blockade runners
New Mexico
Jackson's Valley
Peninsula
Northern Virginia
Maryland
Stones River
Vicksburg
Tullahoma
Gettysburg
Morgan's Raid
Bristoe
Knoxville
Red River
Overland
Atlanta
Valley 1864
Bermuda Hundred
Richmond-Petersburg
Franklin–Nashville
Price's Raid
Sherman's March
Carolinas
Appomattox





Major battles



Fort Sumter
1st Bull Run
Wilson's Creek
Fort Donelson
Pea Ridge
Hampton Roads
Shiloh
New Orleans
Corinth
Seven Pines
Seven Days
2nd Bull Run
Antietam
Perryville
Fredericksburg
Stones River
Chancellorsville
Gettysburg
Vicksburg
Chickamauga
Chattanooga
Wilderness
Spotsylvania
Cold Harbor
Atlanta
Mobile Bay
Franklin
Nashville
Five Forks






Involvement (by 
state or territory)




AL
AK
AR
AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY
















Leaders







Confederate




Military



R. H. Anderson
Beauregard
Bragg
Buchanan
Cooper
Early
Ewell
Forrest
Gorgas
Hill
Hood
Jackson
A. S. Johnston
J. E. Johnston
Lee
Longstreet
Morgan
Mosby
Price
Semmes
E. K. Smith
Stuart
Taylor
Wheeler





Civilian



Benjamin
Bocock
Breckinridge
Davis
Hunter
Mallory
Memminger
Seddon
Stephens








Union




Military



Anderson
Buell
Burnside
Butler
Du Pont
Farragut
Foote
Frémont
Grant
Halleck
Hooker
Hunt
McClellan
McDowell
Meade
Meigs
Ord
Pope
D. D. Porter
Rosecrans
Scott
Sheridan
Sherman
Thomas





Civilian



Adams
Chase
Ericsson
Hamlin
Lincoln
Pinkerton
Seward
Stanton
Stevens
Wade
Welles



















Aftermath







U.S. Constitution



Reconstruction amendments

13th Amendment
14th Amendment
15th Amendment







Reconstruction



Alabama Claims
Brooks–Baxter War
Carpetbaggers
Colfax Riot of 1873
Eufaula Riot of 1874
Freedmen's Bureau
Freedman's Savings Bank
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
Kirk-Holden War
Knights of the White Camelia
Ku Klux Klan
Memphis Riot of 1866
Meridian Riot of 1871
New Orleans Riot of 1866
Pulaski (Tennessee) Riot of 1867
Reconstruction acts

Habeas Corpus Act 1867
Enforcement Act of 1870
Enforcement Act of February 1871
Enforcement Act of April 1871


Reconstruction treaties

Indian Council at Fort Smith


Red Shirts
Redeemers
Confederate refugees

Confederados


Scalawags
South Carolina riots of 1876
Southern Claims Commission
Homestead acts

Southern Homestead Act of 1866
Timber Culture Act of 1873


White League





post-Reconstruction



Commemoration

Centennial
Civil War Discovery Trail
Civil War Roundtables
Civil War Trails Program
Civil War Trust
Confederate History Month
Confederate monuments and memorials
Historical reenactment
Robert E. Lee Day


Disenfranchisement

Black Codes
Jim Crow


Lost Cause mythology
Modern display of the Confederate flag
Sons of Confederate Veterans
Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War
Southern Historical Society
United Daughters of the Confederacy





Monuments and memorials



Union

List of Union Civil War monuments and memorials
List of memorials to the Grand Army of the Republic
Memorials to Abraham Lincoln




Confederate

List of Confederate monuments and memorials
Removal of Confederate monuments and memorials
List of memorials to Robert E. Lee
List of memorials to Jefferson Davis
Annapolis

Roger B. Taney Monument


Baltimore

Confederate Soldiers and Sailors Monument
Confederate Women's Monument
Roger B. Taney Monument
Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson Monument


Durham, North Carolina

Robert E. Lee Monument


New Orleans

Battle of Liberty Place Monument
Jefferson Davis Monument
General Beauregard Equestrian Statue
Robert E. Lee Monument









Cemeteries



Confederate Memorial Day
Ladies' memorial associations
U.S. Memorial Day
U.S. national cemeteries





Veterans



1913 Gettysburg Reunion
Confederate Veteran
Grand Army of the Republic
Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.
Old soldiers' homes
Southern Cross of Honor
United Confederate Veterans



















Related topics










Related topics




Military



Arms
Campaign Medal
Cavalry
Confederate Home Guard
Confederate railroads
Confederate Revolving Cannon
Field artillery
Medal of Honor recipients
Medicine
Leadership
Naval battles
Official Records
Partisan rangers
POW camps
Rations
Signal Corps
Turning point
Union corps badges
U.S. Balloon Corps
U.S. Home Guard
U.S. Military Railroad





Political



Committee on the Conduct of the War
Confederate States Presidential Election of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1861
Confiscation Act of 1862
Copperheads
Emancipation Proclamation
Habeas Corpus Act of 1863
Hampton Roads Conference
National Union Party
Radical Republicans
Trent Affair
Union leagues
U.S. Presidential Election of 1864
War Democrats





Other topics



Bibliography
Confederate war finance

Confederate States dollar


Espionage

Confederate Secret Service


Great Revival of 1863
Music
Naming the war
Native Americans

Cherokee
Choctaw


New York City Gold Hoax of 1864
New York City Riot of 1863
Photographers
Richmond Riot of 1863
Sexuality
Supreme Court cases
Tokens
U.S. Sanitary Commission




















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Union_(American_Civil_War)&oldid=818345392"					Categories: Politics of the American Civil WarSocial history of the American Civil WarSocial history of the United StatesHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 maint: Extra text: authors list