





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The Unique Ingredient Identifier (UNII) is a non-proprietary, free, unique, unambiguous, non-semantic, alphanumeric identifier linked to a substance's molecular structure or descriptive information by the Substance Registration System (SRS) of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the United States Pharmacopeia (USP).
The SRS is used to generate permanent, unique identifiers for substances in regulated products, such as ingredients in drug and biologic products. The SRS uses molecular structure and descriptive information to define a substance and generate the UNII. The primary means for defining a substance is by its molecular structure as represented on a two-dimensional plane. When a molecular structure is not available (e.g., botanicals), the UNII is defined by descriptive information.[1]
The procedures and management of the SRS is provided by the SRS Board which includes experts from both FDA and the United States Pharmacopoeia (USP).[2]
Examples[edit]


Preferred Term
UNII


Methadone hydrochloride
229809935B


Methadone
UC6VBE7V1Z


Water
059QF0KO0R


References[edit]



^ "Substance Registration System – UNII Presentation". fda.gov. 
^ "Substance Registration System - Unique Ingredient Identifier (UNII)". fda.gov. 



External links[edit]



Wikidata has the property: Unique Ingredient Identifiers (P652) (see uses)



Substance Registration System - Unique Ingredient Identifier (UNII)





This pharmacology-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unique_Ingredient_Identifier&oldid=815055090"					Categories: Pharmacological classification systemsPharmacology stubsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2010All articles needing additional referencesAll stub articles