"FWS" redirects here. For other uses, see FWS (disambiguation).

Fish and Wildlife Service


Logo of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service




Flag of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service



Agency overview


Formed
June 30, 1940 (1940-06-30)


Preceding agencies



Bureau of Biological Survey
Bureau of Fisheries





Jurisdiction
United States federal government


Headquarters
Bailey's Crossroads, Virginia (Falls Church mailing address)[1][2]


Employees
approx. 9,000 employees (2010)


Annual budget
$2.32 billion (FY08)


Agency executive



Greg Sheehan (Acting)[3], Director





Parent agency
U.S. Department of the Interior


Website
www.fws.gov


Footnotes


[4][5][6]






Arctic Refuge Law Enforcement Officer Heather Bartlett stands alongside her Super Cub, 2009


The United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS or FWS) is an agency of the federal government within the U.S. Department of the Interior dedicated to the management of fish, wildlife, and natural habitats. The mission of the agency is "working with others to conserve, protect, and enhance fish, wildlife, plants and their habitats for the continuing benefit of the American people."
The leader of the FWS is the director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Daniel M. Ashe, of Maryland, who was confirmed on June 30, 2011, succeeding Sam Hamilton.[7]
Among the responsibilities of the FWS are enforcing federal wildlife laws, protecting endangered species, managing migratory birds, restoring nationally significant fisheries, conserving and restoring wildlife habitat, such as wetlands, helping foreign governments with their international conservation efforts, and distributing money to states' fish and wildlife agencies through the Wildlife Sport Fish and Restoration program.
Units within the FWS include:

National Wildlife Refuge System (over 560 National Wildlife Refuges and thousands of small wetlands and other special management areas covering over 150 million acres (607,000 km²))
Division of Migratory Bird Management
Federal Duck Stamp
National Fish Hatchery System (70 National Fish Hatcheries and 65 Fishery Resource Offices)
Endangered Species program (86 Ecological Services Field Stations)
International Affairs Program
Office of Law Enforcement
National Conservation Training Center (Shepherdstown, WV)
United States Fish and Wildlife Service Office of Law Enforcement
Clark R. Bavin National Fish and Wildlife Forensic Laboratory
Landscape Conservation Cooperatives[8]

The vast majority of fish and wildlife habitat is on non-federal lands. Therefore, the FWS works closely with private groups, such as The Partners for Fish and Wildlife, Partners in Flight, Sport Fishing and The Boating Partnership Council, to assist voluntary habitat conservation and restoration.
The FWS employs approximately 9,000 people and is organized into a central administrative office (in Falls Church, VA), the hallway where directorate members sit at the Department of the Interior in (in Washington, DC), eight regional offices, and nearly 700 field offices distributed throughout the United States.



Contents


1 History
2 Tribal relations
3 See also

3.1 Related governmental agencies
3.2 Regulatory matters
3.3 Wildlife management
3.4 Other related topics


4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links



History[edit]




USFWS patrol vehicles, Alaska 1950


The USFWS originated in 1871 as the United States Commission on Fish and Fisheries, more commonly referred to as the United States Fish Commission, created by the United States Congress with the purpose of studying and recommending solutions to a noted decline in the stocks of food fish. Spencer Fullerton Baird was appointed its first commissioner. In 1903, the Fish Commission was reorganized as the United States Bureau of Fisheries.
In 1885–1886, the Division of Economic Ornithology and Mammalogy (in 1885 it was the Section of Economic Ornithology)[9] was established within the United States Department of Agriculture. In 1896 it became the Division of Biological Survey. Its early work focused on the effect of birds in controlling agricultural pests and mapping the geographical distribution of plants and animals in the United States. Clinton Hart Merriam headed the Bureau for 25 years and became a national figure for improving the scientific understanding of birds and mammals in the United States. Jay Norwood Darling was appointed Chief of the new Bureau of Biological Survey in 1934; the same year Congress passed the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (FWCA), one of the oldest federal environmental review statutes.[10] Under Darling's guidance, the Bureau began an ongoing legacy of protecting vital natural habitat throughout the country. The USFWS was finally created in 1940, when the Bureaus of Fisheries and Biological Survey were combined after being moved to the Department of the Interior. In 1959, the methods used by USFWS's Animal Damage Control Program were featured in the Tom Lehrer song "Poisoning Pigeons in the Park".[11]
The Service governs six National Monuments; Hanford Reach National Monument in Washington state; Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument, a huge maritime area in the northwestern Hawaiian Islands (jointly with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the State of Hawaii); World War Two Valor in the Pacific National Monument in Alaska, Hawaii and California, jointly managed with The National Park Service; Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument, the largest marine protected area in the world[12] (in consultation with NOAA; the Rose Atoll Marine National Monument in American Samoa (with NOAA and the American Samoan Government)), and the Marianas Trench Marine National Monument including undersea mud volcanoes, vents, chemosynthetic organisms, and much of the deepest points on Earth (in coordination of management with NOAA and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands).
Tribal relations[edit]
Pursuant to the eagle feather law, Title 50, Part 22 of the Code of Federal Regulations (50 CFR 22), and the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service administers the National Eagle Repository and the permit system for Native American religious use of eagle feathers.[13][14][15] However, these exceptions often only apply to Native Americans that are registered with the federal government and are enrolled with a federally recognized tribe. Therefore, many indigenous people that wish to practice their religion continue to face persecution.[citation needed] This has become a modern source of conflict between many tribes and the US Fish and Wildlife Service.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the USFWS began to incorporate the research of tribal scientists into conservation decisions.[16] This came on the heels of Native American TEK, or traditional ecological knowledge, gaining acceptance in the scientific community as a reasonable and respectable way to gain knowledge of managing the natural world.[17][18] Additionally, other natural resource agencies within the United States government, such as the USDA, have taken steps to be more inclusive of tribes, native people, and tribal rights.[19] This has marked a transition to a relationship of more cooperation rather than the tension between tribes and government agencies seen historically. Today, these agencies work closely with tribal governments to ensure the best conservation decisions are made and that tribes retain their sovereignty .[20][21]
See also[edit]


United States portal
Law enforcement/Law enforcement topics portal



Federal law enforcement in the United States

Related governmental agencies[edit]

National Fish and Wildlife Forensics Laboratory
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office for Law Enforcement
National Marine Fisheries Service
National Park Service
Partners for Fish and Wildlife
United States Coast Guard
United States Geological Survey

Regulatory matters[edit]

Coastal Barrier Resources Act
Endangered Species Act
Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act
Lacey Act
Listing priority number
Marine Mammal Protection Act
Migratory Bird Treaty Act
Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918
National Wetlands Inventory
National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966
Sikes Act
Wild Bird Conservation Act of 1992
Ramsar Wetlands Convention
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES)

Wildlife management[edit]

International Migratory Bird Day
Timeline of environmental events
Tri-State Bird Rescue and Research
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
United States Fish and Wildlife Service list of endangered species
Sierra Club v. Babbitt

Other related topics[edit]

Arizona Game and Fish Department
National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation
National Wildlife Refuge Association
North American Game Warden Museum

References[edit]






This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (July 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






^ "U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Moving to Bailey's Crossroads?". Falls Church, VA Patch. 2013-08-06. Retrieved 2017-12-06. 
^ "GSA Announces New Lease for U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service". Retrieved 2017-12-06. 
^ "Zinke taps Utah wildlife director to head U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service". Spokesman.com. Retrieved 2017-09-11. 
^ [1] Archived November 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ [2] Archived March 6, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ USFWS - National Organizational Chart. Fws.gov. Retrieved on 2013-08-12.
^ "Daniel M. Ashe". fws.gov. Retrieved 9 December 2014. 
^ "Landscape Conservation Cooperative Network". www.lccnetwork.org. 
^ "USGS Patuxent wildlife Research Center: Biological Survey Unit History". www.pwrc.usgs.gov. 
^ Rosenberg, Ronald H. and Olson, Allen H., Federal Environmental Review Requirements Other than NEPA: The Emerging Challenge (1978). CLEVELAND STATE LAW REVIEW [Vol. 27: 195. 1978] FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW. In Faculty Publications. Paper 672. College of William and Mary Law School
^ Faulkner, Clarence (1999-05-01). "As It Was in Region 5,1949-1964". The Probe. 200: 7 – via DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln, "City-wide pigeon control in Boston, MA using strychnine-treated whole corn". 
^ "Presidential Proclamation --- Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument Expansion". 25 September 2014. 
^ "National Eagle Repository". fws.gov. 
^ "Eagle Parts for Native American Religious Purposes" (PDF). fws.org. 
^ "Title 50 Part 22 Code of Federal Regulations (50 CFR 22)]". ecfr.gpoaccess.gov. 
^ Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife. "Fish and Wildlife Service - Native American Program". www.fws.gov. Retrieved 2016-05-04. 
^ Berkes, Fikret (2000). "Rediscovery of Traditional Ecological Knowledge as Adaptive Management". Ecological Applications 10, No. 5 (2000): 1251-1262. 
^ Huntington, Henry (2000). "Using Traditional Ecological Knowledge in Science: Methods and Applications". Ecological Applications 10, No. 5 (2000): 1270-1274. 
^ Banegas, Diane, “Native American Students Mentored by Forest Service Scientists,” US Forest Service (blog), April 5, 2016 (1:00pm), http://blogs.usda.gov/2016/04/05/native-american-students-mentored-by-forest-service-scientists/.
^ "Office of Tribal Relations | USDA". www.usda.gov. Retrieved 2016-05-04. 
^ Program, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service | Endangered Species. "Endangered Species Program | What We Do | Working with Tribes | Tribal Partnership Stories | American Indian Tribal Rights, Federal-Tribal Trust Responsibilities, and the Endangered Species Act". www.fws.gov. Retrieved 2016-05-04. 



Further reading[edit]

U.S. fishery agency Annual Reports 1871-1940 and 1947-1979
Director of U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service dies at Keystone
DOI Secretary Ken Salazar's Statement on the Passing of Fish and Wildlife Service Director Sam Hamilton
 "Biological Survey, Bureau of". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Fish and Wildlife Service.



Official website
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service on Google Cultural Institute
Fish and Wildlife Service in the Federal Register
FWS Midwest Region
FWS Southwest Region
Lower Great Lakes Fishery Resources Office
Technical Report Archive and Image Library (TRAIL) Historic technical reports from the Fish and Wildlife Service (and other Federal agencies)







v
t
e


United States government agencies involved in environmental science






Environmental Protection Agency
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Global Change Research Program
Smithsonian Institution
National Science Foundation





Department of the Interior



National Park Service
United States Fish and Wildlife Service
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Bureau of Land Management
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement
Bureau of Reclamation
Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation, and Enforcement
United States Geological Survey
Office of Insular Affairs





Department of Commerce



National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
National Weather Service
National Ocean Service
National Geodetic Survey
National Marine Fisheries Service
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research





Department of Energy



Office of Science
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
National Laboratories
Office of Environmental Management





Department of Agriculture



Farm Service Agency
Foreign Agricultural Service
United States Forest Service
Natural Resources Conservation Service
National Water and Climate Center
Rural Utilities Service
Food and Nutrition Service
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
Agricultural Research Service
Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service





Department of Homeland Security



United States Coast Guard
Directorate for Science and Technology





Department of Health
and Human Services



National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences





Department of Defense



Office of Naval Research
Air Force Research Laboratory
United States Army Research, Development and Engineering Command












v
t
e


Agencies under the United States Department of the Interior






Headquarters: Main Interior Building


Ryan Zinke, Secretary of the Interior
David L. Bernhardt, Deputy Secretary of the Interior








Bureau of Indian Affairs
Bureau of Land Management
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement
General Land Office
Bureau of Reclamation
Fish and Wildlife Service
Geological Survey
Office of Surface Mining
Interior Business Center
National Park Service
Office of Insular Affairs















v
t
e


United States environmental law



Supreme Court
decisions



Missouri v. Holland (1920)
Sierra Club v. Morton (1972)
United States v. SCRAP (1973)
Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill (1978)
Vermont Yankee v. NRDC (1978)
Hughes v. Oklahoma (1979)
Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife (1992)
United States v. Bestfoods (1998)
Friends of the Earth v. Laidlaw Environmental Services (2000)
SWANCC v. Army Corps of Engineers (2001)
Department of Transportation v. Public Citizen (2004)
Rapanos v. United States (2006)
Massachusetts v. EPA (2007)
National Ass'n of Home Builders v. Defenders of Wildlife (2007)
Coeur Alaska, Inc. v. Southeast Alaska Conservation Council (2009)





Major
federal legislation
and treaties



Rivers and Harbors Act (1899)
Lacey Act (1900)
Weeks Act (1911)
North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911 (1911)
Migratory Bird Treaty Act (1918)
Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (1934)
Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act (1954)
Clean Air Act (1963, 1970)
National Environmental Policy Act (1970)
Clean Water Act (1972)
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (1972)
Noise Control Act (1972)
Endangered Species Act (1973)
Safe Drinking Water Act (1974)
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976)
Toxic Substances Control Act (1976)
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (1977)
CERCLA (Superfund) (1980)
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (1986)
Emergency Wetlands Resources Act (1986)
Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act (2016)





Federal agencies



Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
Council on Environmental Quality
Office of Surface Mining
United States Environmental Protection Agency
United States Fish and Wildlife Service





Regulations
and concepts



Best available technology
Citizen suit
Discharge Monitoring Report
Effluent guidelines
Environmental crime
Environmental impact statement
Environmental justice
National Ambient Air Quality Standards
National Priorities List
New Source Performance Standard
Not-To-Exceed (NTE)
Right to know
Total maximum daily load
Toxicity category rating











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Fish_and_Wildlife_Service&oldid=814039930"					Categories: United States Fish and Wildlife ServiceEnvironmental agencies in the United StatesUnited States Department of the Interior agenciesConservation in the United StatesLand management in the United StatesUnited States public land lawWildland fire suppression agenciesGovernment agencies established in 19391939 establishments in the United States1939 in the environmentHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2016Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2013All articles lacking in-text citationsWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource referenceOfficial website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia