

United States Coast Guard



Emblem of the United States Coast Guard



Founded
28 January 1915 (U.S. Coast Guard)
(102 years, 11 months)[1]
4 August 1790
(creation of the Revenue Marine) (227 years, 5 months)[1]


Country
 United States of America


Type
Coast guard


Role
Coastal defense, maritime law enforcement, and search and rescue


Size
Civilian employees: 7,064
Active duty personnel: 36,235
Selected reservists: 7,351
Auxiliarists: 29,620
238 cutters
1,523 boats
187 aircraft[2][3]


Part of
DHS (2003–present)[4]
USDOT (1967–2003)[4]
DoT (1946–1967)[5]
DoN (1941–1946)[6]
DoT (1919–1946)[7]
DoN (1917–1919)[8]
DoT (1915–1917)[9][Note 1]


Headquarters
Douglas A. Munro Coast Guard Headquarters Building
Washington, D.C.


Nickname(s)
"Coasties",[10] "Shallow water sailors",[10] "The Guard",[10]


Motto(s)
Semper Paratus (English: Always ready)


Colors
White, CG Blue, CG Red[11]               


March
"Semper Paratus"  Play (help·info)


Anniversaries
4 August


Engagements


See list

Quasi-War
War of 1812
Seminole Wars
Mexican–American War
American Civil War
Spanish–American War
World War I
World War II
Korean War
Vietnam War
Persian Gulf War
War in Afghanistan
Iraq War





Decorations
Presidential Unit Citation


Commanders


Commander-in-Chief
President Donald Trump


Secretary of Homeland Security
Kirstjen Nielsen


Commandant
ADM Paul F. Zukunft


Vice Commandant
ADM Charles D. Michel


Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard
MCPOCG Steven W. Cantrell


Insignia


Standard



Ensign



Seal



Mark



Guidon



Pennant



The United States Coast Guard (USCG) is a branch of the United States Armed Forces[12] and one of the country's seven uniformed services. The Coast Guard is a maritime, military, multi-mission service unique among the U.S. military branches for having a maritime law enforcement mission (with jurisdiction in both domestic and international waters) and a federal regulatory agency mission as part of its mission set. It operates under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security during peacetime, and can be transferred to the U.S. Department of the Navy by the U.S. President at any time, or by the U.S. Congress during times of war. This has happened twice, in 1917, during World War I, and in 1941, during World War II.[6][8]
Created by Congress on 4 August 1790 at the request of Alexander Hamilton as the Revenue Marine, it is the oldest continuous seagoing service of the United States.[Note 2] As Secretary of the Treasury, Hamilton headed the Revenue Marine, whose original purpose was collecting customs duties in the nation's seaports. By the 1860s, the service was known as the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and the term Revenue Marine gradually fell into disuse.[13]
The modern Coast Guard was formed by a merger of the Revenue Cutter Service and the U.S. Life-Saving Service on 28 January 1915, under the U.S. Department of the Treasury. As one of the country's five armed services, the Coast Guard has been involved in every U.S. war from 1790 to the Iraq War[14] and the War in Afghanistan.[15] As of 2014[update] the Coast Guard had over 36,000 men and women on active duty, 7,350 reservists, 29,620 auxiliarists, and 7,064 full-time civilian employees.[2] In terms of size, while the U.S. Coast Guard is the smallest of the military service branches, by itself is the world's 12th largest naval force.[16][17]
The Coast Guard's legal authority differs from the other four armed services, as it operates simultaneously under Title 10 of the U.S. Code and its other organic authorities, such as Titles 6, 14, 19, 33, and 46. Because of its legal authority, the Coast Guard can conduct military operations under the U.S. Department of Defense or directly for the President in accordance with Title 14 USC 1–3. The Coast Guard's enduring roles are maritime safety, security, and stewardship. To carry out those roles, it has 11 statutory missions as defined in 6 U.S.C. § 468, which include enforcing U.S. law in the world's largest exclusive economic zone of 3.4 million square miles (8,800,000 km2).[18] The Coast Guard's motto Semper Paratus means Always ready in Latin.



Contents


1 Mission

1.1 Role
1.2 Missions

1.2.1 Non-homeland security missions
1.2.2 Homeland security missions


1.3 Search and Rescue
1.4 National Response Center
1.5 Authority as an armed service
1.6 Authority as a law enforcement agency


2 History
3 Organization

3.1 Shore establishments


4 Personnel

4.1 Commissioned officers
4.2 Warrant officers
4.3 Enlisted personnel
4.4 Civilian personnel
4.5 Women in the Coast Guard
4.6 Training

4.6.1 Officer training
4.6.2 Recruit training
4.6.3 Service schools




5 Equipment

5.1 Cutters
5.2 Aircraft
5.3 Boats
5.4 Weapons


6 Districts and units
7 Symbols

7.1 Core values
7.2 The Guardian Ethos
7.3 The Coast Guard Ethos
7.4 Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman
7.5 "You have to go out, but you don't have to come back!"
7.6 Coast Guard Ensign
7.7 Coast Guard Standard
7.8 Service Mark ("Racing Stripe")
7.9 Semper Paratus
7.10 Colors


8 Uniforms
9 Deployable Operations Group
10 Coast Guard Reserve
11 Coast Guard Auxiliary
12 Medals and honors
13 Organizations

13.1 Coast Guard Aviation Association
13.2 Coast Guard CW Operators Association
13.3 USCG Chief Petty Officers Association
13.4 USCG Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association (CWOA)


14 Notable Coast Guardsmen
15 In popular culture

15.1 In literature
15.2 In film
15.3 On television


16 See also

16.1 Coast Guard
16.2 Related agencies


17 Notes
18 References
19 Further reading
20 External links



Mission[edit]
Main article: Missions of the United States Coast Guard
Role[edit]




A boatswain's mate watches from the side port door as Coast Guard Cutter Bertholf's Over-The-Horizon small boat departs to receive personnel from Coast Guard Cutter Chandeleur in 2008.


The Coast Guard has roles in maritime homeland security, maritime law enforcement (MLE), search and rescue (SAR), marine environmental protection (MEP), the maintenance of river, intracoastal and offshore aids to navigation (ATON).
With a decentralized organization and much responsibility placed on even the most junior personnel, the Coast Guard is frequently lauded for its quick responsiveness and adaptability in a broad range of emergencies. In a 2005 article in Time magazine following Hurricane Katrina, the author wrote, "the Coast Guard's most valuable contribution to [a military effort when catastrophe hits] may be as a model of flexibility, and most of all, spirit." Wil Milam, a rescue swimmer from Alaska told the magazine, "In the Navy, it was all about the mission. Practicing for war, training for war. In the Coast Guard, it was, take care of our people and the mission will take care of itself."[19]
Missions[edit]




A Coast Guard Aviation Survival Technician assisting with the rescue of a pregnant woman during Hurricane Katrina in 2005.


The Coast Guard carries out three basic roles, which are further subdivided into eleven statutory missions. The three roles are:

Maritime safety
Maritime security
Maritime stewardship

The eleven statutory missions as defined by law are divided into homeland security missions and non-homeland security missions:[20]
Non-homeland security missions[edit]

Ice operations, including the International Ice Patrol
Living marine resources (fisheries law enforcement)
Marine environmental protection
Marine safety
Aids to navigation
Search and rescue

Homeland security missions[edit]

Defense readiness
Maritime law enforcement
Migrant interdiction
Ports, waterways and coastal security (PWCS)
Drug interdiction

Search and Rescue[edit]




Search and Rescue Program Logo of the United States Coast Guard.



See National Search and Rescue Committee[21]
See Joint Rescue Coordination Centers

While the U. S. Coast Guard Search and Rescue (CG-SAR)[1] is not the oldest, search and rescue in the world it is one of the Coast Guard's best-known units. The National Search and Rescue Plan[22] designates the Coast Guard as the federal agency responsible for maritime SAR operations, and the United States Air Force as the federal agency responsible for inland SAR. Both agencies maintain rescue coordination centers to coordinate this effort, and have responsibility for both military and civilian search and rescue.[23] The two services jointly provide instructor staff for the National Search and Rescue School that trains SAR mission planners and coordinators. Previously located on Governors Island, New York, the school is now located at Coast Guard Training Center Yorktown at Yorktown, Virginia.
National Response Center[edit]
Operated by the Coast Guard, the National Response Center (NRC) is the sole U.S. Government point of contact for reporting all oil, chemical, radiological, biological, and etiological spills into the environment anywhere in the United States and its territories.[24] In addition to gathering and distributing spill/incident information for Federal On Scene Coordinators and serving as the communications and operations center for the National Response Team, the NRC maintains agreements with a variety of federal entities to make additional notifications regarding incidents meeting established trigger criteria. The NRC also takes Maritime Suspicious Activity and Security Breach Reports. Details on the NRC organization and specific responsibilities can be found in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan.[25] The Marine Information for Safety and Law Enforcement (MISLE) database system is managed and used by the Coast Guard for tracking pollution and safety incidents in the nation's ports.
Authority as an armed service[edit]




Members of the U.S. Coast Guard Maritime Security Response Team (MSRT) hook and climb onto a target showing the skills needed to complete a variety of missions dealing with anti-terrorism, protecting local maritime assets, and harbor and inshore security patrols as well as detecting, stopping, and arresting submerged divers, using the Underwater Port Security System.


The five uniformed services that make up the U.S. Armed Forces are defined in Title 10 of the U.S. Code:

The term "armed forces" means the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard.[26]

The Coast Guard is further defined by Title 14 of the United States Code:

The Coast Guard as established January 28, 1915, shall be a military service and a branch of the armed forces of the United States at all times. The Coast Guard shall be a service in the Department of Homeland Security, except when operating as a service in the Navy.[27]

Coast Guard organization and operation is as set forth in Title 33 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
On 25 November 2002, the Homeland Security Act was signed into law by U.S. President George W. Bush, designating the Coast Guard to be placed under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The transfer of administrative control from the U.S. Department of Transportation to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security was completed the following year, on 1 March 2003.[4][28][29]
The U.S. Coast Guard reports directly to the Secretary of Homeland Security. However, under 14 U.S.C. § 3 as amended by section 211 of the Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2006, upon the declaration of war and when Congress so directs in the declaration, or when the President directs, the Coast Guard operates under the Department of Defense as a service in the Department of the Navy.
As members of the military, Coast Guardsmen on active and reserve service are subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice and receive the same pay and allowances as members of the same pay grades in the other uniformed services.
The service has participated in every major U.S. conflict from 1790 through today, including landing troops on D-Day and on the Pacific Islands in World War II, in extensive patrols and shore bombardment during the Vietnam War, and multiple roles in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Maritime interception operations, coastal security, transportation security, and law enforcement detachments have been its major roles in recent conflicts in Iraq.
On 17 October 2007, the Coast Guard joined with the U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps to adopt a new maritime strategy called A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower that raised the notion of prevention of war to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war.[30] This new strategy charted a course for the Navy, Coast Guard and Marine Corps to work collectively with each other and international partners to prevent regional crises, man-made or natural, from occurring, or reacting quickly should one occur to avoid negative impacts to the United States. During the launch of the new U.S. maritime strategy at the International Seapower Symposium at the U.S. Naval War College in 2007, Coast Guard Commandant Admiral Thad Allen said the new maritime strategy reinforced the time-honored missions the service has carried out in the United States since 1790. "It reinforces the Coast Guard maritime strategy of safety, security and stewardship, and it reflects not only the global reach of our maritime services but the need to integrate and synchronize and act with our coalition and international partners to not only win wars ... but to prevent wars," Allen said.[30]
Authority as a law enforcement agency[edit]




A member of USCG Law Enforcement Detachment (LEDET) 106 performs a security sweep aboard a tanker ship in the North Persian Gulf in July 2007.






United States Coast Guard sailors in 2010 patrolling the Falcon Lake reservoir of the Rio Grande border crossing for river pirates and Mexican cartel drug smugglers in the on going conflict known as the Mexican Drug War


Title 14 USC, section 2 authorizes the Coast Guard to enforce U.S. federal laws.[31] This authority is further defined in 14 U.S.C. § 89, which gives law enforcement powers to all Coast Guard commissioned officers, warrant officers, and petty officers.[32] Unlike the other branches of the United States Armed Forces, which are prevented from acting in a law enforcement capacity by 18 U.S.C. § 1385, the Posse Comitatus Act, and Department of Defense policy, the Coast Guard is exempt from and not subject to the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus Act.[33]
Further law enforcement authority is given by 14 U.S.C. § 143 and 9 U.S.C. § 1401, which empower U.S. Coast Guard active and reserve commissioned officers, warrant officers, and petty officers as federal customs officers.[34][35] This places them under 19 U.S.C. § 1589a, which grants customs officers general federal law enforcement authority, including the authority to:


(1) carry a firearm;
(2) execute and serve any order, warrant, subpoena, summons, or other process issued under the authority of the United States;
(3) make an arrest without a warrant for any offense against the United States committed in the officer's presence or for a felony, cognizable under the laws of the United States committed outside the officer's presence if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the person to be arrested has committed or is committing a felony; and
(4) perform any other law enforcement duty that the Secretary of Homeland Security may designate.

— 19 USC §1589a. Enforcement authority of customs officers[36]

The U.S. Government Accountability Office Report to the House of Representatives, Committee on the Judiciary on its 2006 Survey of Federal Civilian Law Enforcement Functions and Authorities, identified the Coast Guard as one of 104 federal components that employed law enforcement officers.[37] The report also included a summary table of the authorities of the Coast Guard's 192 special agents and 3,780 maritime law enforcement boarding officers.[38]
Coast Guardsmen have the legal authority to carry their service-issued firearms on and off base. This is rarely done in practice, however; at many Coast Guard stations, commanders prefer to have all service-issued weapons in armories when not in use. Still, one court has held that Coast Guard boarding officers are qualified law enforcement officers authorized to carry personal firearms off-duty for self-defense.[39]
History[edit]
Main article: History of the United States Coast Guard




Marine Corps Privates First Class William A. McCoy and Ralph L. Plunkett holding a sign thanking the Coast Guard after the Battle of Guam in 1944.[40]






USCGC Duane (WHEC-33) shelling targets in Vietnam in 1967, where they played an active role as an auxiliary branch of the U.S. Navy in the Vietnam War






United States Coast Guard Squadron One unit patch of the Vietnam War era


The Coast Guard traced its roots to the small fleet of vessels maintained by the United States Department of the Treasury beginning in the 1790s to enforce tariffs (an important source of revenue for the new nation), which eventually evolved into the United States Revenue Cutter Service. Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton lobbied Congress to fund the construction of ten cutters, which it did on 4 August 1790 (now celebrated as the Coast Guard's official birthday). Until the re-establishment of the Navy in 1798, these "revenue cutters" were the only naval force of the early United States. As such, the cutters and their crews frequently took on additional duties, including combating piracy, rescuing mariners in distress, ferrying government officials, and even carrying mail.[41]
"First Fleet" is a term occasionally used as an informal reference to the Coast Guard, although there is no indication that the United States has ever officially used this designation with reference either to the Coast Guard or any element of the Navy. The informal appellation honors the fact that between 1790 and 1798, there was no United States Navy and the cutters that were the predecessors of the Coast Guard were the only warships protecting the coast, trade, and maritime interests of the new republic.[42]
The modern Coast Guard was created in 1915, when the Revenue Cutter Service merged with the U.S. Life-Saving Service.[43] In 1939, the Lighthouse Service was brought under the Coast Guard's purview. In 1942, the Bureau of Marine Inspection and Navigation was transferred to the Coast Guard.[44] In 1967, the Coast Guard moved from the U.S. Department of the Treasury to the newly formed U.S. Department of Transportation, an arrangement that lasted until it was placed under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in 2003 as part of legislation designed to more efficiently protect American interests following the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001.
In times of war, the Coast Guard or individual components of it can operate as a service of the Department of the Navy. This arrangement has a broad historical basis, as the Coast Guard has been involved in wars as diverse as the War of 1812, the Mexican–American War, and the American Civil War, in which the cutter Harriet Lane fired the first naval shots attempting to relieve besieged Fort Sumter. The last time the Coast Guard operated as a whole within the Navy was in World War II. More often, military and combat units within the Coast Guard will operate under Navy or joint operational control while other Coast Guard units will remain under the Department of Homeland Security.
Organization[edit]
Main article: Organization of the United States Coast Guard




Douglas A. Munro Coast Guard Headquarters Building in St. Elizabeths West Campus.


The new Department of Homeland Security headquarters complex is on the grounds of the former St. Elizabeths Hospital in the Anacostia section of Southeast Washington, across the Anacostia River from former Coast Guard headquarters.[45]
The fiscal year 2016 budget request for the US Coast Guard was $9.96 billion.[46]
Shore establishments[edit]
Shore establishment commands exist to support and facilitate the mission of the sea and air assets. U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters is located in Southeast Washington, DC. Other shore establishments are Coast Guard Sectors (which may include Coast Guard Bases), Coast Guard Stations, Coast Guard Air Stations, and the United States Coast Guard Yard. Training centers include the United States Coast Guard Academy, Training Center Petaluma, Training Center Cape May, Coast Guard Aviation Technical Training Center, Coast Guard Aviation Training Center Mobile, and Training Center Yorktown.
Personnel[edit]
The formal name for a uniformed member of the Coast Guard is "Coast Guardsman", irrespective of gender. "Coastie" is an informal term commonly used to refer to current or former Coast Guard personnel. In 2008, the term "Guardian" was introduced as an alternative but was later dropped. Admiral Robert J. Papp, Jr. stated that it was his belief that no Commandant had the authority to change what members of the Coast Guard are called as the term Coast Guardsman is found in Title 14 USC which established the Coast Guard in 1915.[47][Note 3] "Team Coast Guard" refers to the four components of the Coast Guard as a whole: Regular, Reserve, Auxiliary, and Coast Guard civilian employees.
Commissioned officers[edit]
Commissioned officers in the Coast Guard hold pay grades ranging from O-1 to O-10 and have the same rank structure as the Navy.[49][50] Officers holding the rank of ensign (O-1) through lieutenant commander (O-4) are considered junior officers, commanders (O-5) and captains (O-6) are considered senior officers, and rear admirals (O-7) through admirals (O-10) are considered flag officers. The Commandant of the Coast Guard and the Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard are the only members of the Coast Guard authorized to hold the rank of admiral.[51]
The Coast Guard does not have medical officers or chaplains of its own. Instead, chaplains from the U.S. Navy, as well as officers from the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps are assigned to the Coast Guard to perform chaplain-related functions and medical-related functions, respectively. These officers wear Coast Guard uniforms but replace the Coast Guard insignia with that of their own service.[52]
The Navy and Coast Guard share identical officer rank insignia, except that Coast Guard officers wear a gold Coast Guard Shield in lieu of a line star or staff corps officer insignia.


Commissioned Officer grade structure of the United States Coast Guard


Ensign
(ENS)

Lieutenant
(junior grade)
(LTJG)

Lieutenant
(LT)

Lieutenant
Commander
(LCDR)

Commander
(CDR)

Captain
(CAPT)

Rear Admiral
(lower half)
(RDML)

Rear Admiral
(RADM)

Vice Admiral
(VADM)

Admiral
(ADM)



O-1
O-2
O-3
O-4
O-5
O-6
O-7
O-8
O-9
O-10






















































Warrant officers[edit]
Highly qualified enlisted personnel in pay grades E-6 through E-9 with a minimum of eight years experience can compete each year for appointment as warrant officers (WO). Successful candidates are chosen by a board and then commissioned as chief warrant officers (CWO-2) in one of sixteen specialties. Over time, chief warrant officers may be promoted to CWO-3 and CWO-4. The ranks of warrant officer (WO-1) and chief warrant officer (CWO-5) are not currently used in the Coast Guard. Chief warrant officers may also compete for the Chief Warrant Officer to Lieutenant Program. If selected, the warrant officer will be promoted to lieutenant (O-3E). The "E" designates over four years active duty service as a warrant officer or enlisted member and entitles the member to a higher rate of pay than other lieutenants.


Warrant Officer grade structure of the United States Coast Guard


Chief Warrant Officer 2
Chief Warrant Officer 3
Chief Warrant Officer 4


W-2
W-3
W-4



















Enlisted personnel[edit]
Enlisted members of the Coast Guard have pay grades from E-1 to E-9 and also follow the same rank structure as the Navy. Enlisted members in pay grades of E-4 and higher are considered petty officers and follow career development paths very similar to those of Navy petty officers.
Petty officers in pay grade E-7 and higher are chief petty officers and must attend the Coast Guard Chief Petty Officer Academy, or an equivalent Department of Defense school, in order to be advanced to pay grade E-8. The basic themes of the school are:

Professionalism
Leadership
Communications
Systems thinking and lifelong learning

Enlisted rank insignia is also nearly identical to Navy enlisted insignia. The Coast Guard shield replacing the petty officer's eagle on collar and cap devices for petty officers or enlisted rating insignia for seamen qualified as a "designated striker". Group Rate marks (stripes) for junior enlisted members (E-3 and below) also follow Navy convention with white for seaman, red for fireman, and green for the airman. In a departure from the Navy conventions, all petty officers E-6 and below wear red chevrons and all chief petty officers wear gold


Non-commissioned officer grade structure of the United States Coast Guard
Note: Crossed anchors in the graphics indicate a rating of Boatswain's Mate


Petty Officer Third Class
(PO3)

Petty Officer Second Class
(PO2)

Petty Officer First Class
(PO1)

Chief Petty Officer
(CPO)

Senior Chief Petty Officer
(SCPO)

Master Chief Petty Officer
(MCPO)

Command Master Chief Petty Officer
(CMC)

Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard Reserve Force or Area/DCO/DCMS Command Master Chief Petty Officer
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard
(MCPOCG)



E-4
E-5
E-6
E-7
E-8
E-9

















































Enlisted grade structure of the United States Coast Guard


Seaman Recruit
(SR)

Seaman Apprentice
(SA)

Seaman
(SN)



E-1
E-2
E-3



















Civilian personnel[edit]
The Coast Guard employs over 7,700 civilians in over two hundred different job types including Coast Guard Investigative Service special agents, lawyers, engineers, technicians, administrative personnel, tradesmen, and federal firefighters.[53][54] Civilian employees work at various levels in the Coast Guard to support its various missions.
Women in the Coast Guard[edit]
Main article: Women in the United States Coast Guard
In 1918, twin sisters Genevieve and Lucille Baker of the Naval Coastal Defense Reserve became the first uniformed women to serve in the Coast Guard.[55] Later, SPARS was the United States Coast Guard Women's Reserve created on 23 November 1942 with the signing of Public Law 773 by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.[56] The name is a contraction of the Coast Guard motto Semper Paratus and its English translation, "Always Ready." The name also refers to a spar in nautical usage. Like the other women's reserves such as the Women's Army Corps and the WAVES, it was created to free men from stateside service in order to fight overseas. Its first director was Captain Dorothy C. Stratton who is credited with creating the name for the organization.[57] The cutter USCGC Spar is named for the SPARS.
Training[edit]
Officer training[edit]
The U.S. Coast Guard Academy is a four-year service academy located in New London, Connecticut. Approximately 200 cadets graduate each year, receiving a Bachelor of Science degree and a commission as an ensign in the Coast Guard. Graduates are obligated to serve a minimum of five years on active duty. Most graduates are assigned to duty aboard Coast Guard cutters immediately after graduation, either as Deck Watch Officers (DWOs) or as Engineer Officers in Training (EOITs). Smaller numbers are assigned directly to flight training at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida or to shore duty at Coast Guard Sector, District, or Area headquarters units.
In addition to the Academy, prospective officers, who already hold a college degree, may enter the Coast Guard through Officer Candidate School (OCS), also located at the Coast Guard Academy. OCS is a 17-week course of instruction that prepares candidates to serve effectively as officers in the Coast Guard. In addition to indoctrinating students into a military lifestyle, OCS provides a wide range of highly technical information necessary to perform the duties of a Coast Guard officer.
Graduates of OCS are usually commissioned as ensigns, but some with advanced graduate degrees may enter as lieutenants (junior grade) or lieutenants. Graduating OCS officers entering active duty are required to serve a minimum of three years, while graduating reserve officers are required to serve four years. Graduates may be assigned to a cutter, flight training, a staff job, or an operations ashore billet.
OCS is the primary channel through which the Coast Guard enlisted grades ascend to the commissioned officer corps.
Lawyers, engineers, intelligence officers, military aviators holding commissions in other branches of the U.S. Armed Forces requesting interservice transfers to the Coast Guard, graduates of maritime academies, and certain other individuals may also receive an officer's commission in the Coast Guard through the Direct Commission Officer (DCO) program. Depending on the specific program and the background of the individual, the course is three, four or five weeks long. The first week of the five-week course is an indoctrination week. The DCO program is designed to commission officers with highly specialized professional training or certain kinds of previous military experience.
Unlike the other military services, the Coast Guard does not have a Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) program.
Recruit training[edit]
Newly enlisted personnel are sent to eight weeks of recruit training at Coast Guard Training Center Cape May in Cape May, New Jersey. New recruits arrive at Sexton Hall and remain there for three days of initial processing which includes haircuts, vaccinations, uniform issue, and other necessary entrance procedures. During this initial processing period, the new recruits are led by temporary company commanders. These temporary company commanders are tasked with teaching the new recruits how to march and preparing them to enter into their designated company. The temporary company commanders typically do not enforce any physical activity such as push ups or crunches. When the initial processing is complete, the new seaman recruits are introduced to their permanent company commanders who will remain with them until the end of training. There is typically a designated lead company commander and two support company commanders. The balance of the eight-week boot camp is spent in learning teamwork and developing physical skills. An introduction of how the Coast Guard operates with special emphasis on the Coast Guard's core values is an important part of the training.
The current nine Recruit Training Objectives are:

Self-discipline
Military skills
Marksmanship
Vocational skills and academics
Military bearing
Physical fitness and wellness
Water survival and swim qualifications
Esprit de corps
Core values (Honor, Respect, and Devotion to Duty)

Service schools[edit]
Following graduation from recruit training, most members are sent to their first unit while they await orders to attend advanced training in Class "A" Schools. At "A" schools, Coast Guard enlisted personnel are trained in their chosen rating; rating is a Coast Guard and Navy term for enlisted skills synonymous with the Army's and Marine Corps' military occupation codes (MOS) and Air Force's Air Force Specialty Code (AFSC). Members who earned high ASVAB scores or who were otherwise guaranteed an "A" School of choice while enlisting may go directly to their "A" School upon graduation from Boot Camp.
Equipment[edit]
Main article: Equipment of the United States Coast Guard
Cutters[edit]




USCGC Bertholf, the first Legend-class maritime security cutter.






USCGC Raymond Evans (WPC-1110), the tenth Sentinel-class Fast Response Cutter.


Originally, the U.S. Coast Guard used the term cutter in its traditional sense, as a type of small sailing ship. Today it officially uses the term for any vessel that has a permanently assigned crew and accommodations for the extended support of that crew, and includes only and all vessels of 65 feet (20 m) or more in length.[58]

Polar-class icebreaker (WAGB): There are three WAGB's used for icebreaking and research though only two, the heavy 399-foot (122 m) Polar Star and the newer medium class 420-foot (130 m) Healy, are active.[59][60][61][62] Polar Sea is located in Seattle, Washington but is not currently in active service.
National Security Cutter (WMSL): These are a new class of 418-foot (127 m) military defense, maritime ship, also known as the Legend-class cutter. At 418 ft. these are the largest USCG military cutters in active service. One-for-one Legend-class ships are replacing individually decommissioned 1960s Hamilton-class high endurance cutters. A total of eight were authorized and budgeted; as of 2015 three are in service, and three are under construction. In 2016 a ninth National Security Cutter was authorized by Congress.
High Endurance Cutter (WHEC): These are 12 378-foot (115 m) Hamilton-class cutters commissioned in the late 1960s. Missions include law enforcement, search and rescue, and military defense. These aged cutters are individually being decommissioned and replaced by the new 418 ft. National Security Cutters.
Medium Endurance Cutter (WMEC): These are mostly the 210-foot (64 m) Reliance class, and the 270-foot (82 m) Famous class cutters, although the 283-foot (86 m) Alex Haley also falls into this category. Primary missions are law enforcement, search and rescue, and military defense.
USCGC Mackinaw: A 240-foot (73 m) heavy icebreaker built for operations on the Great Lakes.
USCGC Eagle: A 295-foot (90 m) sailing barque used as a training ship for Coast Guard Academy cadets and Coast Guard officer candidates. She was originally built in Germany as Horst Wessel, and was seized by the United States as a prize of war in 1945.[63][64]
Seagoing Buoy Tender (WLB): These 225-foot (69 m) ships are used to maintain aids to navigation and also assist with law enforcement and search and rescue.
Coastal Buoy Tender (WLM): The 175-foot (53 m) Keeper-class coastal buoy tenders are used to maintain coastal aids to navigation.
Sentinel class cutter (WPC): The 154-foot (47 m) Sentinel class was previously known as the "Fast Response Cutter" class and is used for search and rescue work and law enforcement.
Bay-class icebreaking tug (WTGB): 140-foot (43 m) icebreakers used primarily for domestic icebreaking missions. Other missions include search and rescue, law enforcement, and aids to navigation maintenance.[65]
Patrol Boats (WPB): There are two classes of WPBs currently in service; the 110-foot (34 m) Island-class patrol boats and the 87-foot (27 m) Marine Protector-class patrol boats[66][67]

Aircraft[edit]




MH-65C Dolphin in flight.






HH-60J Jayhawk rescue demonstration.






Coast Guard HC-144A Ocean Sentry (CASA CN-235-300 MP Persuader).


The Coast Guard operates approximately 204 fixed and rotary wing aircraft from 24 Coast Guard Air Stations throughout the contiguous United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Most of these air stations are tenant activities at civilian airports, several of which are former Air Force Bases and Naval Air Stations, although several are also independent military facilities. Coast Guard Air Stations are also located on active Naval Air Stations, Air National Guard bases, and Army Air Fields.
Coast Guard aviators receive Primary (fixed-wing) and Advanced (fixed or rotary-wing) flight training with their Navy and Marine Corps counterparts at NAS Whiting Field, Florida, and NAS Corpus Christi, Texas, and are considered Naval Aviators. After receiving Naval Aviator Wings, Coast Guard pilots, with the exception of those slated to fly the HC-130, report to U.S. Coast Guard Aviation Training Center, Mobile, Alabama to receive 6–12 weeks of specialized training in the Coast Guard fleet aircraft they will operate. HC-130 pilots report to Little Rock AFB, Arkansas, for joint C-130 training under the auspices of the 314th Airlift Wing of the U.S. Air Force.
Fixed-wing aircraft operate from Air Stations on long-duration missions. Helicopters operate from Air Stations and can deploy on a number of different cutters. Helicopters can rescue people or intercept vessels smuggling migrants or narcotics. Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, the Coast Guard has developed a more prominent role in national security and now has armed helicopters operating in high-risk areas for the purpose of maritime law enforcement and anti-terrorism.
The Coast Guard is now developing an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) program that will utilize the MQ-9 Reaper platform for homeland security and search/rescue operations. To support this endeavor, the Coast Guard has partnered with the Navy and U.S. Customs and Border Protection to study existing/emerging unmanned aerial system (UAS) capabilities within their respective organizations. As these systems mature, research and operational experience gleaned from this joint effort will enable the Coast Guard to develop its own cutter and land-based UAS capabilities.
Fixed-wing aircraft:

Lockheed HC-130H Hercules[68]
Lockheed HC-130J Super Hercules[69]
CASA HC-144A Ocean Sentry[70]
Alenia C-27J Spartan

Rotary-wing aircraft:

Sikorsky HH / MH-60 J/T Jayhawk[71]
Aérospatiale MH-65 C/D/E Dolphin[72]

Fixed-wing VIP transport aircraft assigned to CGAS Washington D.C:

VC-37A Long Range Command and Control Aircraft (2 airframes as of December 2011: CG-01, S/N 653 and CG-02, S/N 638)[73]





USCG AC C37A in flight


Boats[edit]




A U.S. Coast Guard 25-foot (8 m) Defender-class boat from Base Seattle


The Coast Guard operates about 1,400 boats, defined as any vessel less than 65 feet (20 m) long, which generally operate near shore and on inland waterways.
The Coast Guard boat fleet includes:

Motor Life Boat (MLB): The Coast Guard's 47-foot (14 m) primary heavy-weather boat used for search and rescue as well as law enforcement and homeland security.
Response Boat – Medium (RB-M): A new multi-mission 45-foot (14 m) vessel intended to replace the 41-foot (12 m) utility boat. 170 planned
Special Purpose Craft – Near Shore Lifeboat: Only 2 built. Shallow draft, 42-foot (13 m) lifeboat substituted for the 47-foot (14 m) Motor Life Boat, based at Chatham, Massachusetts[74]
Long Range Interceptor (LRI): A 36-foot (11 m) high-speed launch that can be launched from the stern ramps of the larger Deepwater cutters.
Aids to Navigation Boats (TANB/BUSL/ANB/ANB): Various designs ranging from 26 to 55 feet (7.9 to 16.8 m) used to maintain aids to navigation.
Special Purpose Craft – Law Enforcement (SPC-LE): Intended to operate in support of specialized law enforcement missions, utilizing three 300 horsepower (220 kW) Mercury Marine engines. The SPC-LE is 33 feet (10 m) long and capable of speeds in excess of 50 knots (93 km/h; 58 mph) and operations more than 30 miles (48 km) from shore.
Response Boat – Small (RB-S): A 25-foot (7.6 m) high-speed boat, for a variety of missions, including search and rescue, port security and law enforcement duties.
Transportable Port Security Boat (TPSB): A 25-foot (7.6 m) well-armed boat used by Port Security Units for force protection.
SPC-SW Special Purpose Craft, Shallow-water: 24 feet (7.3 m)[clarification needed]
Over-the-Horizon (OTH) boat: A 23-foot (7.0 m) rigid hull inflatable boat used by medium and high endurance cutters and specialized units.
Short Range Prosecutor (SRP): A 23-foot (7.0 m) rigid hull inflatable boat that can be launched from a stern launching ramp on the National Security Cutters.

Weapons[edit]




The SIG P229R-DAK is the standard sidearm of the U.S. Coast Guard.


The U.S. Coast Guard uses a wide variety of small arms. Handguns, shotguns, and rifles are used to arm boat crew and boarding team members and machine guns are mounted aboard cutters, boats, and helicopters.
Common small arms include:

SIG Sauer P229R DAK .40 S&W pistol
Remington M870P 12 gauge shotgun
M16A2 rifle
M4 carbine
M14 Tactical rifle
FN M240 machine gun
M2 heavy machine gun

Deployable Specialized Forces also employ specialized weapons including the Mk 18 carbine, Mk 11 precision rifle, and M203 grenade launcher. Marksmen from the Helicopter Interdiction Tactical Squadron and Law Enforcement Detachments use a variant of the Barrett M107 .50-caliber rifle to disable the engines on fleeing boats.
Districts and units[edit]




USCG Districts


The Coast Guard's current district organization is divided into 9 districts. Their designations and HQs are as follows:

1st District (Boston, MA)
5th District (Portsmouth, VA)
7th District (Miami, FL)
8th District (New Orleans, LA)
9th District (Cleveland, OH)
11th District (Alameda, CA)
13th District (Seattle, WA)
14th District (Honolulu, HI)
17th District (Juneau, AK)

Symbols[edit]
Core values[edit]
The Coast Guard, like the other armed services of the United States, has a set of core values that serve as basic ethical guidelines for all Coast Guard active duty, reservists, auxiliarists, and civilians. The Coast Guard Core Values are:


Honor: Integrity is our standard. We demonstrate uncompromising ethical conduct and moral behavior in all of our personal actions. We are loyal and accountable to the public trust.
Respect: We value our diverse workforce. We treat each other with fairness, dignity, and compassion. We encourage individual opportunity and growth. We encourage creativity through empowerment. We work as a team.
Devotion to Duty: We are professionals, military and civilian, who seek responsibility, accept accountability, and are committed to the successful achievement of our organizational goals. We exist to serve. We serve with pride.

— Coast Guard Core Values[75]

The Guardian Ethos[edit]
In 2008, the Coast Guard introduced the Guardian Ethos. As the Commandant, Admiral Allen noted in a message to all members of the Coast Guard: [The Ethos] "defines the essence of the Coast Guard," and is the "contract the Coast Guard and its members make with the nation and its citizens."[76]
The Coast Guard Ethos[edit]
In an ALCOAST message effective 1 December 2011 the Commandant, Admiral Papp, directed that the language of Guardian Ethos be superseded by the Coast Guard Ethos in an effort to use terminology that would help with the identity of personnel serving in the Coast Guard.[77] The term Coast Guardsman is the correct form of address used in Title 14 USC and is the form that has been used historically. This changed the line in the Guardian Ethos "I am a Guardian." to become "I am proud to be a Coast Guardsman."[78]
The Ethos is:


I am a Coast Guardsman.
I serve the people of the United States.
I will protect them.
I will defend them.
I will save them.
I am their shield.
For them I am Semper Paratus.
I live the Coast Guard core values.
I am proud to be a Coast Guardsman.
We are the United States Coast Guard.

— The Coast Guard Ethos[48]

Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman[edit]
The "Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman" was written by Vice Admiral Harry G. Hamlet, who served as Commandant of the Coast Guard from 1932 to 1936.[79]


I am proud to be a United States Coast Guardsman.
I revere that long line of expert seamen who by their devotion to duty and sacrifice of self have made it possible for me to be a member of a service honored and respected, in peace and in war, throughout the world.
I never, by word or deed, will bring reproach upon the fair name of my service, nor permit others to do so unchallenged.
I will cheerfully and willingly obey all lawful orders.
I will always be on time to relieve, and shall endeavor to do more, rather than less, than my share.
I will always be at my station, alert and attending to my duties.
I shall, so far as I am able, bring to my seniors solutions, not problems.
I shall live joyously, but always with due regard for the rights and privileges of others.
I shall endeavor to be a model citizen in the community in which I live.
I shall sell life dearly to an enemy of my country, but give it freely to rescue those in peril.
With God's help, I shall endeavor to be one of His noblest Works...
A UNITED STATES COAST GUARDSMAN.

— Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman[80]

"You have to go out, but you don't have to come back!"[edit]
This unofficial motto of the Coast Guard dates to an 1899 United States Lifesaving Service regulation, which states in part: "In attempting a rescue, ... he will not desist from his efforts until by actual trial, the impossibility of effecting a rescue is demonstrated. The statement of the keeper that he did not try to use the boat because the sea or surf was too heavy will not be accepted, unless attempts to launch it were actually made and failed."[81]
Coast Guard Ensign[edit]




Ensign of the United States Coast Guard






Former Coast Guard Ensign, used from 1915 to 1953.


The Coast Guard Ensign (flag) was first flown by the Revenue Cutter Service in 1799 to distinguish revenue cutters from merchant ships. A 1 August 1799 order issued by Secretary of the Treasury, Oliver Wolcott, Jr. specified that the Ensign would be "sixteen perpendicular stripes (for the number of states in the United States at the time), alternate red and white, the union of the ensign to be the arms of the United States in a dark blue on a white field."[82]
This ensign became familiar in American waters and served as the sign of authority for the Revenue Cutter Service until the early 20th century. The ensign was originally intended to be flown only on revenue cutters and boats connected with the Customs Service but over the years it was found flying atop custom houses as well, and the practice became a requirement in 1874. On 7 June 1910, President William Howard Taft issued an Executive Order adding an emblem to (or "defacing") the ensign flown by the Revenue cutters to distinguish it from what is now called the Customs Ensign flown from the custom houses. The emblem was changed to the official seal of the Coast Guard in 1927.[83][84]
The purpose of the ensign is to allow ship captains to easily recognize those vessels having legal authority to stop and board them. It is flown only as a symbol of law enforcement authority and is never carried as a parade standard.[85]
Coast Guard Standard[edit]




Parade Standard of the U.S. Coast Guard.


The Coast Guard Standard is used in parades and carries the battle honors of the Coast Guard. It was derived from the jack of the Coast Guard ensign which was flown by revenue cutters. The emblem is a blue eagle from the coat of arms of the United States on a white field. Above the eagle are the words "UNITED STATES COAST GUARD" below the eagle is the motto, "SEMPER PARATUS" and the inscription "1790."
Service Mark ("Racing Stripe")[edit]




Service Mark (also known as Racing Stripe).


The racing stripe is borne by Coast Guard cutters, aircraft, and many boats. Red-hulled icebreaker cutters and most HH-65/MH-65 helicopters (i.e., those with a red fuselage) bear a narrow white bar, a narrow blue bar, and broad CG red bar, with the Coast Guard shield centered. Conversely, black-hulled cutters (such as buoy tenders and inland construction tenders) use the standard racing stripe. Auxiliary vessels maintained by the Coast Guard also carry the Racing Stripe, but in inverted colors (i.e., broad blue stripe with narrow white and CG red stripes) and the Auxiliary shield.
The Racing Stripe, officially known as the Service Mark, was designed in 1964 by the industrial design office of Raymond Loewy Associates to give the Coast Guard a distinctive, modern image. Loewy had designed the colors for the Air Force One fleet for Jackie Kennedy. President Kennedy was so impressed with his work, he suggested that the entire Federal Government needed his make-over and suggested that he start with the Coast Guard.[86] First used and placed into official usage as of April 6, 1967, it consists of a narrow blue stripe, a narrow white stripe between, and a broad CG red bar with the Coast Guard shield centered.[11][87][88] The stripes are canted at a 64 degree angle, coincidentally the year the Racing Stripe was designed.[89]
Similar Racing Stripe designs have been adopted for the use of other coast guards and maritime authorities and many other law enforcement and rescue agencies.
Semper Paratus[edit]
The official march of the Coast Guard is "Semper Paratus" (Latin for "Always Ready").[90]
Colors[edit]
Two Pantone colors are named after the Coast Guard; they are used in the Service Mark.[11]

CG Red is Pantone 179C (hex color code #E23D28)
CG Blue is Pantone 307C[11] (hex color code #007AA5)[91]

Uniforms[edit]




Photo showing a variety of Coast Guard uniforms. From Left: Service Dress White, Tropical Blue, Service Dress Blue, Winter Dress Blue, Camouflage Utility Uniform, Operational Dress Uniform






USCG members in 2013 in ODUs.


Prior to 1974, Coast Guard personnel wore essentially the same uniforms as the Navy (although some unique uniform items did exist) with distinctive Coast Guard insignia. These were minor, primarily consisting of distinctive cap devices for officers and chief petty officers, incorporation of the Coast Guard shield in lieu of line or staff corps insignia for officers, and different buttons on dress uniforms.
In 1974, the current Coast Guard Service Dress Blue "Bravo" uniform was introduced for wear by both officers and enlisted personnel; the transition was completed during 1974. The uniform consists of a blue four-pocket single breasted jacket and trousers, a light-blue button-up shirt with a pointed collar, two front button-flap pockets, and shoulder loops, along with a tie of the same shade as the jacket are worn with the uniform. Either the garrison cap or combination cap may be worn. Officer and enlisted rank insignia are sewn onto the jacket sleeve in the same manner as Navy uniforms.[92]




A Coast Guard warrant officer (left) and officer (right) wearing Full Dress Whites.


The Service Dress Blue "Bravo" uniform may be worn year-round for business within the Coast Guard and for social occasions where the civilian equivalent is coat and tie.[93]
The slightly more formal Service Dress Blue "Alpha" variant substitutes a white shirt for the blue, and mandates the combination cap. Enlisted personnel do not wear collar devices with the white shirt.
Full Dress Blue is essentially the same as Service Dress Blue "Alpha," except that it is worn with a full-size medals instead of ribbons. Additionally, a sword may be prescribed for officers, and white gloves may be required. A white belt may be worn for honor guards.
The Tropical Blue uniform, worn in warm weather, omits the jacket and tie, and features a short-sleeved, light blue shirt (identical to that worn by the U.S. Air Force) with rank insignia on shoulder boards for officers, and pin-on collar insignia for petty officers. The Tropical Blue uniform may be worn year-round for general office wear and for visits between commands. It may be worn in lieu of the SDB uniform, but not to functions where civilian dress is coat and tie.[93]
Despite the transition to distinctive "Bender's blues" uniforms in the 1970s, some Navy-style dress uniforms were retained. The Service Dress White and Full Dress White "choker" uniforms for officers are identical to those worn by U.S. Navy officers (aside from service-specific buttons, insignia and sword design). These are typically used for formal parade and change-of-command ceremonies. For similar occasions the enlisted members wear Tropical Blue, Service Dress Blue or Full Dress Blue. The mess dress uniforms worn for formal (black tie) evening ceremonies are also identical to those of the Navy, aside from Coast Guard-specific insignia. As in the Navy, these uniforms are required for officers, but optional for enlisted members. Due to the expense of these uniforms and the fact that they are rarely called-for, few junior enlisted members purchase them.




The U.S. Coast Guard Pipe Band in New York during the 2010 St. Patrick's Day Parade.


The current working uniform of the Coast Guard is the Operational Dress Uniform (ODU). The ODU may be worn year-round primarily as a field utility and watchstanding uniform, but may also be worn in an office environment where appropriate. The ODU is similar to the Battle Dress Uniform of other armed services, both in function and style. However, the ODU is in a solid dark blue with no camouflage pattern and does not have lower pockets on the blouse. The first generation ODU, in service from 2004 to 2012, was worn tucked in. The second generation ODU is worn untucked and has black Coast Guard insignia embroidered on the left shirt pocket as well as the side pockets of the trousers. The ODU is worn with composite-toed boots in most circumstances, but low-cut brown boat shoes may be prescribed for certain vessel boarding operations. A standard baseball-style ball cap is worn, embroidered in gold block lettering with "U.S. Coast Guard." Units may also additionally authorize ball caps with the unit name embroidered for wear while on the unit. A foul weather parka is the outerwear worn with the ODU. The ODU's success and practicality as a working uniform has led the U.S. Public Health Service and the NOAA Corps to adopt ODU variants as standard working uniforms. Some Navy personnel also advocated adoption of the ODU as a standard shipboard uniform for the Navy, rather than the unpopular Navy Working Uniform Type I.
Coast Guard personnel serving in expeditionary combat units such as Port Security Units or Law Enforcement Detachments, and Coast Guard personnel deployed overseas (e.g. PATFORSWA) wear the Navy Working Uniform Type III with distinctive Coast Guard insignia, and generally follow Navy Uniform Regulations.




Coast Guard cadets wearing fall Parade Dress Blue uniform dress their line.


All Coast Guardsmen wear the combination cap with all uniforms except the ODU and CUU. Company commanders (the Coast Guard's equivalent of drill sergeants) at Training Center Cape May wear the traditional Smokey Bear-style campaign hat.
The Coast Guard Pipe Band, a special musical unit composed of active, reserve and auxiliary members, wears a modified form of highland dress, including kilt and sporran. It is, along with the Band of the Air Force Reserve Pipe Band, one of only two kilted units in the United States military, excluding those maintained by state defense forces and service academies. The band's kilt is patterned in the official U.S. Coast Guard tartan, which is registered with the Scottish Register of Tartans and based on the Hamilton tartan (in honor of the founder of the Revenue-Marine, Alexander Hamilton).[94]
Cadets at the U.S. Coast Guard Academy wear standard Coast Guard uniforms, but also wear two different styles of parade dress uniforms, similar to those worn by cadets at the U.S. Naval Academy. Fall Parade Dress Blue consists of navy blouses with banded collars and double rows of buttons, worn with matching navy trousers and a white peaked hat. Spring Parade Dress Blue substitutes white trousers in lieu of navy.
Deployable Operations Group[edit]
Main article: Deployable Operations Group




Seal of the United States Coast Guard Deployable Operations Group


The Deployable Operations Group (DOG) was a Coast Guard command established in July 2007. The DOG established a single command authority to rapidly provide the Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security, Department of Defense, Department of Justice and other interagency operational commanders adaptive force packages drawn from the Coast Guard's deployable specialized force units. The DOG was disestablished on 22 April 2013 and its deployable specialized forces (DSF) units were placed under the control of the Atlantic and Pacific Area Commanders.[95]
The planning for the unit began after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, and culminated with its formation on 20 July 2007. Its missions include maritime law enforcement, anti-terrorism, port security, pollution response, and diving operations.
There were over 25 specialized units within the Deployable Operations Group including the Maritime Security Response Team, Maritime Safety and Security Teams, Law Enforcement Detachments, Port Security Units, the National Strike Force, and Regional Dive Lockers. The DOG also managed Coast Guard personnel assigned to the Navy Expeditionary Combat Command and was involved in the selection of Coast Guard candidates to attend Navy BUD/S and serve with Navy SEAL Teams.[96]
Coast Guard Reserve[edit]
Main article: United States Coast Guard Reserve




Seal of the United States Coast Guard Reserve


The United States Coast Guard Reserve is the reserve military force of the Coast Guard.[97] The Coast Guard Reserve was founded on 19 February 1941. Coast Guard reservists normally drill two days a month and an additional 12 days of active duty each year, although many perform additional drill and active duty periods, to include those mobilized to extended active duty. Coast Guard reservists possess the same training and qualifications as their active duty counterparts, and as such, can be found augmenting active duty Coast Guard units every day.
During the Vietnam War and shortly thereafter, the Coast Guard considered abandoning the reserve program, but the force was instead reoriented into force augmentation, where its principal focus was not just reserve operations, but to add to the readiness and mission execution of every-day active duty personnel.
Since 11 September 2001, over 8,500 reservists have been activated and served on tours of active duty, to include deployments to the Persian Gulf and also as parts of Department of Defense combatant commands such as the U.S. Northern and Central Commands. Coast Guard Port Security Units are entirely staffed with reservists, except for five to seven active duty personnel. Additionally, most of the staffing the Coast Guard provides to the Navy Expeditionary Combat Command are reservists.
The Reserve is managed by the Director of Reserve and Military Personnel Directorate, Rear Admiral Kurt B. Hinrichs, USCGR.
Coast Guard Auxiliary[edit]
Main article: United States Coast Guard Auxiliary




Badge of the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary


The United States Coast Guard Auxiliary is the uniformed volunteer component of the Coast Guard, established on 23 June 1939 by an act of Congress as the United States Coast Guard Reserve, it was re-designated as the Auxiliary on 19 February 1941. It works within the Coast Guard in carrying out its noncombatant and non-law enforcement missions.[98] Auxiliarists are subject to direction from the Commandant of the Coast Guard making them unique among all federal volunteers (e.g. Air Force's Civil Air Patrol and FBI's InfraGard); they are not a separate organization, but an integral part of the Coast Guard. As of 2014, there were approximately 29,000 active Auxiliarists.[2]
The Coast Guard has assigned primary responsibility for many recreational boating safety tasks to the Auxiliary, including public boating safety education and voluntary Vessel Safety Checks (formerly called Courtesy Examinations).[99] Additionally, Auxiliarists use their own vessels boats and aircraft (once registered as Coast Guard facilities) to conduct safety patrols, aid in search and rescue missions, and perform other tasks on behalf of the Coast Guard.
Prior to 1997, Auxiliarists were largely limited to activities supporting recreational boating safety. In 1997, however, new legislation authorized the Auxiliary to participate in any and all Coast Guard missions except direct military and direct law enforcement.[100] Auxiliarists may directly augment active duty Coast Guard personnel in non-combat, non-law enforcement roles (e.g. radio communications watch stander, interpreter, cook, etc.) and may assist active duty personnel in inspecting commercial vessels and maintaining aids-to-navigation. Auxiliarists may support the law enforcement and homeland security missions of the Coast Guard but may not directly participate (make arrests, etc.), and Auxiliarists are not permitted to carry a weapon while serving in any Auxiliary capacity.
Medals and honors[edit]
Main article: Awards and decorations of the United States Coast Guard
See also: Awards and decorations of the United States military
One Coast Guardsman, Douglas Albert Munro, has earned the Medal of Honor, the highest military award of the United States.[101] Fifty five Coast Guardsmen have earned the Navy Cross and numerous men and women have earned the Distinguished Flying Cross.
The highest peacetime decoration awarded within the Coast Guard is the Homeland Security Distinguished Service Medal; prior to the transfer of the Coast Guard to the Department of Homeland Security, the highest peacetime decoration was the Department of Transportation Distinguished Service Medal. The highest unit award available is the Presidential Unit Citation.
In wartime, members of the Coast Guard are eligible to receive the Navy version of the Medal of Honor. A Coast Guard Medal of Honor is authorized but has not yet been developed or issued.
In May 2006, at the Change of Command ceremony when Admiral Thad Allen took over as Commandant, President George W. Bush awarded the entire Coast Guard, including the Coast Guard Auxiliary, the Coast Guard Presidential Unit Citation with hurricane device, for its efforts during and after Hurricane Katrina and Tropical Storm Rita.
Organizations[edit]
Coast Guard Aviation Association[edit]
Those who have piloted or flown in Coast Guard aircraft under official flight orders may join the Coast Guard Aviation Association which was formerly known as the "Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl" ("Flying Since the World was Flat").
The Ancient Albatross Award is presented to the active duty USCG member who qualified as an aviator earlier than any other person who is still serving. Separate enlisted and officer awards are given.[102][103]
Coast Guard CW Operators Association[edit]
The Coast Guard CW Operators Association (CGCWOA) is a membership organization comprising primarily former members of the United States Coast Guard who held the enlisted rating of Radioman (RM) or Telecommunications Specialist (TC), and who employed International Morse Code (CW) in their routine communications duties on Coast Guard cutters and at shore stations.[104]
USCG Chief Petty Officers Association[edit]
Members of this organization unite to assist members and dependents in need, assist with Coast Guard recruiting efforts, support the aims and goals of the Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers Academy, keep informed on Coast Guard matters, and assemble for social amenities; and include Chief, Senior Chief, and Master Chief Petty Officers, active, reserve and retired. Membership is also open to all Chief Warrant Officers and Officers who have served as a Chief Petty Officer.[105]
USCG Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association (CWOA)[edit]
Established in 1929, the Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association, United States Coast Guard (CWOA) represents Coast Guard warrant and chief warrant officers (active, reserve and retired) to the Congress, White House and the Department of Homeland Security. Additionally, the association communicates with the Coast Guard leadership on matters of concern to Coast Guard chief warrant officers.[106]
Notable Coast Guardsmen[edit]
Main article: List of U.S. Coast Guard people
Numerous celebrities have served in the Coast Guard including tennis player Jack Kramer, golfer Arnold Palmer, All Star baseball player Sid Gordon, boxer Jack Dempsey; musicians Kai Winding, Rudy Vallee,[107] Derroll Adams, and Tom Waits; actors Buddy Ebsen, Sid Caesar, Victor Mature, Richard Cromwell, Alan Hale, Jr., William Hopper, Beau Bridges, Jeff Bridges, Cesar Romero; author Alex Haley; and Senator Claiborne Pell.
Vice Admiral Thad Allen in 2005 was named Principal Federal Officer to oversee recovery efforts in the Gulf Region after Hurricane Katrina. After promotion to Admiral, on the eve of his retirement as Commandant, Allen again received national visibility after being named National Incident Commander overseeing the response efforts of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill.
Former Coast Guard officers have been appointed to numerous civilian government offices. After retiring as Commandant of the Coast Guard in 2002, Admiral James Loy went on to serve as administrator of the Transportation Security Administration and later as Deputy Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security. After their respective Coast Guard careers, Carlton Skinner served as the first Civilian Governor of Guam; G. William Miller, 65th Secretary of the Treasury, and retired Vice Admiral Harvey E. Johnson, Jr. served as Deputy Administrator and Chief Operating Officer of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) under President George W. Bush. Rear Admiral Stephen W. Rochon was appointed by President George W. Bush to serve as the Director of the Executive Residence and White House Chief Usher, beginning service on 12 March 2007, and continued to serve in the same capacity under President Barack Obama.
Two Coast Guard aviators, Commander Bruce E. Melnick and Captain Daniel C. Burbank, have served as NASA astronauts.
Signalman First Class Douglas Albert Munro was awarded the Medal of Honor posthumously, and is the only Coast Guardsman to ever receive this honor.[101]
In popular culture[edit]
The US Coast Guard maintains a Motion Picture and Television Office (MOPIC) in Hollywood, CA, along with its sister services at the Department of Defense dedicated to enhancing public awareness and understanding of the Coast Guard, its people, and its missions through a cooperative effort with the entertainment industry.[108][109]
In literature[edit]

Ice Brothers is a novel by former Coast Guard officer Sloan Wilson about the Greenland Patrol during World War II.
A Coast Guard cutter and its crew figured prominently in Tom Clancy's books Clear and Present Danger, Without Remorse, and Executive Orders.
Sinbad, a dog serving aboard the cutter USCGC Campbell in WWII, who was enlisted and held the rank of Chief Petty Officer, was the first member of the United States Coast Guard to be the subject of a biography in George Foley's Sinbad of the Coast Guard in 1945.
The Coast Guard training cutter, USCGC Eagle, figures prominently in S.M. Stirling's book Island in the Sea of Time.
The 2009 book The Finest Hours by Casey Sherman and Michael J. Tougias describes the 1952 Pendleton rescue off the New England coast.

In film[edit]

The Yellow Traffic (1914), Silent film featuring a merchant ship hijacked and forced to smuggle Chinese immigrants, saved by the Revenue Cutter Service.
Rugged Water (1925), Silent film depicting the U.S. Life-Saving Service in Setauket.
The Sea Spoilers (1936), John Wayne stars as a Warrant Officer in command of a patrol boat in search of smugglers and seal poachers in Alaska.
Fighting Coast Guard (1951), depicts Coast Guard trained to help win WWII.[109]
Onionhead (1958), portrays Andy Griffith as a Coast Guard cook.
The Boatniks (1970), a Disney comedy film, depicts Ensign Tom Garland, played by Robert Morse, as the commander of a small cutter on the West Coast.
Satan's Triangle (1975), a TV movie involving a United States Coast Guard helicopter sent to answer a distress call from inside the Bermuda Triangle.
The Island (1980), latter-day Caribbean pirates capture the (fictional) cutter USCGC New Hope. Filming was done on USCGC Dauntless.[109]
Captain Ron (1992), depicts the escape of the Harvey family from modern pirates with a distress call to the Coast Guard who arrive to save the day.
White Squall (1996), depicts the recovery of the students and crew of the Albatross, and subsequent hearing regarding the conduct of Captain Shelden.
The Perfect Storm (2000), depicted the rescue operations of the USCGC Tamaroa as one of its subplots.
Bad Boys II (2003), depicts counter-drug helicopters from the Helicopter Interdiction Tactical Squadron (HITRON).[109]
Yours, Mine, and Ours (2005), a family comedy, Dennis Quaid plays a fictional U.S. Coast Guard Academy superintendent who marries a character played by Rene Russo; together, they have 18 children.
The Guardian (2006), starring Kevin Costner and Ashton Kutcher, was based on the training and operations of Coast Guard Aviation Survival Technicians.
Pain & Gain (2013), starring Dwayne Johnson and Mark Wahlberg, depicted the Coast Guard Deployable Operations Group in action.[109]
The Finest Hours (2016), based on the 2009 book by Casey Sherman and Michael J. Tougias about the 1952 Pendleton rescue off New England.
Deepwater Horizon (2016), depicts the USCG response to the 2010 Deepwater Horizon explosion, and subsequent rescue and containment efforts.

On television[edit]
The Coast Guard has been featured in several television series, including The Amazing Race 25, Hawaii Five O, Baywatch, Boston Legal, Burn Notice, CSI: Miami, Dirty Jobs, Harbor Command, Miami Vice, Person of Interest, NCIS, NCIS New Orleans and Psych.
Other shows include:

Coast Guard was a syndicated television series that aired for three seasons from 1995 to 1997 in the United States as well as overseas, where it was called Sea Rescue. The series followed Coast Guard personnel as they performed their missions.[110][111][112]
Coast Guard Alaska: Search and Rescue, a series on The Weather Channel that features a Coast Guard search-and-rescue unit based in Kodiak, Alaska. Several series have spun off the original to focus on units based in Cape Disappointment and Florida.[113][114][115]
Deadliest Catch, works extensively with Base Kodiak, who cooperates with the film crew to insure safety and has been featured in several rescues.[116][117]
Doll & Em features an CG ANT team member and the Point Vicente Light as the lighthouse Doll & Em escape to do their writing in the Season 2 opener.[118]
Emergency!, Coast Guard HH-52 Seaguard helicopters and boats were used in various rescues.[citation needed]
Flipper, various Coast Guard HH-52 Seaguard helicopters were used.[citation needed].
Hawaii Five-0, features several episodes in which the Five-0 team worked with Station Honolulu[119] and Air Station Barbers Point.[120]
NCIS, Diane Neal portrays Abigail Borin, CGIS Special Agent in Charge featured in several episodes of both NCIS and NCIS: New Orleans.[121]
Unnamed Coast Guardsmen of a Law Enforcement Detachment were featured in a Channel 5 documentary Royal Navy Caribbean Patrol. They were serving aboard HMS Manchester, a British Royal Navy ship combating drug smugglers in the Caribbean.[citation needed]

See also[edit]


Military of the United States portal
United States Coast Guard portal
Law enforcement/Law enforcement topics portal


Coast Guard[edit]


AMVER
Badges of the United States Coast Guard
Chaplain of the Coast Guard
Coast Guard Day
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 33
Joint Maritime Training Center
List of United States Coast Guard cutters
Maritime Law Enforcement Academy
MARSEC
National Data Buoy Center
National Ice Center
Naval militia
North Pacific Coast Guard Agencies Forum
Patrol Forces Southwest Asia
SPARS
U.S. Coast Guard Intelligence
U.S. Coast Guard Legal Division
United States Coast Guard Air Stations
United States Coast Guard Police
United States Coast Guard Research & Development Center
United States Coast Guard Stations
Women in the United States Coast Guard


Related agencies[edit]

List of United States federal law enforcement agencies
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office for Law Enforcement
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)
U.S. Maritime Administration
U.S. Merchant Marine

Notes[edit]



^ Prior to the formation of the modern U.S. Coast Guard by merger of the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and the U.S. Life-Saving Service in 1915, the Revenue Cutter Service had been under the control of the U.S. Department of the Treasury from its creation in 1790. The U.S. Life-Saving Service dated from 1871 and was also under the control of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.
^ Although the U.S. Navy lists its founding as 1775 with the formation of the Continental Navy, that service was disbanded in 1785 and the modern U.S. Navy in its present form was founded in 1794.
^ The term Coast Guardsman is the official term used by the U.S. Coast Guard to refer to a member regardless of the person's gender. In an ALCOAST message effective 1 December 2011 the Commandant, Admiral Papp, directed that the language of the Guardian Ethos be superseded by the Coast Guard Ethos in an effort to use terminology that would help with the identity of personnel serving in the Coast Guard. The term Coast Guardsman is the correct form of address used in Title 14 USC and is the form that has been used historically.[48]



References[edit]


^ a b "Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked Questions - When was the Coast Guard established?". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 13 July 2013. 
^ a b c "Coast Guard Snapshot 2014" (PDF). United States Coast Guard. Retrieved 5 December 2016. 
^ "Homeland Security Budget-in-Brief Fiscal Year 2009" (PDF). United States Department of Homeland Security. 2009. p. 53. 
^ a b c United States Coast Guard. "Daily Chronology of Coast Guard History". United States Department of Homeland Security. 2003 - Administrative control of the Coast Guard transferred to the newly created Department of Homeland Security from the Department of Transportation, where it had served since 1 April 1967. 
^ United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard Organizational History" (PDF). United States Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 1 April 1967: Executive Order 16781 transferred the Coast Guard from the Treasury Department to the newly-formed Department of Transportation. 
^ a b United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard Organizational History" (PDF). United States Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 1 November 1941: President Roosevelt's Executive Order 8929 transferred the Coast Guard to Navy Department control. In compliance with Executive Order 9666, the Coast Guard returned to Treasury Department control. 
^ United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard Organizational History" (PDF). United States Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 28 August 1919: Coast Guard reverted to Treasury Department after President Wilson signed Executive Order 3160. 
^ a b United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard Organizational History" (PDF). United States Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 6 April 1917: With the declaration of war against Germany the Coast Guard was transferred by Executive Order to the control of the Navy Department. 
^ "An Act To create the Coast Guard by combining therein the existing Life-Saving Service and Revenue-Cutter Service". January 1915. Archived from the original on 8 September 2013. Retrieved 8 September 2013. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives o the United States of America in Congress assembled, That there shall be established in lieu of the existing Revenue-Cutter Service and the Life-Saving Service, to be composed of those two existing organizations, with the existing offices and positions and the incumbent officers and men of those two services, the Coast Guard, which shall constitute a part of the military forces of the United States and which shall operate under the Treasury Department in time of peace and operate as a part of the Navy, subject to the orders of the Secretary of the Navy, in time of war or when the President shall so direct. When subject to the Secretary of the Navy in time of war the expense of the Coast Guard shall be paid by the Navy Department; Provided, That no provision of this Act shall be construed as giving any officer of either the Coast Guard or the Navy, military or other control at any time over any vessel, officer, or man of the other service except by direction of the President. 
^ a b c William R. Benedetto (February 2006). Sailing Into the Abyss: A True Story of Extreme Heroism on the High Seas. Kensington Publishing Corporation. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-8065-2646-1. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Its sailors go by a handful of names, including coasties, shallow-water sailors, hooligans, rum-runners, the Guard, and, now, the Home Security guys. 
^ a b c d "U.S. Coast Guard Heraldry" (PDF). United States Coast Guard. April 2011. pp. 3–1. COMDTINST M5200.14A. 
^ 10 U.S.C. § 101(a)(4)
^ Johnson, Robert Irwin (1987). Guardians of the Sea, History of the United States Coast Guard, 1915 to the Present. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-0-87021-720-3. 
^ Scheina, Robert (11 October 2012). "The U.S. Coast Guard at War". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 
^ LaRouche, Monique (2012). "The Coast Guard RAIDs Afghanistan". Reservist. U.S. Coast Guard. LXI (1): 18. 
^ "Coast Guard Organization and Administration, Chapter One". Retrieved 7 October 2013. 
^ https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/agency/end-strength.htm
^ Stone, Andrea (21 December 2011). "Coast Guard Cutters Rust Away, Break Down". The Huffington Post. 
^ The Coast Guard Gets It Right Amanda Ripley. TIME. 23 October 2005.
^ 6 U.S.C. § 468
^ "USCG Office of Search & Rescue (CG-SAR)". uscg.mil. Retrieved 21 January 2015. 
^ "National Search and Rescue Plan (USA) 2007" (PDF). Uscg.mil. 22 June 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2013. 
^ "National Search And Rescue Committee". U. S. Coast Guard Office of Search and Rescue. U.S. Coast Guard. Retrieved 26 March 2013. 
^ "USCG National Response Center". uscg.mil. Retrieved 21 January 2015. 
^ "National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan". epa.gov. Retrieved 2 December 2014. 
^ "10 USC §101. Definitions" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. (a)(4). 
^ "14 USC §1. Establishment of Coast Guard" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ "Homeland Security Act of 2002" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 25 November 2002. 
^ Baldinelli, D.C. (9 December 2002). "The U.S. Coast Guard's Assignment to the Department of Homeland Security: Entering Uncharted Waters or Just a Course Correction?". United States Coast Guard. United States Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved 18 January 2014. On November 25, 2002, President George Bush signed the Homeland Security Act, which called for the largest reorganization in the U.S. government since the formation of the Department of Defense. The reorganization plan will bring together twenty-two agencies or parts of agencies from other departments such as Justice, Commerce, Health and Human Services, etc., under the control of the Department of Homeland Security.... One of those agencies affected was the United States Coast Guard, which will be transferred from the Department of Transportation. 
^ a b Garamone, Jim (17 October 2007). "Sea Services Unveil New Maritime Strategy". Navy News Service. American Forces Press Service. NNS071017-13. 
^ "14 USC §2. Primary duties" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ "14 USC §89. Law enforcement" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ "18 USC §1385. Use of Army and Air Force as posse comitatus" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ "14 USC §143. Treasury Department" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ "19 USC §1401.(i) Officer of the customs; customs officer" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ "19 USC §1589a. Enforcement authority of customs officers" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ "Federal Law Enforcement Survey of Federal Civilian Law Enforcement Functions and Authorities" (PDF). Government Accounting Office. December 2006. GAO-07-121. 
^ "Law Enforcement Survey Table". Government Accounting Office. Retrieved 3 February 2013. 
^ "People v. Booth, ___ N.Y.S.2d ___, 2008 WL 2247068, 2008 N.Y. Slip. Op. 28206 (N.Y. Co.Ct. 2008)" (PDF). 24 May 2008. 
^ Papp, Robert J., Jr. (27 September 2012). "The legacy of Signalman 1st Class Douglas Munro". Coast Guard Compass. 
^ Ripley, Amanda (23 October 2005). "How the Coast Guard Gets it Right". Time. (Subscription required (help)). 
^ "Numbered Fleets". Federation of American Scientists. 28 July 1999. Archived from the original on 26 April 2006. 
^ "Historic Light Stations". U.S. Coast Guard. Retrieved 21 January 2015. 
^ "U.S. Steamboat Inspection Service". U.S. Coast Guard. Retrieved 21 January 2015. 
^ Cacas, Max (10 September 2009). "DHS marks new milestone with St. E's campus groundbreaking". WFED. Archived from the original on 21 June 2011. 
^ https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/FY_2016_DHS_Budget_in_Brief.pdf
^ Leavitt, Michael P. "Coast Guardsman, Not Guardian" (PDF). Flotilla 23-1 Annapolis, MD. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 November 2011. Retrieved 24 June 2011. 
^ a b Shipmates 17 - The Coast Guard Ethos
^ "14 USC §41. Grades and ratings" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ "37 USC §201. Pay grades: assignment to; general rules" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2015, Section 201
^ "Required Uniforms". USCG Uniform Distribution Center. 23 May 2013. 
^ "Title unknown". [dead link]
^ "USCG Civilian Careers". United States Coast Guard. 28 June 2013. 
^ "Women's History Chronology". uscg.mil. Retrieved 21 January 2015. 
^ "History of the Coast Guard Reserve". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 26 January 2012. 
^ "Women & the US Coast Guard". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 16 July 2013. 
^ "United States Coast Guard Regulations, Chapter 10 – Classification and Status of Coast Guard Vessels" (PDF). 1992. COMDINSTM 5000.3B. 
^ "420-foot Icebreaker (WAGB)". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. 
^ "399-foot Polar Class Icebreakers (WAGB)". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. 
^ "Alaska Lt. Gov. calls for US icebreakers". Fairbanks Daily News-Miner. Associated Press. 30 November 2011. Archived from the original on 20 January 2012. 
^ "Northrop Grumman to Supply Polar Ice Breaker Navigation Support for U.S. Coast Guard". 20 October 2013. 
^ "U.S. Coast Guard Barque Eagle (WIX-327)". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. 
^ "USCGC Eagle". Lots of Honor. 2 June 2017. 
^ "140-foot Icebreaking Tug (WTGB) - Bay Class". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. 
^ "110-foot Patrol Boat (WPB) - Island Class". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. 
^ "87-foot Coastal Patrol Boat (WPB) - Marine Protector Class". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. 
^ "HC-130H: Hercules". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 28 June 2013. 
^ "HC-130J: Super Hercules". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 28 June 2013. 
^ "HC-144A: Ocean Sentry". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 2 July 2013. 
^ "HH-60J Sea Hawk / "Jayhawk"". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 7 August 2013. 
^ "HH/MH-65C: Dolphin". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 28 June 2013. 
^ "C-37A: Gulfstream V". Office of Aviation Forces (CG-711). 28 June 2013. 
^ "Chatham Boats". Station Chatham. 28 June 2013. 
^ "United States Coast Guard Core Values". United States Coast Guard Academy. Retrieved 7 August 2013. 
^ "The Coast Guard and Homeland Security". United States Army Combined Arms Center. July 2010. Retrieved 26 February 2015. 
^ "Shipmates 17 - The Coast Guard Ethos" (txt). CGMS General Messages. 30 November 2011. ALCOAST 554/11. 
^ "The Guardian Ethos" (PDF). U.S. Coast Guard Posture Statement. United States Coast Guard. February 2008. p. 17. 
^ "Harry G. Hamlet 1932-1936". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 26 January 2012. 
^ Hamlet, Harry G. (10 October 2012). "Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked Questions - Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 
^ "Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked Questions - What is the origin of the saying "You have to go out, but you don't have to come back"?". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 10 October 2012. 
^ "U.S. Coast Guard Flags". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 26 January 2012. 
^ "The Coast Guard Ensign". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 
^ Saba, Anne (January 2000). "Tradition, Service, Honor: The Customs Ensign". U.S. Customs Today. Archived from the original on 23 October 2011. 
^ "U.S. Coast Guard Flags". 17 November 2014. Retrieved 26 February 2015. As it was intended in 1799, the ensign is displayed as a mark of authority for boardings, examinations and seizures of vessels for the purpose of enforcing the laws of the United States. The ensign is never carried as a parade or ceremony standard. 
^ Thiesen, William H., PhD (Summer 2012). "The History of the 'Racing Stripe' Emblem and Brand" (PDF). Sea History (139). 
^ "U.S. Coast Guard Coatings and Color manual" (PDF). Coast Guard Historian's Office. 16 July 1973. CG-263. 
^ "Coatings And Color Manual" (PDF). CG-612 Directives and Publications Division. 11 March 2005. COMDTINST M10360.3C. 
^ "Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked Questions - When did the Coast Guard adopt the "slash" for its cutters, boats, and aircraft?". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 14 February 2013. 
^ Semper Paratus (Sound recording). U.S. Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers Association. Archived from the original (wav) on 17 January 2013. 
^ "Pantone chart with RGB and HTML conversions" (PDF). Planet Guide. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 8 August 2013. 
^ "Uniform Regulations" (PDF). Coast Guard Historian's Office. 18 February 2009. COMDTINST M1020.6F. 
^ a b "Honoring Our Profession - Uniform Guidance and Results of Uniform Board No. 44" (txt). CGMS General Messages. ALCOAST 291/11. Retrieved 27 July 2011. 
^ Scotland, National Records of. "Tartan Details - The Scottish Register of Tartans". 
^ "Deployable Operations Group disbanded". Navy Times. Retrieved 21 January 2015. 
^ "Coast Guard Expects New Deployable Group Operating By Next Summer" (PDF). Senior Coast Guard Leadership. Retrieved 3 February 2013. [dead link]
^ "14 USC PART II—Coast Guard Reserve and Auxiliary" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. 
^ Papp, Robert J., Jr. "US Coast Guard Auxiliary Policy Statement" (PDF). Retrieved 9 August 2013. 
^ "CG Auxiliary Vessel Examiner Manual" (PDF). CG-612 Directives and Publications Division. 20 August 1996. COMDTINST M16796.2E. 
^ "33 CFR § 5.31 Power and authority" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2013. 
^ a b "SM1c Douglas Albert Munro". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 10 October 2012. 
^ "Ancient Albatross Award". Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2013. 
^ Chidlow, Nora L. "The Bird That Continues to Fly: A History of the Ancient Albatross Award" (PDF). Coast Guard Historian's Office. 
^ "Coast Guard CW Operators Association". 
^ "U.S. Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers Association". 
^ "USCG Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association". 
^ Wise, James E., Jr.; Rehill, Anne Collier (1997). Stars in Blue: Movie Actors in America's Sea Services. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press. p. 293. ISBN 1-55750-937-9. 
^ USCG Department of Public Affairs. "U.S. Coast Guard Motion Picture & Television Office (CG-0922M)". Retrieved 13 March 2017. 
^ a b c d e Commander Judd, Ralph, USCG (ret). "The Coast Guard In Film". USCG: Frequently Asked Questions. Retrieved 13 March 2017. 
^ "Coast Guard". Film. Retrieved 25 December 2009. [dead link]
^ "Coast Guard Episodes 1995, TV Show". TV Guide online. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 1 July 2014. 
^ "Coast Guard (1995–1997) TV Series - Reality-TV". Internet Movie Data Base. Amazon.com. Retrieved 1 July 2014. 
^ Brooks, James (November 12, 2011). "Kodiak Coast Guardsmen cheer their debut on national TV". Alaska Dispatch News. 
^ "The Weather Channel Greenlights New Original Series "Coast Guard Florida,"". The Futon Critic. Retrieved March 18, 2015. 
^ Lagan, Christopher (February 6, 2014). "Coast Guard Pacific Northwest will be focus of new Weather Channel series". Coast Guard All Hands. 
^ Stelter, Brian (June 24, 2010). "A Large Audience for 'Catch' Episode About Captain's Stroke". New York Times. Retrieved 14 March 2017. 
^ Bierly, Mandi (May 21, 2012). "'Deadliest Catch' shows Coast Guard rescue on the Wizard". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 14 March 2017. 
^ Hogan, Michael (3 June 2015). "Doll & Em, series 2, episode 1, review". The Telegraph. Retrieved 13 March 2017. 
^ "Powa Maka Moana". IMDb. Retrieved 3 September 2015. 
^ "Mo'o 'olelo Pu". IMDb. Retrieved 3 September 2015. 
^ Lagan, Christopher (January 10, 2011). "CGIS returns to NCIS". Coast Guard Compass. 


Further reading[edit]

Dolbow, Jim (2012). The Coast Guardsman's Manual (10th ed.). Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, Maryland. ISBN 978-1591142188. 
Coast Guard: Observations on Progress Made and Challenges Faced in Developing and Implementing a Common Operational Picture: Testimony before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation, Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, House of Representatives Government Accountability Office

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Coast Guard.



U.S. Coast Guard Website

About U.S. Coast Guard
Coast Guard Magazine
Coast Guard manuals online
Coast Guard Flags
USCG Homeport Website


Women & the U. S. Coast Guard
Coast Guard in the Federal Register
Reports on the Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security Office of Inspector General
'A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower'
U.S. Coast Guard Videos
Coast Guard Personnel Locator
All Comprehensive Security Plans for Mid and High Value Homes
How to join the U.S. Coast Guard
U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary Website
Coast Guard Channel
Coast Guard News
Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding the U.S. Coast Guard
Greg Trauthwein (17 March 2014). "USCG ... Past, Present & Future". Maritime Reporter and Marine News magazines online. Retrieved 26 February 2015. 
US Coast Guard Networked Group on LinkedIn
America's Waterway Watch
United States Coast Guard at the Wayback Machine (archived 29 January 1997)





 United States Coast Guard 






 Portal:United States Coast Guard
 Category:United States Coast Guard





Leadership



Secretary of Homeland Security
Commandant of the Coast Guard
Vice Commandant of the United States Coast Guard
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard








Organization



Missions
Reserve
Intelligence
Investigative Service
Legal Division
Police
Deployable Operations Group
Areas
Districts
Sectors
Stations

Air Stations
Radio stations
Shipbuilding Yard


National Ice Center
Research & Development Center
Coast Guard Auxiliary





Personnel and training



Personnel
Officer ranks
Enlisted rates
Ratings
Coast Guard Academy
Training Center Cape May
Training Center Petaluma
Training Center Yorktown
Maritime Law Enforcement Academy
Joint Maritime Training Center
Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl
Chaplain of the Coast Guard





Uniforms and equipment



Uniforms
Awards
Badges
Cutters
List of cutters
Ship commissioning
Ship decommissioning
Equipment





History and traditions



History
Coast Guard Act
Coast Guard City
Life-Saving Service
Revenue Cutter Service
Lighthouse Service
Steamboat Inspection Service
Bureau of Navigation
"Semper Paratus"
Flag
Ensign
Racing Stripe
United States Coast Guard Band
United States Coast Guard Ceremonial Honor Guard
United States Coast Guard Pipe Band
Fleet Week
Coast Guard service numbers
Coast Guardsman's Creed





Battles and operations



Quasi-War
War of 1812
West Indies Anti-Piracy Operations
Capture of the Bravo
Ingham Incident
Amistad Incident
Great Lakes Patrol
Mexican–American War
American Civil War
Battle of Fort Sumter
Battle of Pig Point
Battle of Galveston Harbor
Battle of Portland Harbor
Overland Relief Expedition
Spanish–American War
Battle of Manila Bay
Battle of Cárdenas
Ice Patrol
World War I
1st Battle of the Atlantic
Great Mississippi Flood
Rum Patrol
World War II
2nd Battle of the Atlantic
Battle of Guam
Operation Overlord
Korean War
Vietnam War
Coast Guard Squadron One
Operation Market Time
Operation Sealords
Action of 1 March 1968
Persian Gulf War
War on Terrorism
Afghanistan War
Iraq War
Operation Enduring Freedom HOA












v
t
e


Agencies under the United States Department of Homeland Security






Headquarters: Nebraska Avenue Complex


Elaine Duke, Acting Secretary of Homeland Security
Elaine Duke, Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security





Deputy Secretary



United States Coast Guard
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Citizenship and Immigration Services
Customs and Border Protection
Federal Emergency Management Agency
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
United States Secret Service
Office of Operations Coordination
Transportation Security Administration
Office of Health Affairs
Office of Policy
Office of Immigration Statistics
Homeland Security Advisory Council








National Protection
and Programs

National Protection and Programs Directorate

Federal Protective Service
Office of Cybersecurity and Communications
Office of Infrastructure Protection
Office of Biometric Identity Management
Office of Cyber and Infrastructure Analysis





Science and
Technology

Science and Technology Directorate

Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency
Explosives Division
Chemical and Biological Defense Division
Border and Maritime Security Division
Human Factors and Behavioral Sciences Division
Infrastructure Protection and Disaster Management Division
Cyber Security Division (National Cybersecurity Center)





Intelligence and Analysis



Office of Intelligence and Analysis





Management



Management Directorate








Law enforcement in the United States
Terrorism in the United States












v
t
e


United States Armed Forces






 Book
 Portal

A
MC
N
AF
CG


 Category

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Navbox

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Leadership



Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
Secretary of Defense
Deputy Secretary of Defense
Secretary of Homeland Security
Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security
Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Chairman
Vice Chairman


United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:

Senate
House


Active duty four-star officers
United States military seniority
National Security Act of 1947
Goldwater–Nichols Act





Organization




Service departments



Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
Navy (Secretary)
Air Force (Secretary)
Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard





Branches



Army (Chief of Staff)
Marine Corps (Commandant)
Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
Air Force (Chief of Staff)
Coast Guard (Commandant)





Reserve components



Reserves:

Army
Marine Corps Reserve
N
AF
CG


National Guard:

A
AF







Civilian auxiliaries



Military Auxiliary Radio System
Merchant Marine
Civil Air Patrol
Coast Guard Auxiliary





Unified Combatant Command



Northern
Central
European
Pacific
Southern
Africa
Special Operations
Strategic
Transportation








Structure



United States Code

Title 10
Title 14
Title 32
Title 50


The Pentagon
Installations
Units:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Logistics
Media
Unit mottoes





Operations and history



Current deployments
Conflicts
Wars
Timeline
History:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Colonial
World War II
Civil affairs
African Americans
Asian Americans
Buddhist Americans
Jewish Americans
Muslim Americans
Pakistani Americans
Sikh Americans
Historiography:

Army Center of Military History
MC History Division
Naval History and Heritage Command
Air Force Historical Research Agency


American official war artists:

Army Art Program
AF Art Program







Personnel




Training



MEPS
ASVAB
Recruit training:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Officer candidate school:

A
MC
N
AF


Warrant:

A
MC


Service academies:

A (prep)
N (prep)
AF (prep)
CG
Merchant Marine


ROTC

A:ECP
MC/N
AF


Medical
Other education





Uniforms



Uniforms:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Awards & decorations:

Inter-service
A
MC/N
AF
CG
Foreign
International
Devices


Badges:

Identification
A
MC
N
AF
CG







Ranks



Enlisted:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Warrant officers
Officer:

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Other



Oath:

Enlistment
Office


Creeds & Codes:

Code of Conduct
NCO
A
MC
N
AF
CG


Service numbers:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
Pay
Uniform Code of Military Justice
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Military Health System/TRICARE
Separation
Veterans Affairs
Conscription
Chiefs of Chaplains:

A
MC
N
AF
CG










Equipment



A
MC:

vehicles
weapons
other


N
AF
CG




Land



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles (active)





Sea



All watercraft
Ships:

A
N (active)
AF
CG
MSC


Weapons:

N
CG


Aircraft:

N
CG


Reactors





Air



Aircraft

World War I
active


Aircraft designation
Missiles
Helicopter arms





Other



Nuclear football
Electronics (designations)
Flags:

A
MC
N
AF
CG
Ensign
Jack
Guidons


Food
WMDs:

Nuclear
Biological
Chemical













Legend
A = Army
MC = Marine Corps
N = Navy
AF = Air Force
CG = Coast Guard












v
t
e


NATO Maritime Forces



Maritime forces



Albanian Naval Force
Belgian Maritime Component
Bulgarian Navy
Royal Canadian Navy
Croatian Navy
Denmark

Royal Danish Navy
Danish Naval Home Guard


Estonian Navy
France

French Navy
French Maritime Gendarmerie


German Navy
Hellenic Navy
Icelandic Coast Guard
Italian Navy
Latvian Naval Forces
Lithuanian Naval Force
Montenegrin Navy
Royal Netherlands Navy
Norway

Royal Norwegian Navy
Norwegian Home Guard Naval Component


Polish Navy
Portuguese Navy
Romanian Naval Forces
Slovenian Navy
Spain

Spanish Navy
Spanish Royal Guard "Oceanic Sea" Composite Company


Turkey

Turkish Naval Forces
Turkish Coast Guard Command


Royal British Navy
United States

United States Navy
United States Coast Guard







Land forces maritime component



Hungarian Ground Forces
United States Army Transportation Corps





Air forces maritime component



United States Air Force maritime forces












v
t
e


NATO Air Forces



Air forces



Albanian Air Force
Belgian Air Component
Bulgarian Air Force
Royal Canadian Air Force
Croatian Air Force and Air Defence
Czech Air Force
Denmark

Royal Danish Air Force
Danish Air Force Home Guard


Estonian Air Force
France

French Air Force
French Air Gendarmerie


Germany

German Air Force
German Cyber and Information Space Command


Hellenic Air Force
Hungarian Air Force
Italian Air Force
Latvian Air Force
Lituania

Lithuanian Air Force
Lithuanian Special Operations Force Air Force Special Operations Element


Montenegrin Air Force
Royal Netherlands Air Force
Norway

Royal Norwegian Air Force
Norwegian Cyber Defence Force


Polish Air Force
Portuguese Air Force
Romanian Air Force
Slovak Air Force
Slovenian Air Force and Air Defence
Spain

Spanish Air Force
Spanish Royal Guard "Plus Ultra" Squadron


Turkish Air Force
British Royal Air Force
United States Air Force





Maritime forces aviation



Bulgarian Naval Aviation
French Naval Aviation
German Naval Aviation
Hellenic Navy Fleet Air Arm
Icelandic Coast Guard Aeronautical Division
Italy

Italian Navy Aviation
Italian Coast Guard Air Service


Netherlands Naval Aviation Service
Polish Naval Aviation Brigade
Portuguese Naval Aviation
Romanian Naval Forces Aviation
Spanish Naval Air Arm
Turkey

Turkish Naval Forces Aviation Command
Turkish Coast Guard Aviation Command


British Royal Navy Fleet Air Arm
United States of America

United States Marine Corps Aviation
United States Naval Air Forces
United States Coast Guard Aviation







Land forces aviation



France

French Army Light Aviation
National Gendarmerie Aviation


German Army Aviation Corps
Hellenic Army Aviation
Italy

Italian Army Aviation Command
Aerial Service of the Carabinieri Corps


Lithuanian National Defence Volunteer Forces, Aviation Unit
Polish Land Forces Aviation
Spanish Army Airmobile Force
Turkey

Turkish Land Forces Aviation Command
Turkish Gendarmerie Aviation Command


British Army Air Corps
United States Army Aviation Branch












v
t
e


Federal law enforcement agencies of the United States



Department of Commerce



Office of Export Enforcement
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - Fisheries: Office for Law Enforcement





Department of Defense







Defense Criminal Investigative Service
Department of Defense police
Defense Logistics Agency Police
Pentagon Force Protection Agency (Pentagon Police)
National Security Agency Police





Army Department



Intelligence and Security Command
Criminal Investigation Command
US Army Military Police Corps
Department of the Army Police|Army Department Police
Corrections Command





Navy Department



Naval Criminal Investigative Service
Marine Corps Criminal Investigation Division
Master-at-Arms
Marine Corps Police
Naval Academy Police





Air Force Department



Office of Special Investigations
Security Forces
Air Force Police








Department of
Health and Human Services



United States Food and Drug Administration (Office of Criminal Investigations)
National Institutes of Health Police





Department of
Homeland Security



Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
United States Coast Guard

Investigative Service
Coast Guard Police


Customs and Border Protection
Federal Protective Service
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
United States Secret Service
Transportation Security Administration

Office of Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service







Department of
the Interior



Bureau of Indian Affairs Police
Bureau of Land Management: Office of Law Enforcement
Hoover Dam Police
National Park Service

Rangers
United States Park Police


Fish and Wildlife Service: Office of Law Enforcement
National Wildlife Refuge System: Division of Refuge Law Enforcement





Department of Justice



Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
Drug Enforcement Administration
Federal Bureau of Investigation

FBI Police


Federal Bureau of Prisons
United States Marshals Service





Department of State



Bureau of Diplomatic Security

Diplomatic Security Service
Office of Foreign Missions







Department of Transportation



United States Merchant Marine Academy Department of Public Safety





Department of the Treasury



Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
Bureau of Engraving and Printing Police
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigation Division
United States Mint Police








U.S. Forest Service: Law Enforcement and Investigations

USDA


Department of Veterans Affairs Police
Office of Secure Transportation

DOE







United States Congress



Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives
Sergeant at Arms of the Senate
United States Capitol Police
Government Printing Office Police





Judicial branch



U.S. Probation and Pretrial Services System
Marshal of the United States Supreme Court (Supreme Court Police)





Other federal law
enforcement agencies



Amtrak Police
Central Intelligence Agency Security Protective Service
Environmental Protection Agency Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance
Federal Reserve Police
National Zoological Park Police
Postal Inspection Service (U.S. Postal Police)
Smithsonian Institution Office of Protection Services












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American civil rights movement 1865–1896 / 1896–1954 / 1954–1968
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Coast guards



Africa



Egypt





Asia



 Bangladesh
 China
 India
Indonesia
 Japan
Malaysia
Maldives
Pakistan (Coast Guard·MSA)
 Philippines
 Singapore
 South Korea
 Sri Lanka
 Taiwan
United Arab Emirates
 Vietnam
 Yemen





Europe



 Albania
 Croatia
 Cyprus
 France
 Germany
 Greece
 Iceland
Ireland
Isle of Man
 Italy
Jersey
 Netherlands (Caribbean)
Norway (Coast Guard·Society for Sea Rescue)
 Romania
 Russia
 Sweden
 Turkey
 Ukraine
United Kingdom (Coast Guard· Border Force)





North America



Barbados
Belize
 Canada
Haiti
Mexico
United States of America ( Coast Guard· Auxiliary· CBP)





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand





South America



 Argentina
 Peru












v
t
e


Alexander Hamilton






Senior Officer of the United States Army, 1799–1800
1st Secretary of the Treasury, 1789–1795
Delegate, Congress of the Confederation, 1782–1783, 1788–1789





United States
founding events



A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress (1774)
The Farmer Refuted (1775)
Delegate, 1786 Annapolis Convention
Delegate, 1787 Constitutional Convention
Initiated, main author, The Federalist Papers

written by Hamilton


Founding Father





Secretary of
the Treasury



First Bank of the United States
Revenue Marine (United States Coast Guard)
United States Customs Service
Hamiltonian economic program
Residence Act

Compromise of 1790


"First Report on the Public Credit", 1790
Funding Act of 1790
"Operations of the Act Laying Duties on Imports", 1790
"Second Report on Public Credit", a.k.a. "Report on a National Bank", 1790
"Report On Manufactures", 1791
Tariff of 1790
Tariff of 1792
Coinage Act of 1792

United States Mint


Whiskey Rebellion
Jay Treaty





Military career



New York Provincial Company of Artillery
In the Revolutionary War
Battles: Harlem Heights
White Plains
Trenton
General Washington's Aide-de-Camp
Princeton
Brandywine
Germantown
Monmouth
Siege of Yorktown





Other events



Burr–Hamilton duel
Founder, Federalist Party

Federalist Era


Founder, Bank of New York
Bank of North America
Advisor, George Washington's Farewell Address
President-General of the Society of the Cincinnati
Founder, New-York Evening Post
Hamilton–Reynolds sex scandal
Rutgers v. Waddington
Relationship with slavery





Depictions
and memorials



Alexander Hamilton (Fraser statue)
Alexander Hamilton (Ceracchi bust)
Alexander Hamilton (Conrads statue)
Alexander Hamilton (Trumbull portrait)
Alexander Hamilton Bridge
Alexander Hamilton High School (Los Angeles)
Fort Hamilton
Hamilton Grange National Memorial
Hamilton Hall (Columbia University)
Hamilton Hall (Salem, Massachusetts)
Hamilton Heights, Manhattan
Hamilton, Ohio
Hamilton-Oneida Academy
Postage stamps
Trinity Church Cemetery
United States ten-dollar bill





Media and
popular culture



Hamilton (2015 musical)
Hamilton (1917 play)
Alexander Hamilton (1931 film)
Liberty! (1997 documentary series)
Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
John Adams (2008 miniseries)





Related



Age of Enlightenment
American Enlightenment
American Philosophical Society
Liberty Hall (New Jersey)
New York Manumission Society

African Free School


"American System" economic plan

American School


American Revolution

patriots







Family



Elizabeth Schuyler Hamilton

wife
Schuyler family


Philip Hamilton (oldest son)
Angelica Hamilton (daughter)
Alexander Hamilton Jr. (son)
James Alexander Hamilton (son)
John Church Hamilton (son)
William S. Hamilton (son)
Eliza Hamilton Holly (daughter)
Philip Hamilton (youngest son)
Schuyler Hamilton (grandson)
Alexander Hamilton Jr. (grandson)
Allan McLane Hamilton (grandson)
Robert Ray Hamilton (great-grandson)









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 154411282
LCCN: n80125851
ISNI: 0000 0001 2364 4587
GND: 13011-4
BNF: cb120183530 (data)
BIBSYS: 90323419











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Coast_Guard&oldid=818523088"					Categories: 1915 establishments in the United StatesCoast guardsGendarmerieOrganizations based in Washington, D.C.Sea rescue organisationsUniformed services of the United StatesUnited States Coast GuardUnited States Department of Homeland SecurityHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2011Articles with dead external links from August 2013Articles with dead external links from June 2016Use dmy dates from September 2015Articles containing explicitly cited English-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2014All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2016Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiers