"USFS" redirects here. For the figure skating organization, see U.S. Figure Skating. For the other U.S. Government branch, see United States Foreign Service.
This article is about a division of the United States Department of Agriculture. For agriculture extensions in general, see Agricultural extension.

United States Forest Service


Logo of the U.S. Forest Service




Flag of the U.S. Forest Service



Agency overview


Formed
February 1, 1905; 112 years ago (1905-02-01)


Preceding agency



Bureau of Forestry





Jurisdiction
Federal government of the United States


Headquarters
Sidney R. Yates Building
1400 Independence Ave SW
Washington, D.C.


Employees
c. 35,000 (FY16)[1]
28,330 Permanent
4,488 Seasonal FY08


Annual budget
$5.806 billion (FY08)


Minister responsible



Robert Bonnie, Under Secretary of Agriculture for Natural Resources and Environment





Agency executives



Tony Tooke, Chief
Dan Jiron, Deputy Chief





Parent agency
U.S. Department of Agriculture


Website
www.fs.fed.us


Footnotes


[2]


The United States Forest Service (USFS) is an agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture that administers the nation's 154 national forests and 20 national grasslands, which encompass 193 million acres (780,000 km2). Major divisions of the agency include the National Forest System, State and Private Forestry, Business Operations, and the Research and Development branch.[3] Managing approximately 25% of federal lands, it is the only major national land agency that is outside the U.S. Department of the Interior.[4]



Contents


1 History
2 Organization

2.1 Overview
2.2 National
2.3 Research Stations and Research Work Units
2.4 Regions
2.5 National Forest or Grassland
2.6 Ranger District


3 Major divisions

3.1 Law Enforcement & Investigations
3.2 National Forest System
3.3 State and Private Forestry
3.4 Research and Development
3.5 International Programs


4 Activities

4.1 Fighting fires


5 Budget
6 Popular culture
7 Controversies
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the United States Forest Service
The concept of the National Forests was born from Theodore Roosevelt’s conservation group, Boone and Crockett Club, due to concerns regarding Yellowstone National Park beginning as early as 1875.[5] In 1876, Congress created the office of Special Agent in the Department of Agriculture to assess the quality and conditions of forests in the United States. Franklin B. Hough was appointed the head of the office. In 1881, the office was expanded into the newly formed Division of Forestry. The Forest Reserve Act of 1891 authorized withdrawing land from the public domain as "forest reserves," managed by the Department of the Interior. In 1901, the Division of Forestry was renamed the Bureau of Forestry. The Transfer Act of 1905 transferred the management of forest reserves from the General Land Office of the Interior Department to the Bureau of Forestry, henceforth known as the United States Forest Service. Gifford Pinchot was the first United States Chief Forester in the Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt.
Significant federal legislation affecting the Forest Service includes the Weeks Act of 1911, the Multiple Use – Sustained Yield Act of 1960, P.L. 86-517; the Wilderness Act, P.L. 88-577; the National Forest Management Act, P.L. 94-588; the National Environmental Policy Act, P.L. 91-190; the Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act, P.L. 95-313; and the Forest and Rangelands Renewable Resources Planning Act, P.L. 95-307.
In February 2009, the Government Accountability Office evaluated whether the Forest Service should be moved from the Department of Agriculture to the Department of the Interior, which already includes the National Park Service, the Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Bureau of Land Management, managing some 438,000,000 acres (1,770,000 km2) of public land.[4]
Organization[edit]
Overview[edit]
As of 2009, the Forest Service has a total budget authority of $5.5 billion, of which 42% is spent fighting fires. The Forest Service employs 34,250 employees in 750 locations, including 10,050 firefighters, 737 law enforcement personnel, and 500 scientists.[6]
The mission of the Forest Service is "To sustain the health, diversity, and productivity of the Nation's forests and grasslands to meet the needs of present and future generations."[6] Its motto is "Caring for the land and serving people." As the lead federal agency in natural resource conservation, the US Forest Service provides leadership in the protection, management, and use of the nation's forest, rangeland, and aquatic ecosystems. The agency's ecosystem approach to management integrates ecological, economic, and social factors to maintain and enhance the quality of the environment to meet current and future needs. Through implementation of land and resource management plans, the agency ensures sustainable ecosystems by restoring and maintaining species diversity and ecological productivity that helps provide recreation, water, timber, minerals, fish, wildlife, wilderness, and aesthetic values for current and future generations of people.[7]
The everyday work of the Forest Service balances resource extraction, resource protection, and providing recreation. The work includes managing 193,000,000 acres (780,000 km2) of national forest and grasslands, including 59,000,000 acres (240,000 km2) of roadless areas; 14,077 recreation sites; 143,346 miles (230,693 km) of trails; 374,883 miles (603,316 km) of roads; and the harvesting of 1.5 billion trees per year.[6] Further, the Forest Service fought fires on 2,996,000 acres (12,120 km2) of land in 2007.[6]
The Forest Service organization includes ranger districts, national forests, regions, research stations and research work units and the Northeastern Area Office for State and Private Forestry. Each level has responsibility for a variety of functions.
National[edit]
The Chief of the Forest Service is a career federal employee who oversees the entire agency. The Chief reports to the Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment in the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), an appointee of the President confirmed by the Senate. The Chief's staff provides broad policy and direction for the agency, works with the Administration to develop a budget to submit to Congress, provides information to Congress on accomplishments, and monitors activities of the agency. There are five deputy chiefs for the following areas: National Forest System, State and Private Forestry, Research and Development, Business Operations, and Finance.
Research Stations and Research Work Units[edit]




The Forest Products Laboratory, in Madison, Wisconsin.


The Forest Service Research and Development deputy area includes five research stations, the Forest Products Laboratory, and the International Institute of Tropical Forestry, in Puerto Rico. Station directors, like regional foresters, report to the Chief. Research stations include Northern, Pacific Northwest, Pacific Southwest, Rocky Mountain, and Southern. There are 92 research work units located at 67 sites throughout the United States. there are 80 Experimental Forests and Ranges that have been established progressively since 1908; many sites are more than 50 years old. The system provides places for long-term science and management studies in major vegetation types of the 195 million acres (790,000 km2) of public land administered by the Forest Service. Individual sites range from 47 to 22,500 ha in size.
Operations of Experimental Forests and Ranges are directed by local research teams for the individual sites, by Research Stations for the regions in which they are located, and at the level of the Forest Service.
Major themes in research at the Experimental Forests and Ranges includes: develop of systems for managing and restoring forests, range lands, and watersheds; investigate the workings of forest and stream ecosystems; characterize plant and animal communities; observe and interpret long-term environmental change and many other themes.
Regions[edit]




Map of the nine regions


There are nine regions in the USDA Forest Service; numbered 1 through 10 (Region 7 was eliminated in 1965 when the current Eastern Region was created from the former Eastern and North Central regions.[8] ). Each encompasses a broad geographic area and is headed by a regional forester who reports directly to the Chief. The regional forester has broad responsibility for coordinating activities among the various forests within the region, for providing overall leadership for regional natural resource and social programs, and for coordinated regional land use planning.

Northern Region: based in Missoula, Montana, the Northern Region (R1) covers six states (Montana, Northern Idaho, North Dakota, Northwestern South Dakota, Northeast Washington, and Northwest Wyoming), twelve National Forests and one National Grassland.
Rocky Mountain: based in Golden, Colorado, the Rocky Mountain Region (R2) covers five states (Colorado, Nebraska, Kansas and most of Wyoming and South Dakota), sixteen National Forests and seven National Grasslands.
Southwestern: based in Albuquerque, New Mexico, the Southwestern Region (R3) covers two states (New Mexico and Arizona) and eleven National Forests.
Intermountain: based in Ogden, Utah, the Intermountain Region (R4) covers four states (Southern Idaho, Nevada, Utah and Western Wyoming), twelve national forests.
Pacific Southwest: based in Vallejo, California, The Pacific Southwest Region (R5) covers two states (California and Hawaii), eighteen National Forests and one Management Unit.
Pacific Northwest: based in Portland, Oregon the Pacific Northwest Region (R6) covers two states (Washington and Oregon), seventeen National Forests and one National Scenic Area.
Southern: based in Atlanta, Georgia, the Southern Region (R8) covers thirteen states (Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North and South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Oklahoma and Virginia; and Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands), and thirty-four National Forests.
Eastern: based in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, the Eastern Region (R9) covers twenty states (Maine, Illinois, Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Indiana, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Maryland, New York, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Vermont, New Hampshire, Delaware, and New Jersey), seventeen National Forests, one Grassland and America's Outdoors Center for Conservation, Recreation, and Resources.
Alaska: based in Juneau, Alaska, the Alaska Region (R10) covers one state (Alaska), and two National Forests.

National Forest or Grassland[edit]
Further information: List of U.S. National Forests and United States National Grassland
The Forest Service oversees 155 national forests and 20 grasslands. Each administrative unit typically comprises several ranger districts, under the overall direction of a forest supervisor. Within the supervisor's office, the staff coordinates activities among districts, allocates the budget, and provides technical support to each district. Forest supervisors are line officers and report to regional foresters.
Ranger District[edit]
The Forest Service has over 600 ranger districts. Each district has a staff of 10 to 100 people under the direction of a district ranger, a line officer who reports to a forest supervisor. The districts vary in size from 50,000 acres (200 km2) to more than 1 million acres (4,000 km2). Most on-the-ground activities occur on ranger districts, including trail construction and maintenance, operation of campgrounds, and management of vegetation and wildlife habitat.[3]
Major divisions[edit]
Law Enforcement & Investigations[edit]




Patch of the Law Enforcement & Investigations unit






A horse patrol of the Law Enforcement & Investigations unit


The U.S. Forest Service Law Enforcement & Investigations unit (LEI), headquartered in Washington, D.C., is a federal law enforcement agency of the U.S. government. It is responsible for enforcement of federal laws and regulations governing national forest lands and resources. All Law Enforcement Officers and Special Agents Receive their training through Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC).
Operations are divided into two major functional areas:

Law enforcement: uniformed, high-visibility enforcement of laws
Investigations: special agents who investigate crimes against property, visitors, and employees

Uniformed Law Enforcement Officers (LEOs) enforce federal laws and regulations governing national forest lands and resources. LEOs also enforce some or all state laws on National Forest Lands. As part of that mission, LEOs carry firearms, defensive equipment, make arrests, execute search warrants, complete reports, and testify in court. They establish a regular and recurring presence on a vast amount of public lands, roads, and recreation sites. The primary focus of their jobs is the protection of natural resources, protection of Forest Service employees and the protection of visitors. To cover the vast and varied terrain under their jurisdiction, they use Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptors, special service SUVs, horses, K-9 units, helicopters, snowmobiles, dirt bikes, and boats.
Special Agents are criminal investigators who plan and conduct investigations concerning possible violations of criminal and administrative provisions of the Forest Service and other statues under the United States Code. Special agents are normally plainclothes officers who carry concealed firearms, and other defensive equipment, make arrests, carry out complex criminal investigations, present cases for prosecution to U.S. Attorneys, and prepare investigative reports. All field agents are required to travel a great deal and usually maintain a case load of ten to fifteen ongoing criminal investigations at one time. Criminal investigators occasionally conduct internal and civil claim investigations.
National Forest System[edit]




Forest Service team uses a 106 mm Recoilless Rifle for avalanche control at Mammoth Mountain in the Inyo National Forest in California. Note the Minarets in background.


The 193 million acres (780,000 km2) of public land that are managed as national forests and grasslands are collectively known as the National Forest System. These lands are located in 44 states, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands and comprise about 9% of the total land area in the United States. The lands are organized into 155 national forests and 20 national grasslands. The mission of the National Forest System is to protect and manage the forest lands so they best demonstrate the sustainable multiple-use management concept, using an ecological approach, to meet the diverse needs of people.
State and Private Forestry[edit]
The mission of the State and Private Forestry program is to provide technical and financial assistance to private landowners, state agencies, tribes, and community resource managers to help sustain the United States' urban and rural forests and to protect communities and the environment from wildland fires, insects, disease, and invasive plants. The program employs approximately 537 staff located at 17 sites throughout the country. The delivery of the State and Private Forestry program is carried out by eight National Forest System regions and the Northeastern Area.
Research and Development[edit]




The U.S. Forest Service R&D lab in Olympia, Washington


The research and development (R&D) arm of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service works to improve the health and use of the United States' forests and grasslands. Research has been part of the Forest Service mission since the agency's inception in 1905. Today, Forest Service researchers work in a range of biological, physical, and social science fields to promote sustainable management of United States' diverse forests and rangelands. Research employs about 550 scientists and several hundred technical and support staff, located at 67 sites throughout the United States and in Puerto Rico. Discovery and technology development and transfer is carried out through seven research stations.
Research focuses on informing policy and land management decisions and includes addressing invasive insects, degraded river ecosystems, or sustainable ways to harvest forest products. The researchers work independently and with a range of partners, including other agencies, academia, nonprofit groups, and industry. The information and technology produced through basic and applied science programs is available to the public for its benefit and use.
In addition to the Research Stations, the USFS R&D branch also leads several National Centers such as the National Genomics Center for Wildlife and Fish Conservation.
International Programs[edit]
The Forest Service plays a key role in formulating policy and coordinating U.S. support for the protection and sound management of the world's forest resources. It works closely with other agencies such as USAID, the State Department, and the Environmental Protection Agency, as well as with nonprofit development organizations, wildlife organizations, universities, and international assistance organizations. The Forest Service's international work serves to link people and communities striving to protect and manage forests throughout the world. The program also promotes sustainable land management overseas and brings important technologies and innovations back to the United States. The program focuses on conserving key natural resource in cooperation with countries across the world.
Activities[edit]




More than 80% of the 193 million acres (780,000 km2) of land managed by the United States Forest Service is in the western states. This map shows USFS lands as a percentage of total land area in each state.[9]


Although a large volume of timber is logged every year, not all National Forests are entirely forested. There are tidewater glaciers in the Tongass National Forest in Alaska and ski areas such as Alta, Utah in the Wasatch-Cache National Forest. In addition, the Forest Service is responsible for managing National Grasslands in the midwest. Furthermore, areas designated as wilderness by acts of Congress, prohibit logging, mining, road and building construction and land leases for purposes of farming and or livestock grazing.
Since 1978, several Presidents have directed the USFS to administer National Monuments inside of preexisting National Forests.

Admiralty Island National Monument – Alaska
Giant Sequoia National Monument – California
Misty Fjords National Monument – Alaska
Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument – Washington
Newberry National Volcanic Monument – Oregon
Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains National Monument – California (jointly with the Bureau of Land Management)

The Forest Service also manages Grey Towers National Historic Site in Milford, Pennsylvania, the home and estate of its first Chief, Gifford Pinchot.
Fighting fires[edit]
See also: History of wildfire suppression in the United States




Smokey Bear poster


In August 1944, to reduce the number of forest fires, the Forest Service and the Wartime Advertising Council began distributing fire education posters featuring a black bear. The poster campaign was a success; the black bear would later be named "Smokey Bear", and would, for decades, be the "spokesbear" for the Forest Service. Smokey Bear has appeared in innumerable TV commercials; his popular catch phrase, "Only YOU can prevent forest fires", is one of the most widely recognized slogans in the United States. A recent study found that 95% of the people surveyed could complete the phrase when given the first few words.[10][not in citation given]
In September 2000, the Departments of Agriculture and the Interior developed a plan to respond to the fires of 2000, to reduce the impacts of these wildland fires on rural communities, and to ensure sufficient firefighting resources in the future. The report is entitled "Managing the Impacts of Wildfire on Communities and the Environment: A Report to the President In Response to the Wildfires of 2000"—The National Fire Plan for short. The National Fire Plan continues to be an integral part of the Forest Service today. The following are important operational features of the National Fire Plan:

Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy: The 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and the subsequent 2001 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy act as the foundation of the National Fire Plan.
Basic Premise of the National Fire Plan: Investing now in an optimal firefighting force, hazardous fuels reduction, and overall community protection will provide for immediate protection and future cost savings.
Funding: Initially (2001), the National Fire Plan provided for an additional $1,100,994,000 for the Forest Service for a total wildland fire management budget of $1,910,193,000. In 2008, the total amount for the Forest Service in wildland fire management (not including emergency fire suppression funding) is $1,974,276,000.

In August 2014, Tom Vilsack, the Secretary of Agriculture, announced that the agency will have to put $400 to $500 million in wildfire prevention projects on hold because funding for firefighting is running low as the fiscal year ends. The decision is meant to preserve resources for fighting active fires burning in California, Oregon, Washington and Idaho. Politicians of both parties have indicated that they believe the current funding structure is broken, but they have not agreed on steps to fix the funding allocation.[11]
Budget[edit]
Although part of the Department of Agriculture, the Forest Service receives its budget through the Subcommittee on Appropriations—Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies.


Appropriations Title (in thousands of dollars)
FY 2011[12]
FY 2012[12]
FY 2013[13]
FY 2014[13]
FY 2015[1]


Research
306,637
295,300
279,854
292,805
296,000


State and Private Forestry
277,596
252,926
239,696
229,980
232,653


National Forest System
1,542,248
1,554,137
1,455,341
1,496,330
1,494,330


Wildland Fire Management
2,168,042
1,974,467
1,868,795
2,162,302
2,333,298


Capital Improvement and Maintenance
472,644
394,089
358,510
350,000
360,374


Land Acquisition
33,982
53,701
50,665
44,654
48,666


Other Appropriations
5,179
5,875
4,821
5,540
4,865


Subtotal, Discretionary Appropriations *
5,096,746
4,845,876
4,936,514
5,496,611
5,073,246


Subtotal, Permanent Appropriations
627,234
581,595
507,631
566,231
293,316


Total Forest Service
$5,858,615
$5,584,586
$5,749,146
$6,264,941
$5,547,812


* Discretionary Appropriations includes Regular Appropriations plus Supplemental and Emergency Appropriations.


Popular culture[edit]




Lassie with Robert Bray as U.S. Forest Ranger Corey Stuart


The U.S. Forest Service achieved widespread awareness during the 1960s, as it became the setting for the long running classic TV show Lassie, with storylines focusing on Lassie's adventures with various forest rangers.[14]
The iconic collie's association with the Forest Service led to Lassie receiving numerous awards and citations from the U.S. Senate and the Department of Agriculture, and was partly responsible for a bill regarding soil and water pollution that was signed into law in early 1968 by President Lyndon Johnson, which was dubbed by some as "The Lassie Program".[14][15][16]
Controversies[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The history of the Forest Service has been fraught with controversy, as various interests and national values have grappled with the appropriate management of the many resources within the forests. These values and resources include grazing, timber, mining, recreation, wildlife habitat, and wilderness. Because of continuing development elsewhere, the large size of National Forests have made them de facto wildlife reserves for a number of rare and common species. In recent decades, the importance of mature forest for the spotted owl and a number of other species led to great changes in timber harvest levels.
In the 1990s, the agency was involved in scandal when it illegally provided surplus military aircraft to private contractors for use as airtankers. (See U.S. Forest Service airtanker scandal.)
Another controversial issue is the policy on road building within the National Forests. In 1999, President Clinton ordered a temporary moratorium on new road construction in the National Forests to "assess their ecological, economic, and social values and to evaluate long-term options for their management."[17] Five and half years later, the Bush administration replaced this with a system where each state could petition the Forest Service to open forests in their territory to road building.
Some years the agency actually loses money on its timber sales.[18]
A 2017 draft report describing the legal basis which provides federal land managers a scope of decisionmaking authority exeeding that of state fish and game departments has proven unexpectedly controversial.[19]
See also[edit]


United States portal



Forests of the United States
National Forest Foundation
List of legislation governing the United States Forest Service
American Experience (season 27) "The Big Burn" (2014)
Notable Members of the U.S. Forest Service




Gifford Pinchot
Theodore Woolsey
Franklin B. Hough
Aldo Leopold
Raphael Zon
Michael Dombeck
Ed Pulaski
Annie E. Hoyle
Jack Ward Thomas



References[edit]


^ a b "Fiscal Year 2016 Budget Overview" (PDF). USFS. p. 2. Retrieved 2015-08-17. 
^ "Office of the Chief". Agency Leadership. US Forest Service. 
^ a b  This article incorporates public domain material from the United States Forest Service document "Agency Organization".
^ a b General Accounting Office (February 11, 2009). "Federal Land Management: Observations on a Possible Move of the Forest Service into the Department of the Interior". 
^ Sheldon, William G. "History of the Boone and Crockett Club Pg 64-80". Scholar Works, University of Montana. Boone and Crockett Club. Retrieved 1 February 2017. 
^ a b c d "The U.S. Forest Service - An Overview" (PDF). U.S. Forest Service. 
^ Heinrich, Bernd (December 20, 2009). "Clear-Cutting the Truth About Trees". The New York Times. Retrieved May 26, 2010. 
^ The Land We Cared for... A History of the Forest Service's Eastern Region. 1997, Conrad, David E., Forest Service.
^ "Western States Data Public Land Acreage". wildlandfire.com. 
^ "The Story of Smokey Bear". United States Forest Service. Archived from the original on 2010-11-29. Retrieved 2008-01-26. 
^ Freking, Kevin. "MONEY ALLOCATED FOR FIGHTING FIRES TO RUN OUT". Associated Press. Retrieved 6 August 2014. 
^ a b "Fiscal Year 2013 Budget Overview" (PDF). USFS. 
^ a b "Fiscal Year 2015 Budget Overview" (PDF). USFS. 
^ a b "Lassie Television Series". That's Entertainment. 7 February 2013. Retrieved 13 March 2013. 
^ "Awards". The Lassie Network. Archived from the original on 2013-07-14. Retrieved 2013-08-09. 
^ "Finding Aid for the Edmund S. Muskie Papers, Series XV: Moving images 1948-2000MC105.15". bates.edu. 
^ "Home". Roadless Area Conservation. US Forest Service. 
^ "Taxpayers Losing Money to Loggers on U.S. Land, Forest Service Admits". Los Angeles Times. November 22, 1997. Retrieved 2009-04-03. 
^ Chaney, Rob (2017-09-25). "Forest Service tried to quash paper debunking Montana wildlife authority". Missoulian. Retrieved 2017-09-25. 


Further reading[edit]

History sources


USDA Forest Service – The First Century
100 Years of Federal Forestry
History of the Boone and Crockett Club Pg 64-80
Egan, Timothy (2009). The Big Burn: Teddy Roosevelt & the Fire That Saved America. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-618-96841-1. 
The short film "Visions of the wild (1985)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive


Research


Historic technical reports from the Forest Service (and other Federal agencies) are available in the Technical Report Archive and Image Library (TRAIL)
"USDA Forest Service Research Publications". Retrieved January 23, 2006. 


Education


The Greatest Good documentary
"The Greatest Good:100years"
Smokey Bear
Wildlife Crossings Toolkit The Wildlife Crossings Toolkit provides information for terrestrial biologists, engineers, and transportation professionals to assist in maintaining or restoring habitat connectivity across transportation infrastructure on public lands.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Forest Service.



Official website
Works by United States Forest Service at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about United States Forest Service at Internet Archive







v
t
e


United States government agencies involved in environmental science






Environmental Protection Agency
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Global Change Research Program
Smithsonian Institution
National Science Foundation





Department of the Interior



National Park Service
United States Fish and Wildlife Service
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Bureau of Land Management
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement
Bureau of Reclamation
Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation, and Enforcement
United States Geological Survey
Office of Insular Affairs





Department of Commerce



National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
National Weather Service
National Ocean Service
National Geodetic Survey
National Marine Fisheries Service
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research





Department of Energy



Office of Science
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
National Laboratories
Office of Environmental Management





Department of Agriculture



Farm Service Agency
Foreign Agricultural Service
United States Forest Service
Natural Resources Conservation Service
National Water and Climate Center
Rural Utilities Service
Food and Nutrition Service
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
Agricultural Research Service
Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service





Department of Homeland Security



United States Coast Guard
Directorate for Science and Technology





Department of Health
and Human Services



National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences





Department of Defense



Office of Naval Research
Air Force Research Laboratory
United States Army Research, Development and Engineering Command












v
t
e


 Agencies under the United States Department of Agriculture






Headquarters: Jamie L. Whitten Building


Sonny Perdue, Secretary of Agriculture
Stephen Censky, Deputy Secretary of Agriculture





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Natural Resources and Environment



Forest Service
Office of Environmental Markets








Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Rural Development*



Rural Housing Service
Rural Utilities Service
Rural Business-Cooperative Service





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services



Food and Nutrition Service
Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Food Safety



Food Safety and Inspection Service





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Research, Education, and Economics



Agricultural Research Service
Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service
Economic Research Service
National Agricultural Library
National Agricultural Statistics Service
National Institute of Food and Agriculture





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Marketing and Regulatory Programs



Agricultural Marketing Service
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Trade and Foreign Agricultural Affairs**



Foreign Agricultural Service
Commodity Credit Corporation





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Farm Production and Conservation**



Farm Service Agency
Risk Management Agency
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation
Natural Resources Conservation Service





Office of the Chief Financial Officer



National Finance Center






*Reports directly to the Secretary of Agriculture
**Created from Under Secretary of Agriculture for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services










v
t
e


Federal law enforcement agencies of the United States



Department of Commerce



Office of Export Enforcement
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - Fisheries: Office for Law Enforcement





Department of Defense







Defense Criminal Investigative Service
Department of Defense police
Defense Logistics Agency Police
Pentagon Force Protection Agency (Pentagon Police)
National Security Agency Police





Army Department



Intelligence and Security Command
Criminal Investigation Command
US Army Military Police Corps
Department of the Army Police|Army Department Police
Corrections Command





Navy Department



Naval Criminal Investigative Service
Marine Corps Criminal Investigation Division
Master-at-Arms
Marine Corps Police
Naval Academy Police





Air Force Department



Office of Special Investigations
Security Forces
Air Force Police








Department of
Health and Human Services



United States Food and Drug Administration (Office of Criminal Investigations)
National Institutes of Health Police





Department of
Homeland Security



Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
United States Coast Guard

Investigative Service
Coast Guard Police


Customs and Border Protection
Federal Protective Service
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
United States Secret Service
Transportation Security Administration

Office of Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service







Department of
the Interior



Bureau of Indian Affairs Police
Bureau of Land Management: Office of Law Enforcement
Hoover Dam Police
National Park Service

Rangers
United States Park Police


Fish and Wildlife Service: Office of Law Enforcement
National Wildlife Refuge System: Division of Refuge Law Enforcement





Department of Justice



Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
Drug Enforcement Administration
Federal Bureau of Investigation

FBI Police


Federal Bureau of Prisons
United States Marshals Service





Department of State



Bureau of Diplomatic Security

Diplomatic Security Service
Office of Foreign Missions







Department of Transportation



United States Merchant Marine Academy Department of Public Safety





Department of the Treasury



Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
Bureau of Engraving and Printing Police
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigation Division
United States Mint Police








U.S. Forest Service: Law Enforcement and Investigations

USDA


Department of Veterans Affairs Police
Office of Secure Transportation

DOE







United States Congress



Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives
Sergeant at Arms of the Senate
United States Capitol Police
Government Printing Office Police





Judicial branch



U.S. Probation and Pretrial Services System
Marshal of the United States Supreme Court (Supreme Court Police)





Other federal law
enforcement agencies



Amtrak Police
Central Intelligence Agency Security Protective Service
Environmental Protection Agency Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance
Federal Reserve Police
National Zoological Park Police
Postal Inspection Service (U.S. Postal Police)
Smithsonian Institution Office of Protection Services












v
t
e


U.S. National Trails System



National Geologic Trail



Ice Age Floods Trail





National Historic Trails




Scenic motor routes



California Trail
El Camino Real de los Tejas Trail
El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro
Juan Bautista de Anza Trail
Mormon Trail
Nez Perce Trail
Old Spanish Trail
Oregon Trail
Pony Express Trail
Santa Fe Trail
Selma to Montgomery Trail
Trail of Tears





Natural surface trails



Ala Kahakai Trail
Iditarod Trail





Water trails



Captain John Smith Chesapeake Trail





Combination



Lewis and Clark Trail (motor & land & water)
Overmountain Victory Trail (motor & land)
Star-Spangled Banner Trail (motor & water)
Washington–Rochambeau Revolutionary Route (motor & water)








National Scenic Trails



Appalachian Trail
Arizona Trail
Continental Divide Trail
New England Trail
Florida Trail
Ice Age Trail
Natchez Trace Trail
North Country Trail
Pacific Crest Trail
Pacific Northwest Trail
Potomac Heritage Trail





National Water Trails



Alabama Scenic River Trail
Bronx River Blueway
Chattahoochee River Water Trail
Hudson River Greenway Water Trail
Island Loop Route
Kansas River Trail
Mississippi National River and Recreation Area Water Trail
Mississippi River Water Trail (MRWT) Great River Water Trail
Missouri National Recreational River Water Trail
Okefenokee Wilderness Canoe Trails
Red Rock Water Trail
Rock River Water Trail
Waccamaw River Blue Trail
Willamette River Water Trail





National Recreation Trails



National Park Service
United States Forest Service
Bureau of Land Management





Related



Triple Crown of Hiking











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Forest_Service&oldid=812023358"					Categories: United States Forest ServiceForestry agencies in the United StatesConservation in the United StatesGovernment agencies established in 1905Organizations based in Washington, D.C.Forest research institutesFederal law enforcement agencies of the United StatesEnvironment and heritage law enforcement agenciesHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from public domain works of the United States GovernmentAll articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from October 2017Articles needing additional references from July 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive links