
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development





The headquarters of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development are located in the Palace of Nations (United Nations Office at Geneva, Switzerland).



Abbreviation
UNCTAD


Formation
1964


Headquarters
Geneva, Switzerland


Website
unctad.org


The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) was established in 1964 as a permanent intergovernmental body.
UNCTAD is the principal organ of the United Nations General Assembly dealing with trade, investment, and development issues. The organization's goals are to: "maximize the trade, investment and development opportunities of developing countries and assist them in their efforts to integrate into the world economy on an equitable basis."[1]
The primary objective of UNCTAD is to formulate policies relating to all aspects of development including trade, aid, transport, finance and technology. The conference ordinarily meets once in four years; the permanent secretariat is in Geneva.
One of the principal achievements of UNCTAD (1964) has been to conceive and implement the Generalised System of Preferences (GSP). It was argued in UNCTAD that to promote exports of manufactured goods from developing countries, it would be necessary to offer special tariff concessions to such exports. Accepting this argument, the developed countries formulated the GSP scheme under which manufacturers' exports and import some agricultural goods from the developing countries enter duty-free or at reduced rates in the developed countries. Since imports of such items from other developed countries are subject to the normal rates of duties, imports of the same items from developing countries would enjoy a competitive advantage.
The creation of UNCTAD in 1964 was based on concerns of developing countries over the international market, multi-national corporations, and great disparity between developed nations and developing nations. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was established to provide a forum where the developing countries could discuss the problems relating to their economic development. The organisation grew from the view that existing institutions like GATT (now replaced by the World Trade Organization, WTO), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and World Bank were not properly organized to handle the particular problems of developing countries. Later, in the 1970s and 1980s, UNCTAD was closely associated with the idea of a New International Economic Order (NIEO).
The first UNCTAD conference took place in Geneva in 1964, the second in New Delhi in 1968, the third in Santiago in 1972, fourth in Nairobi in 1976, the fifth in Manila in 1979, the sixth in Belgrade in 1983, the seventh in Geneva in 1987, the eighth in Cartagena in 1992, the ninth at Johannesburg (South Africa) in 1996, the tenth in Bangkok (Thailand) in 2000, the eleventh in São Paulo (Brazil) in 2004, the twelfth in Accra in 2008, the thirteenth in Doha (Qatar) in 2012 and the fourteenth in Nairobi (Kenya) in 2016.
Currently, UNCTAD has 194 member states and is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. UNCTAD has 400 staff members and a bi-annual (2010–2011) regular budget of $138 million in core expenditures and $72 million in extra-budgetary technical assistance funds. It is a member of the United Nations Development Group.[2] There are non-governmental organizations participating in the activities of UNCTAD.[3]



Contents


1 Membership
2 Meetings

2.1 Geneva, 1964
2.2 New Delhi, 1968
2.3 Santiago, 1972
2.4 Nairobi, 1976 and Manila, 1979
2.5 Belgrade, 1983


3 Reports
4 Other

4.1 Partnership Initiatives


5 List of Secretaries-General and Officers-in-Charge
6 See also
7 References

7.1 Notes


8 Further reading
9 External links



Membership[edit]




  UNCTAD Members
  UNCTAD Members at the Trade and Development Board







  Members, List A
  Members, List B
  Members, List C
  Members, List D
  Members, to be assigned



As of October 2012, 194 states are UNCTAD members:[4] all UN members and the Holy See. UNCTAD members are divided into four lists, the division being based on United Nations Regional Groups[4] with six members unassigned: Armenia, Kiribati, Nauru, South Sudan, Tajikistan, Tuvalu. List A consists mostly of countries in the African and Asia-Pacific Groups of the UN. List B consists of countries of the Western European and Others Group. List C consists of countries of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States (GRULAC). List D consists of countries of the Eastern European Group.
The lists, originally defined in 19th General Assembly resolution 1995[5] serve to balance geographical distribution of member states' representation on the Trade Development Board and other UNCTAD structures. The lists are similar to those of UNIDO, an UN specialized agency.
The full lists are as follows:

List A (100 members): Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Côte d'Ivoire, Republic of Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi , Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, North Korea, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, South Korea, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Tanzania, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.


List B (31 members): Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States.


List C (33 members): Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela.


List D (24 members): Albania, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Montenegro, Poland, Moldova, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Macedonia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan.


Not assigned countries (6 members): Armenia, Kiribati, Nauru, South Sudan, Tajikistan, Tuvalu.

Other states that do not participate are Cook Islands, Niue and the states with limited recognition.
Meetings[edit]
The inter-governmental work is done at five levels of meetings:

The UNCTAD Conference – held every four years:



UNCTAD XIV
Nairobi
 Kenya
17–22 July 2016[6]


UNCTAD XIII
Doha
 Qatar
21–26 April 2012[7]


UNCTAD XII
Accra
 Ghana
21–25 April 2008[8]


UNCTAD XI
São Paulo
 Brazil
13–18 June 2004[9]


UNCTAD X
Bangkok
 Thailand
12–19 February 2000[10]


UNCTAD IX
Midrand
 South Africa
27 April – 11 May 1996


UNCTAD VIII
Cartagena
 Colombia
8–25 February 1992


UNCTAD VII
Geneva
  Switzerland
8 Jul-3 Aug 1987


UNCTAD VI
Belgrade
 Yugoslavia
6–30 Jun 1983


UNCTAD V
Manila
 Philippines
7 May-3 Jun 1979


UNCTAD IV
Nairobi
 Kenya
5–31 May 1976


UNCTAD III
Santiago
 Chile
13 Apr-21 May 1972


UNCTAD II
New Delhi
 India
31 Jan-29 Mar 1968


UNCTAD I
Geneva
  Switzerland
23 Mar-16 Jun 1964



The UNCTAD Trade and Development Board – the Board manages the work of UNCTAD between two conferences and meets up to three times every year;
Four UNCTAD Commissions and one Working Party – these meet more often than the Board to take up policy, programme and budgetary issues;
Expert Meetings – the commissions will convene expert meetings on selected topics to provide substantive and expert input for Commission policy discussions.

Geneva, 1964[edit]
In response to developing country (Least Developed Country, LDC) anxiety at their worsening position in world trade, the United Nations General Assembly voted for a 'one off' conference. These early discussions paved the way for new IMF facilities to provide finance for shortfalls in commodity earnings and for the Generalised Preference Schemes which increased access to Northern markets for manufactured imports from the South. At Geneva, the LDCs were successful in their proposal for the conference with its Secretariat to become a permanent organ of the UN, with meetings every four years.[11]
New Delhi, 1968[edit]
The New Delhi Conference, held in February and March 1968, was a forum that allowed developing countries to reach agreement on basic principles of their development policies. The conference in New Delhi was an opportunity for schemes to be finally approved. The conference provided a major impetus in persuading the North to follow up UNCTAD I resolutions, in establishing generalised preferences. The target for private and official flows to LDCs was raised to 1% of the North's GNP, but the developed countries failed to commit themselves to achieving the target by a specific date. This has proven a continuing point of debate at UNCTAD conferences.
The conference led to the International Sugar Agreement, which seeks to stabilize world sugar prices.[11][12]
Santiago, 1972[edit]
The Santiago Conference, 15 April 1972, was the third occasion on which the developing countries have confronted the rich with the need to use trade and aid measures more effectively to improve living standards in the developing world. Discussion centred on the international monetary system and specifically on the South's proposal that a higher proportion of new special drawing rights (SDRs) should be allocated to LDCs as a form of aid (the so-called 'link'). In Santiago, substantial disagreements arose within the Group of 77 (G77) despite preconference meetings. There was disagreement over the SDR proposal and between those in the G77 who wanted fundamental changes such as a change in the voting allocations in the South's favour at the IMF and those (mainly the Latin American countries) who wanted much milder reforms. This internal dissent seriously weakened the group's negotiating position and led to a final agreed motion which recommended that the IMF should examine the link and that further research be conducted into general reforms. This avoided firm commitments to act on the 'link' or general reform, and the motion was passed by conference.[11][13]
Nairobi, 1976 and Manila, 1979[edit]
UNCTAD IV held in Nairobi May 1976, showed relative success compared to its predecessors. An Overseas Development Institute briefing paper of April 1979 highlights one reason for success as being down to the 1973 Oil Crisis and the encouragement of LDCs to make gains through producers of other commodities. The principal result of the conference was the adoption of the Integrated Programme for Commodities. The programme covered the principal commodity exports and its objectives aside from the stabilisation of commodity prices were: 'Just and remunerative pricing, taking into account world inflation', the expansion of processing, distribution and control of technology by LDCs and improved access to markets.[14][15]
UNCTAD V in the wake of the Nairobi Conference, held in Manila 1979 focused on the key issues of: protectionism in developing countries and the need for structural change, trade in commodities and manufactures aid and international monetary reform,technology, shipping, and economic co-operation among developing countries. An Overseas Development Institute briefing paper written in 1979 focuses its attention on the key issues regarding the LDCs` role as the Group of 77 in the international community.[16]
Belgrade, 1983[edit]
The sixth UN conference on trade and development in Belgrade, 6–30 June 1983 was held against the background of earlier UNCTADs which have substantially failed to resolve many of the disagreements between the developed and developing countries and of a world economy in its worst recession since the early 1930s. The key issues of the time were finance and adjustment, commodity price stabilisation and trade.[11]
Reports[edit]
UNCTAD produces a number of topical reports, including:

The Trade and Development Report[17]
The Trade and Environment Review[18]
The World Investment Report[19]
The Economic Development in Africa Report[20]
The Least Developed Countries Report[21]
UNCTAD Statistics[22]
The Information Economy Report[23]
The Review of Maritime Transport[24]
The International Accounting and Reporting Issues Annual Review[25]
The Technology and Innovation Report[26]

Other[edit]
UNCTAD conducts technical cooperation programmes[27] such as ASYCUDA, DMFAS, EMPRETEC and WAIPA.
In addition, UNCTAD conducts certain technical cooperation in collaboration with the World Trade Organization through the joint International Trade Centre (ITC), a technical cooperation agency targeting operational and enterprise-oriented aspects of trade development.
UNCTAD hosts the Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (ISAR).[25]
Partnership Initiatives[edit]
UNCTAD is a founding member of the United Nations Sustainable Stock Exchanges (SSE) initiative along with the Principles for Responsible Investment, the United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative (UNEP-FI), and the UN Global Compact.
List of Secretaries-General and Officers-in-Charge[edit]


Nr
Secretary-General
Dates in office
Country of origin
Remarks


10
Mukhisa Kituyi
1 September 2013 – present
 Kenya



9
Supachai Panitchpakdi
1 September 2005 – 30 August 2013
 Thailand



8
Carlos Fortin
2004–2005
 Chile
Officer-in-Charge


7
Rubens Ricupero
1995–2004
 Brazil



6
Carlos Fortin
1994–1995
 Chile
Officer-in-Charge


5
Kenneth K.S. Dadzie
1986–1994
 Ghana



4
Alister McIntyre
1985
 Grenada
Officer-in-Charge


3
Gamani Corea
1974–1984
 Sri Lanka



2
Manuel Pérez-Guerrero
1969–1974
 Venezuela



1
Raúl Prebisch
1963–1969
 Argentina



See also[edit]

Foreign direct investment
Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing Countries (GSTP)
International trade
List of countries by received FDI
United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection
World Development Information Day

References[edit]
Notes[edit]



^ From official website
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 15 May 2012. 
^ http://unctad.org/en/docs/tdngolistd12_en.pdf
^ a b "Membership of UNCTAD and membership of the Trade and Development Board" (PDF). unctad.org. 
^ https://undocs.org/A/RES/1995(XIX)
^ UNCTAD 14 Home Page
^ Page has moved
^ http://www.unctadxii.org/
^ http://www.unctadxi.org/
^ "WELCOME TO TENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE(UNCTAD X), BANGKOK 12–19 FEB. 2000". unctad-10.org. 
^ a b c d "UNCTAD VI: background and issues". ODI Briefing Paper. Overseas Development Institute. Retrieved 19 July 2011. 
^ "The UN Conference on Trade and Development". ODI Briefing Paper 1. Overseas Development Institute. Retrieved 27 June 2011. 
^ "ODI Briefing Paper". UNCTAD III, problems and prospects. Overseas Development Institute. Retrieved 27 June 2011. 
^ "UNCTAD 5: A preview of the issues". ODI briefing paper No.2 1979. Overseas Development Institute. Retrieved 28 June 2011. 
^ "UNCTAd VI: background and issues". ODI Briefing Paper. Overseas Development Institute. Retrieved 19 July 2011. 
^ "UNCTAD: A preview of the issues". ODI briefing paper 1979. Overseas Development Institute. Retrieved 28 June 2011. 
^ http://unctad.org/tdr
^ http://unctad.org/ter
^ "unctad.org – Home". unctad.org. 
^ http://unctad.org/africa/series
^ http://unctad.org/ldcr
^ http://unctad.org/stats
^ http://unctad.org/ier/series
^ http://unctad.org/rmt/series
^ a b http://unctad.org/isar
^ "unctad.org – Technology and Innovation Report (Series)". unctad.org. 
^ http://unctad.org/tc



Further reading[edit]

Berthoud, Paul (2008). A Professional Life Narrative. edinter.net.  worked with UNCTAD and offers testimony from the inside.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.



United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNCTAD member states
Research Guide about UNCTAD (UN Library at Geneva)
International Trade Centre
UNCTAD: Time to Lead (Focus on the Global South)
Global Policy Forum – UNCTAD
International Trade Debates
ODI Briefing Papers on the UNCTAD







v
t
e


 United Nations






António Guterres, Secretary-General
Amina J. Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General
Peter Thomson, General Assembly President





United Nations System




United Nations Charter



Preamble





Principal organs



General Assembly

President


Security Council

Members


Economic and Social Council
Secretariat

Secretary-General
Deputy Secretary-General
Under-Secretary-General


International Court of Justice

statute


Trusteeship Council





Secretariat Offices
and Departments



Headquarters
Envoy on Youth
Spokesperson for the Secretary-General
Geneva
Palace of Nations
Nairobi
Vienna
Economic and Social Affairs
Political Affairs
Public Information

Dag Hammarskjöld Library


Safety and Security
Palestinian Rights
Peacekeeping Operations
Internal Oversight
Legal Affairs
Developing Countries
Sport for Development and Peace
Disarmament Affairs
Outer Space Affairs
Partnerships
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UN organizations by location
United Nations Office for Developing Countries






Programmes and
specialized agencies




FAO
ICAO
IFAD
ILO
IMO
ITC
IPCC
IAEA
MINURSO
UNIDO
ITU
UNAIDS
SCSL
UNCTAD
UNCITRAL
UNCDF
UNDG
UNDP
UNDPI
UNDPKO

peacekeeping


UNEP

OzonAction
UNEP/GRID-Arendal
UNEP-WCMC


UNESCO
UNFIP
UNFPA
UN-HABITAT
OHCHR
UNHCR
UNHRC
UNICEF
UNICRI
UNIDIR
UNITAR
UN-Oceans
UNODC
UNOPS
UNOSAT
UNRISD
UNRWA
UNSSC
UNU

UNU-OP
UNU-CRIS


UNV
UN Women
UNWTO
UPU
WFP
WHO
WIPO
WMO








Members / observers



Full members
Founding members

UNSC Permanent members


Observers

European Union







History



League of Nations
Four Policemen
Declaration by United Nations
Peacekeeping missions

history
timeline


Enlargement





Resolutions



Security Council vetoes
General Assembly

66th
67th


Security Council

Cyprus
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Lebanon
Nagorno-Karabakh
North Korea
Palestine
Syria
Western Sahara







Elections



Secretary-General (2006
2016)
International Court of Justice 2011
General Assembly President (2012
2016)
Security Council (2015
2016)





Related



Bretton Woods system
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Criticism
Delivering as One
Flag

Honour Flag


Four Nations Initiative
Genocide Convention
UN Global Compact
ICC
International Years
UN laissez-passer
Military Staff Committee
Official languages
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Peacekeeping
Treaty Series
UN Day
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Millennium Declaration

Summit
Development Goals


Security Council veto power
UN reform

Security Council reform


UN Art Collection
UN Memorial Cemetery Korea





Other



Outline
UN television film series (1964–1966)
In popular culture












v
t
e


South–South cooperation and Third Worldism



Global South




Development



Landlocked developing countries
Least Developed Countries
Heavily indebted poor countries





Markets



Emerging markets
Newly industrialized country
Transition economy





Worlds Theory



First World
Second World
Third World
Fourth World








Geopolitics







Decolonization
Cold War
Neocolonialism
Multipolarity
World Conference against Racism

Durban I
Durban II
Durban III


Globalization





BRICS



Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS)
BASIC (BRICS less Russia)
BRIC (BRICS less South Africa)
India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA)








Finance



Debt
Asian Clearing Union
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
Asian Development Bank
Arab Monetary Fund
BancoSur
Caribbean Development Bank
Common Fund for Commodities






Trade and
development




Developmental state
Flying geese paradigm
Infrastructure-based development
Sustainable development
Global System of Trade Preferences
Protocol on Trade Negotiations
New International Economic Order
New World Information and Communication Order
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Industrial Development Organization





Public health



Generic drugs

biosimilar


Pharmaceutical patents

criticism


Test data exclusivity
Doha Declaration
World Health Organization






Organizations
and groups




G-77
G-15
D-8
G20 developing nations (G-20)
G-24
G33 developing countries (G-33)
G-11
G-90
Non-Aligned Movement
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group
African Union
Afro–Asian Conference
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Colombo Plan
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
International Solar Alliance
Like Minded Group
Melanesian Spearhead Group
Next Eleven
North–South Summit
Polynesian Leaders Group
South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
Small Island Developing States
South Centre
Third World Network






North–South
divide




Brandt Report
Global financial system

International Monetary Fund
World Bank
World Trade Organization


Fair trade
Financial regulation
Global digital divide












v
t
e


International trade



Terminology



Absolute advantage
Balance of payments
Balance of trade
Capital account
Comparative advantage
Current account
Export-oriented industrialization
Fair trade
Foreign exchange reserves
Globalization
Import substitution industrialization
Net capital outflow
Outsourcing
Tariff
Trade justice
Trade war
Trading nation









Organizations
and policies




International Monetary Fund (IMF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization (WTO)

International Trade Centre


Bilateral investment treaty
Economic integration
Free-trade zone
Special economic zone
Trade agreement
Trade barrier
Trade bloc





Political economy



Free trade (Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Repeal of the Corn Laws)
Mercantilism
Protectionism (Economic nationalism, Autarky)





Regional organizations



ACU
ASEAN
CACM
CAN
CARICOM
CEMAC
CUBKR
EAC
EAU
EU
GCC
Mercosur
RCEP
SAARC
SACU
WAEMU





Exports by product



Aircraft & Spacecraft
Aircraft parts
Aluminium
Cars
Car parts
Coal
Coffee
Computers
Copper
Corn
Cotton
Diamonds
Electricity
Engines
Gas turbines
Gold
Integrated circuits
Iron ore
Natural gas
Oil
Petrol
Pharmaceuticals
Ships
Steel
Telecommunications equipment
Telephones
Trucks
Wheat
Wine








 Category
 Commons








United Nations portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_Nations_Conference_on_Trade_and_Development&oldid=818394826"					Categories: United Nations Development GroupUnited Nations General Assembly subsidiary organsInternational development organizationsInternational trade organizationsInternational factor movementsUnited Nations conferencesDiplomatic conferences in Switzerland21st-century diplomatic conferences20th-century diplomatic conferencesOrganizations established in 1964Organisations based in GenevaHidden categories: Use dmy dates from June 2017