"USDOI" redirects here. For the precursor to the FBI, see United States Division of Investigation.

United States Department of the Interior


Seal of the U.S. Department of the Interior




Flag of the U.S. Department of the Interior




Main Interior Building


Agency overview


Formed
March 3, 1849; 168 years ago (1849-03-03)


Type
Department


Headquarters
Main Interior Building
1849 C Street NW
Washington, D.C., U.S.
38°53′37.11″N 77°2′33.33″W﻿ / ﻿38.8936417°N 77.0425917°W﻿ / 38.8936417; -77.0425917


Employees
70,003 (2012)[1]


Annual budget
$20.7 billion (2013)[2]


Agency executives



Ryan Zinke, Secretary
David L. Bernhardt, Deputy Secretary
Vacant, Solicitor of the Interior





Website
www.DOI.gov


The United States Department of the Interior (DOI) is the United States federal executive department of the U.S. government responsible for the management and conservation of most federal land and natural resources, and the administration of programs relating to Native Americans, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, territorial affairs, and insular areas of the United States. About 75% of federal public land is managed by the department, with most of the remainder managed by the United States Department of Agriculture's United States Forest Service.[3]
The Department is administered by the United States Secretary of the Interior, who is a member of the Cabinet of the President. The current Secretary is Ryan Zinke. The Inspector General position is currently vacant, with Mary Kendall serving as acting Inspector General.[4][5]
Despite its name, the Department of the Interior has a different role from that of the interior ministries of other nations, which are usually responsible for police matters and internal security. In the United States, national security and immigration functions are performed by the Department of Homeland Security primarily and the Department of Justice secondarily.
The Department of the Interior has often been humorously called "The Department of Everything Else" because of its broad range of responsibilities.[6]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Formation of the department
1.2 Early and later years of the department


2 American Indians
3 Operating units
4 Controversy
5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



History[edit]
Formation of the department[edit]
A department for domestic concern was first considered by the 1st United States Congress in 1789, but those duties were placed in the Department of State. The idea of a separate domestic department continued to percolate for a half-century and was supported by Presidents from James Madison to James Polk. The 1846–48 Mexican–American War gave the proposal new steam as the responsibilities of the federal government grew. Polk's Secretary of the Treasury, Robert J. Walker, became a vocal champion of creating the new department.[citation needed]
In 1849, Walker stated in his annual report that several federal offices were placed in departments with which they had little to do. He noted that the General Land Office had little to do with the Treasury and also highlighted the Indian Affairs office, part of the Department of War, and the Patent Office, part of the Department of State. Walker argued that these and other bureaus should be brought together in a new Department of the Interior.[citation needed] A bill authorizing its creation of the Department passed the House of Representatives on February 15, 1849, and spent just over two weeks in the Senate. The Department was established on March 3, 1849 (9 Stat. 395), the eve of President Zachary Taylor's inauguration, when the Senate voted 31 to 25 to create the Department. Its passage was delayed by Democrats in Congress who were reluctant to create more patronage posts for the incoming Whig administration to fill. The first Secretary of the Interior was Thomas Ewing.
Early and later years of the department[edit]
Many of the domestic concerns the Department originally dealt with were gradually transferred to other Departments. Other agencies became separate Departments, such as the Bureau of Agriculture, which later became the Department of Agriculture. However, land and natural resource management, American Indian affairs, wildlife conservation, and territorial affairs remain the responsibilities of the Department of the Interior.[citation needed]
As of mid-2004, the Department managed 507 million acres (2,050,000 km²) of surface land, or about one-fifth of the land in the United States. It manages 476 dams and 348 reservoirs through the Bureau of Reclamation, 410 national parks, monuments, seashore sites, etc. through the National Park Service, and 544 national wildlife refuges through the Fish and Wildlife Service. Energy projects on federally managed lands and offshore areas supply about 28% of the nation's energy production.[citation needed]
American Indians[edit]
Within the Interior Department, the Bureau of Indian Affairs handles some federal relations with Native Americans, while others are handled by the Office of Special Trustee. The current acting Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs is Lawrence S. Roberts, an enrolled member of the Oneida Tribe in Wisconsin.
The Department has been the subject of disputes over proper accounting for Native American Trusts set up to track the income and distribution of monies that are generated by the Trust and specific Native American lands, which the government leases for fees to companies that extract oil, timber, minerals, and other resources. Several cases have sought an accounting of such funds from departments within the Interior and Treasury (such as the Minerals Management Service), in what has been a 15-year-old lawsuit. Some Native American nations have also sued the government over water-rights issues and their treaties with the US. In 2010 Congress passed the Claims Settlement Act of 2010 (Public Law 111-291), which provided $3.4 billion for the settlement of the Cobell v. Salazar class-action trust case and four Native American water rights cases.[7]

The $3.4 billion will be placed in a still-to-be-selected bank and $1.4 billion will go to individuals, mostly in the form of checks ranging from $500 to $1,500. A small group, such as members of the Osage tribe who benefit from huge Oklahoma oil revenues, will get far more, based on a formula incorporating their 10 highest years of income between 1985 and 2009. As important, $2 billion will be used to buy trust land from Native American owners at fair market prices, with the government finally returning the land to tribes. Nobody can be forced to sell.[8]

Operating units[edit]




The hierarchy of the U.S. Department of the Interior.



Assistant Secretary for Policy, Management, and Budget

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy and International Affairs

Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance
Office of International Affairs
Office of Native Hawaiian Relations
Office of Restoration and Damage Assessment
Office of Policy Analysis


Deputy Assistant Secretary for Budget, Finance, Performance and Acquisition

Office of Budget
Office of Financial Management
Office of Planning and Performance Management
FBMS Program Management Office
Office of Acquisition and Property Management
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization


Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Capital & Diversity

Office of Human Resources
Office of Occupational Safety and Health
Office of Strategic Employee and Organizational Development
Office of Youth, Partnerships and Service
Office of Civil Rights


Deputy Assistant Secretary for Technology, Information and Business Services

Office of Collaborative Action and Dispute Resolution
Office of Valuation Services
Interior Business Center
Office of Hearings and Appeals
Office of Facilities and Administrative Services
Office of the Chief Information Officer


Deputy Assistant Secretary for Public Safety, Resource Protection and Emergency Services (DAS-PRE)

Office of Emergency Management (OEM)
Office of Law Enforcement and Security (OLES)
Office of Wildland Fire
Office of Aviation Services (OAS)
Interagency Borderland Coordinator


Deputy Assistant Secretary for Natural Resources Revenue Management

Office of Natural Resources Revenue




Assistant Secretary for Fish, Wildlife, and Parks

National Park Service
United States Fish and Wildlife Service


Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs

Deputy Assistant Secretary for Management

Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO)
Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO)
Office of Human Capital Management (OHCM)
Office of Planning and Policy Analysis (OPPA)
Office of Facilities, Environmental and Cultural Resources (OFECR)


Deputy Assistant Secretary for Policy and Economic Development

Office of Indian Energy and Economic Development (IEED)
Office of Indian Gaming (OIG)
Office of Self-Governance (OSG)


Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA)

Office of Indian Services (OIS)
Office of Field Operations (OFO)
Office of Justice Services (OJS)
Office of Trust Services (OTS)


Bureau of Indian Education (BIE)
Office of External Affairs

Office of Congressional and Legislative Affairs (OCLA)
Office of Public Affairs (OPA)


Office of Federal Acknowledgment (OFA)
Office of Regulatory Management (ORM)


Assistant Secretary for Land and Minerals Management

Bureau of Land Management
Office of Surface Mining
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement


Assistant Secretary for Water and Science

United States Geological Survey
Bureau of Reclamation


Assistant Secretary for Insular Areas

Office of Insular Affairs


Solicitor

Office of the Solicitor (SOL)


Office of the Inspector General (OIG)

Office of General Counsel
Assistant Inspector General for Investigations

Office of Investigations


Assistant Inspector General for Audits, Inspections, and Evaluations

Office of Audits, Inspections, and Evaluations


Assistant Inspector General for Management

Office of Management


Associate Inspector General for External Affairs
Associate Inspector General for Whistleblower Protection
Strategy Management Office
Associate Inspector General for Communications


Chief Information Officer
Special Trustee for American Indians
Federal Executive Boards
Interior Museum
National Indian Gaming Commission (NIGC)

Controversy[edit]
Secretary of the Interior Albert B. Fall was implicated in the Teapot Dome scandal of 1921. He was convicted of bribery in 1929, and served one year in prison, for his part in the controversy. A major factor in the scandal was a transfer of certain oil leases from the jurisdiction of the Department of the Navy to that of the Department of the Interior, at Fall's behest.
Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt—already facing criticism related to his alleged hostility to environmentalism and his support of the development and use of federal lands by foresting, ranching, and other commercial interests, and for banning The Beach Boys from playing a 1983 Independence Day concert on the National Mall out of concerns of attracting "an undesirable element"—resigned abruptly after a September 21, 1983, speech in which he said about his staff: "I have a black, a woman, two Jews and a cripple. And we have talent."[9] Within weeks of making this statement, Watt submitted his resignation letter.[9][10]
Under the Administration of President George W. Bush, the Interior Department's maintenance backlog climbed from $5 billion to $8.7 billion, despite Bush's campaign pledges to eliminate it completely. Of the agency under Bush's leadership, Interior Department Inspector General Earl Devaney has cited a "culture of fear" and of "ethical failure." Devaney has also said, "Simply stated, short of a crime, anything goes at the highest levels of the Department of Interior."[11]
See also[edit]


Government of the United States portal



Environmental policy of the United States
America's Great Outdoors Initiative
Texas General Land Office

References[edit]


^ FY 2014 Interior Budget in Brief - Appendix O
^ FY 2014 Interior Budget in Brief - Appendix A
^ GAO, "Federal Land Management: Observations on a Possible Move of the Forest Service into the Department of the Interior", February 11, 2009
^ "About the Inspector General". U.S. Department of the Interior. Retrieved 16 July 2015. 
^ "Oversight: The Office of the Inspector General for the Department of the Interior". Committee on Natural Resources. Retrieved 16 July 2015. 
^ "History", National Park Service web page. Retrieved 2010-05-20.
^ Curtis, Mary C., "Obama Hails Passage of Settlement for Native Americans, Black Farmers", The Huffington Post, 30 November 2010. Accessed 1 December 2011.
^ Warren, James, "A Victory for Native Americans?", The Atlantic, 7 June 2010.
^ a b 556. James G Watt, US Secretary of the Interior., "Simpson’s Contemporary Quotations" (1988) via bartleby.com and Wayback Machine.
^ RMOA - Document
^ "Bush legacy leaves uphill climb for U.S. parks", Los Angeles Times, January 25, 2009.


Further reading[edit]

Crimes Against Nature by Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. (2004)
Utley, Robert M. and Barry Mackintosh; The Department of Everything Else: Highlights of Interior History; Dept. of the Interior, Washington, D.C.; 1989

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Department of the Interior.



Official website
Department of the Interior in the Federal Register
The Department of Everything Else: Highlights of Interior History
Sex, Drug Use and Graft cited in Interior Department New York Times, September 10, 2008







v
t
e


Agencies under the United States Department of the Interior






Headquarters: Main Interior Building


Ryan Zinke, Secretary of the Interior
David L. Bernhardt, Deputy Secretary of the Interior








Bureau of Indian Affairs
Bureau of Land Management
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement
General Land Office
Bureau of Reclamation
Fish and Wildlife Service
Geological Survey
Office of Surface Mining
Interior Business Center
National Park Service
Office of Insular Affairs















v
t
e


United States government agencies involved in environmental science






Environmental Protection Agency
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Global Change Research Program
Smithsonian Institution
National Science Foundation





Department of the Interior



National Park Service
United States Fish and Wildlife Service
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Bureau of Land Management
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement
Bureau of Reclamation
Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation, and Enforcement
United States Geological Survey
Office of Insular Affairs





Department of Commerce



National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
National Weather Service
National Ocean Service
National Geodetic Survey
National Marine Fisheries Service
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research





Department of Energy



Office of Science
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
National Laboratories
Office of Environmental Management





Department of Agriculture



Farm Service Agency
Foreign Agricultural Service
United States Forest Service
Natural Resources Conservation Service
National Water and Climate Center
Rural Utilities Service
Food and Nutrition Service
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
Agricultural Research Service
Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service





Department of Homeland Security



United States Coast Guard
Directorate for Science and Technology





Department of Health
and Human Services



National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences





Department of Defense



Office of Naval Research
Air Force Research Laboratory
United States Army Research, Development and Engineering Command












v
t
e


Federal executive departments of the United States of America



Executive
Departments



Agriculture
Commerce
Defense
Education
Energy
Health and Human Services
Homeland Security
Housing and Urban Development
Interior
Justice
Labor
State
Transportation
Treasury
Veterans Affairs





Former



Air Force
Army
Commerce and Labor
Health, Education, and Welfare
Navy
Post Office
War











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Department_of_the_Interior&oldid=816820968"					Categories: 1849 establishments in the United StatesGovernment agencies established in 1849United States Department of the InteriorUnited States federal executive departmentsHidden categories: Pages using infobox government agency with unknown parametersAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2017