"OFR" redirects here. For other uses, see OFR (disambiguation).

United States Department of the Treasury


Seal of the U.S. Department of the Treasury




Flag of the U.S. Department of the Treasury




Treasury Building


Agency overview


Formed
September 2, 1789; 228 years ago (1789-09-02)


Preceding agency



Board of Treasury





Jurisdiction
Federal government of the United States


Headquarters
Treasury Building
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C., U.S
38°53′54″N 77°2′3″W﻿ / ﻿38.89833°N 77.03417°W﻿ / 38.89833; -77.03417Coordinates: 38°53′54″N 77°2′3″W﻿ / ﻿38.89833°N 77.03417°W﻿ / 38.89833; -77.03417


Employees
86,049 (2014)


Annual budget
"$14 billion (2013)" (PDF). 


Agency executives



Steven Mnuchin, Secretary
Vacant, Deputy Secretary
Jovita Carranza, Treasurer





Child agencies



Internal Revenue Service
United States Mint
Bureau of Engraving and Printing
Several others





Website
treasury.gov


The Department of the Treasury (USDT)[1] is an executive department and the treasury of the United States federal government. Established by an Act of Congress in 1789 to manage government revenue, its responsibilities include producing currency and coinage, collecting taxes and paying bills of the US government, managing the federal finances, supervising banks and thrifts, and advising on fiscal policy.[2] The Department is administered by the Secretary of the Treasury, who is a member of the Cabinet. On February 13, 2017, the Senate confirmed Steven Mnuchin as Secretary of the Treasury.
The first Secretary of the Treasury was Alexander Hamilton, who was sworn into office on September 11, 1789.[3] Hamilton was asked by President George Washington to serve after first having asked Robert Morris (who declined, recommending Hamilton instead). Hamilton almost single-handedly worked out the nation's early financial system, and for several years was a major presence in Washington's administration as well. His portrait is on the obverse of the U.S. ten-dollar bill while the Treasury Department building is shown on the reverse. Besides the Secretary, one of the best-known Treasury officials is the Treasurer of the United States whose signature, along with the Treasury Secretary's, appears on all Federal Reserve notes.
The Treasury prints and mints all paper currency and coins in circulation through the Bureau of Engraving and Printing and the United States Mint. The Department also collects all federal taxes through the Internal Revenue Service, and manages U.S. government debt instruments.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Revolutionary Period
1.2 Hamilton and the Establishment of the Department of the Treasury
1.3 2003 Reorganization


2 Responsibilities

2.1 Mission
2.2 Basic functions


3 Organization

3.1 Structure
3.2 Bureaus
3.3 Budget and staffing


4 Freedom of Information Act processing performance
5 See also
6 Notes and references
7 External links



History[edit]
Revolutionary Period[edit]
The history of the Department of the Treasury began in the turmoil of the American Revolution, when the Continental Congress at Philadelphia deliberated the crucial issue of financing a war of independence against Great Britain. The Congress had no power to levy and collect taxes, nor was there a tangible basis for securing funds from foreign investors or governments. The delegates resolved to issue paper money in the form of bills of credit, promising redemption in coin on faith in the revolutionary cause. On June 22, 1775—only a few days after the Battle of Bunker Hill, Congress issued $2 million in bills; on July 25, 28 citizens of Philadelphia were employed by the Congress to sign and number the currency.
On July 29, 1775, the Second Continental Congress assigned the responsibility for the administration of the revolutionary government's finances to Joint Continental Treasurers, George Clymer and Michael Hillegas. The Congress stipulated that each of the colonies contribute to the Continental government's funds. To ensure proper and efficient handling of the growing national debt in the face of weak economic and political ties between the colonies, the Congress, on February 17, 1776, designated a committee of five to superintend the Treasury, settle the accounts, and report periodically to the Congress. On April 1, a Treasury Office of Accounts, consisting of an Auditor General and clerks, was established to facilitate the settlement of claims and to keep the public accounts for the government of the United Colonies. With the signing of the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776, the new-born republic as a sovereign nation was able to secure loans from abroad.
Despite the infusion of foreign and domestic loans to pay for a war of independence, the United Colonies were unable to establish a well-organized agency for financial administration. Michael Hillegas was first called Treasurer of the United States on May 14, 1777. The Treasury Office was reorganized three times between 1778 and 1781. The $241.5 million of paper Continental Dollars devalued rapidly. By May 1781, the dollar collapsed at a rate of from 500 to 1000 to 1 against hard currency. Protests against the worthless money swept the colonies and angry Americans coined the expression "not worth a Continental".
Robert Morris was designated Superintendent of Finance in 1781 and restored stability to the nation's finances. Morris, a wealthy colonial merchant, was nicknamed "the Financier" because of his reputation for procuring funds or goods on a moment's notice. His staff included a Comptroller, a Treasurer, a Register, and auditors, who managed the country's finances through 1784, when Morris resigned because of ill health. The Treasury Board of three Commissioners continued to oversee the finances of the confederation of former colonies until September 1789.
Hamilton and the Establishment of the Department of the Treasury[edit]
The First Congress of the United States was called to convene in New York on March 4, 1789, marking the beginning of government under the Constitution. On September 2, 1789, Congress created a permanent institution for the management of government finances:

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That there shall be a Department of Treasury, in which shall be the following officers, namely: a Secretary of the Treasury, to be deemed head of the department; a Comptroller, an Auditor, a Treasurer, a Register, and an Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury, which assistant shall be appointed by the said Secretary.[4]

Alexander Hamilton took the oath of office as the first Secretary of the Treasury on September 11, 1789. Hamilton had served as George Washington's aide-de-camp during the Revolution, and was of great importance in the ratification of the Constitution. Because of his financial and managerial acumen, Hamilton was a logical choice for solving the problem of the new nation's heavy war debt. Hamilton's first official act was to submit a report to Congress in which he laid the foundation for the nation's financial health.
To the surprise of many legislators, he insisted upon federal assumption and dollar-for-dollar repayment of the country's war debt of $75 million in order to revitalize the public credit: "[T]he debt of the United States' was the price of liberty. The faith of America has been repeatedly pledged for it, and with solemnities that give peculiar force to the obligation." Hamilton foresaw the development of industry and trade in the United States, and suggested that government revenues be based upon customs duties. His sound financial policies also inspired investment in the Bank of the United States, which acted as the government's fiscal agent.
2003 Reorganization[edit]




Treasury Building


Congress transferred several agencies that had previously been under the aegis of the Treasury department to other departments as a consequence of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Effective January 24, 2003, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF), which had been a bureau of the Department since 1972, was extensively reorganized under the provisions of the Homeland Security Act of 2002. The law enforcement functions of ATF, including the regulation of legitimate traffic in firearms and explosives, were transferred to the Department of Justice as the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (BATFE). The regulatory and tax collection functions of ATF related to legitimate traffic in alcohol and tobacco remained with the Treasury at its new Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB).
Effective March 1, 2003, the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, the United States Customs Service, and the United States Secret Service were transferred to the newly created Department of Homeland Security ("DHS").
Responsibilities[edit]




Treasury Department official, surrounded by packages of newly minted currency, counting and wrapping dollar bills. Washington, D.C., 1907.


Mission[edit]
The mission of the Department of the Treasury is to "maintain a strong economy and create economic and job opportunities by promoting the conditions that enable economic growth and stability at home and abroad, strengthen national security by combating threats and protecting the integrity of the financial system, and manage the U.S. Government’s finances and resources effectively".
Basic functions[edit]
The basic functions of the Department of the Treasury mainly include:[5]

Producing all currency and coinage of the U.S.;
Collecting taxes, duties and money paid to and due to the U.S.:
Paying all bills of the U.S.;
Managing the federal finances;
Managing government accounts and the United States public debt;
Supervising national banks and thrift institutions;
Advising on domestic and international financial, monetary, economic, trade and tax policy (fiscal policy being the sum of these);
Enforcing federal finance and tax laws;
Investigating and prosecuting tax evaders;
Publishing statistical reports.

With respect to the estimation of revenues for the executive branch, Treasury serves a purpose parallel to that of the Office of Management and Budget for the estimation of spending for the executive branch, the Joint Committee on Taxation for the estimation of revenues for Congress, and the Congressional Budget Office for the estimation of spending for Congress.
From 1830 until 1901, the responsibility of overseeing weights and measures was carried out by the Office of Standard Weights and Measures, which was part of the U.S. Treasury Department.[6] After 1901, the responsibility was assigned to the agency that subsequently became known as the National Institute of Standards and Technology.




Organization of the U.S. Dept. of the Treasury.






The Office of Foreign Assets Control and the main branch of the Treasury Department Federal Credit Union are located in the Freedman's Bank Building in Washington, D.C.


Organization[edit]
The Department of the Treasury is organized into two major components: the Departmental offices and the operating bureaus. The Departmental Offices are primarily responsible for the formulation of policy and management of the Department as a whole, while the operating bureaus carry out the specific operations assigned to the Department.
Structure[edit]




Seal on United States Department of the Treasury on the Building



Secretary of the Treasury[7]

Deputy Secretary of the Treasury

Treasurer of the United States

Bureau of Engraving and Printing
United States Mint


Under Secretary for Domestic Finance[8]

Assistant Secretary for Financial Institutions

Office of Financial Institutions


Assistant Secretary for Financial Markets

Office of Financial Markets


Fiscal Assistant Secretary

Office of Fiscal Service
Bureau of the Fiscal Service


Assistant Secretary for Financial Stability

Office of Financial Stability




Under Secretary for International Affairs[9]

Assistant Secretary for International Markets and Development
Assistant Secretary for International Affairs
Office of Environment and Energy[10]


Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence)[11]

Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing

Office of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes


Assistant Secretary for Intelligence and Analysis

Office of Intelligence and Analysis


Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
Office of Foreign Assets Control
Treasury Executive Office for Asset Forfeiture


Assistant Secretary for Management / Chief Financial Officer / Performance Improvement Officer
Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy
Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs
Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs/Director of policy planning
Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy

Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau


Commissioner of Internal Revenue

Internal Revenue Service


Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
Office of the General Counsel
Office of the Inspector General
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA)





Bureaus[edit]


Bureau
Description


The Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB)
The Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB) is responsible for enforcing and administering laws covering the production, use, and distribution of alcohol and tobacco products. TTB also collects excise taxes for firearms and ammunition.


The Bureau of Engraving & Printing (BEP)
The Bureau of Engraving & Printing (BEP) designs and manufactures U.S. currency, securities, and other official certificates and awards.


The Bureau of the Fiscal Service
The Bureau of the Fiscal Service was formed from the consolidation of the Financial Management Service and the Bureau of the Public Debt. Its mission is to promote the financial integrity and operational efficiency of the U.S. government through exceptional accounting, financing, collections, payments, and shared services.


The Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) Fund
The Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) Fund was created to expand the availability of credit, investment capital, and financial services in distressed urban and rural communities.


The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) supports law enforcement investigative efforts and fosters interagency and global cooperation against domestic and international financial crimes. It also provides U.S. policy makers with strategic analyses of domestic and worldwide trends and patterns.


The Inspector General
The Inspector General conducts independent audits, investigations and reviews to help the Treasury Department accomplish its mission; improve its programs and operations; promote economy, efficiency and effectiveness; and prevent and detect fraud and abuse.


The Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA)
The Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA) provides leadership and coordination and recommends policy for activities designed to promote economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in the administration of the internal revenue laws. TIGTA also recommends policies to prevent and detect fraud and abuse in the programs and operations of the IRS and related entities.


The Internal Revenue Service
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is the largest of Treasury's bureaus. It is responsible for determining, assessing, and collecting internal revenue in the United States.


The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) charters, regulates, and supervises national banks to ensure a safe, sound, and competitive banking system that supports the citizens, communities, and economy of the United States.


The U.S. Mint
The U.S. Mint designs and manufactures domestic, bullion and foreign coins as well as commemorative medals and other numismatic items. The Mint also distributes U.S. coins to the Federal Reserve banks as well as maintains physical custody and protection of the nation's silver and gold assets.


Budget and staffing[edit]
The Treasury Department was authorized a budget for Fiscal Year 2015 of $22.6 billion. The budget authorization is broken down as follows:[12]


Program
Funding (in millions)
Employees (in FTEs)


Management and Finance


Department Administration
$311
1,320


Office of the Inspector General
$35
213


Inspector General for Tax Administration
$157
837


Special Inspector General for TARP
$34
192


Community Development Financial Institutions Fund
$225
73


Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
$108
346


Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
$101
517


Bureau of the Fiscal Services
$348
2,350


Tax Administration


Internal Revenue Service
$12,476
92,009


International Programs


International Programs
$2,610
0


Non-Appropriated Bureaus


Office of Fiscal Stability
$184
86


Small Business Lending Programs
$17
25


State Small Business Credit Initiative
$7
12


Financial Stability Oversight Council
$20
26


Office of Financial Research
$92
249


Bureau of Engraving and Printing
$749
1,944


United States Mint
$3,571
1,874


Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
$1,104
3,997


TOTAL
$22,583
106,080


Freedom of Information Act processing performance[edit]
In the latest Center for Effective Government analysis of 15 federal agencies which receive the most Freedom of Information Act FOIA requests, published in 2015 (using 2012 and 2013 data, the most recent years available), the Treasury earned a D by scoring 68 out of a possible 100 points, i.e. did not earn a satisfactory overall grade.[13]
See also[edit]


Government of the United States portal



Federal Reserve System
MicroLoan Program
Title 12 of the Code of Federal Regulations
Title 17 of the Code of Federal Regulations
Title 19 of the Code of Federal Regulations
Title 31 of the Code of Federal Regulations
Treasury Enterprise Architecture Framework
Treasury Information System Architecture Framework

Notes and references[edit]



^ Donald A. Torres (1985). Handbook of Federal Police and Investigative Agencies. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 275. ISBN 0313245789. 
^ "An Act to Establish the Treasury Department" (PDF). September 2, 1789. Retrieved 2014-11-05. 
^ "Appointment as Secretary of the Treasury". 
^ "Chapter 12, 1 Statue. 65" (PDF). 
^ US Treasury website Organization
^ Records of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), National Archives website, (Record Group 167), 1830–1987.
^ Treasury Order 101-05, U.S. Dept. of the Treasury. 10 January 2011. Updated 26 April 2011. Accessed 11 November 2012.
^ DF Org Chart, "The Office of Domestic Finance". U.S. Dept. of the Treasury. October 2011. Accessed 11 November 2012.
^ International Affairs, "About International Affairs". U.S. Dept. of the Treasury. 14 February 2012. Accessed 11 November 2012.
^ "Environment and Energy". www.treasury.gov. Retrieved 2017-10-30. 
^ Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, "About Terrorism and Financial Intelligence". U.S. Dept. of the Treasury. July 2, 2012. Accessed November 11, 2012.
^ 2015 Department of the Treasury Budget in Brief, pg 9, United States Department of the Treasury, Accessed 2015-07-06
^ Making the Grade: Access to Information Scorecard 2015, March 2015, 80 pages, Center for Effective Government, retrieved 21 March 2016



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Department of the Treasury.





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Treasury.



Official website
Department of the Treasury in the Federal Register
Map of Major Foreign Holders Of Treasury Securities 2009


Annual Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of Finances – These annual reports also contain the reports of the many departments of the Treasury, including the Bureau of the Mint, Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Bureau of Customs, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Secret Service, and the Internal Revenue Service.
United States Department of the Treasury at the Wayback Machine (archived December 26, 1996)
Act to establish the Treasury Department. 1st Congress, 1st Session, Ch. 12, 1 Stat. 65







v
t
e


Agencies under the United States Department of the Treasury






Headquarters: Treasury Building


Steven Mnuchin, Secretary of the Treasury
Vacant, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury





Deputy Secretary
of the Treasury



Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
Community Development Financial Institutions Fund
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration

Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
Office of Tax Policy








Under Secretary
of the Treasury
for International Affairs



Office of East Asia
Office of South and Southeast Asia Nations
Office of Europe & Eurasia
Office of the Western Hemisphere
Office of International Monetary Policy
Office of Banking and Securities
Office of International Debt Policy
Office of Development Policy
Office of Financing Operations
Office of African Nations
Office of the Middle East and North Africa
Office of International Trade
Office of International Investment
Office of Trade Finance
Office of Technical Assistance
Office of Risk and Research Analysis
Exchange Stabilization Fund





Under Secretary of
the Treasury for
Domestic Finance



Advanced Counterfeit Deterrence
Federal Financing Bank
Office of Debt Management
Office of Financial Institutions
Office of Financial Markets
Office of Financial Stability
Office of Fiscal Service
Bureau of the Fiscal Service





Under Secretary of
the Treasury for Terrorism
and Financial Intelligence



Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence
Office of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes
Office of Intelligence and Analysis
Office of Foreign Assets Control
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
Treasury Executive Office for Asset Forfeiture





Treasurer of the United States



Bureau of Engraving and Printing
United States Mint












v
t
e


Federal executive departments of the United States of America



Executive
Departments



Agriculture
Commerce
Defense
Education
Energy
Health and Human Services
Homeland Security
Housing and Urban Development
Interior
Justice
Labor
State
Transportation
Treasury
Veterans Affairs





Former



Air Force
Army
Commerce and Labor
Health, Education, and Welfare
Navy
Post Office
War












v
t
e


Patriot Act




Titles I – II – III – IV – V – VI – VII – VIII – IX – X



Statute legislative and judicial history



History of the Patriot Act





Acts modified



Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968
Electronic Communications Privacy Act
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
Money Laundering Control Act
Bank Secrecy Act
Right to Financial Privacy Act
Fair Credit Reporting Act
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952
Victims of Crime Act of 1984
Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act





People



George W. Bush
John Ashcroft
Alberto Gonzales
Patrick Leahy
Orrin Hatch
Jon Kyl
Dianne Feinstein
Viet D. Dinh
Joe Biden
Michael Chertoff
Barack Obama
Eric Holder
Jim Dempsey
Chuck Schumer
Lamar Smith
Bob Graham
Jay Rockefeller
Arlen Specter
Mike Oxley
Dick Armey
Paul Sarbanes
Trent Lott
Tom Daschle
Russ Feingold
Ellen Huvelle
Ron Paul
Lisa Murkowski
Ron Wyden
Dennis Kucinich
Larry Craig
John E. Sununu
Richard Durbin
Bernie Sanders
Jerrold Nadler
John Conyers, Jr.
Butch Otter





Government organizations



Federal Bureau of Investigation
Department of Justice
Select Committee on Intelligence
Department of the Treasury
FinCEN
Department of State
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Customs Service
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement





Non-government organizations



American Civil Liberties Union
American Library Association
Center for Democracy and Technology
Center for Public Integrity
Electronic Frontier Foundation
Electronic Privacy Information Center
Humanitarian Law Project











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Department_of_the_Treasury&oldid=818330862"					Categories: United States Department of the TreasuryUnited States federal executive departments1789 establishments in the United StatesFinance ministriesFinancial regulatory authorities of the United StatesMinistries established in 1789Robert Mills buildingsHidden categories: Use mdy dates from May 2012Coordinates not on WikidataWebarchive template wayback links