Not to be confused with Secretary of state (U.S. state government).


Secretary of State of the United States



Seal of the Secretary of State




Flag of the Secretary of State






Incumbent
Rex Tillerson
since February 1, 2017



United States Department of State


Style
Mr. Secretary


Member of
Cabinet, National Security Council


Reports to
The President


Seat
Washington, D.C.


Appointer
The President
with Senate advice and consent


Term length
Appointed


Constituting instrument
22 U.S.C. § 2651


Precursor
United States Secretary of Foreign Affairs


Formation
July 27, 1789; 228 years ago (1789-07-27)


First holder
John Jay (acting)
Thomas Jefferson


Succession
Fourth[1]


Deputy
John Sullivan


Salary
$205,700 annually[2]  (Executive Schedule I)[3]


Website
www.state.gov


The Secretary of State is a senior official of the federal government of the United States of America, and as head of the U.S. Department of State, is principally concerned with foreign policy and is considered to be the U.S. government's equivalent of a Minister for Foreign Affairs.[4][5]
The Secretary of State is nominated by the President of the United States and, following a confirmation hearing before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, is confirmed by the United States Senate. The Secretary of State, along with the Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary of Defense, and Attorney General, are generally regarded as the four most important Cabinet members because of the importance in their respective departments.[6] Secretary of State is a Level I position in the Executive Schedule and thus earns the salary prescribed for that level (currently $205,700).[3]
The current Secretary of State is former ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson, the 69th person to hold office since its creation in 1789.



Contents


1 Duties and responsibilities
2 Line of succession
3 List of Secretaries of State
4 References
5 External links



Duties and responsibilities[edit]
The stated duties of the Secretary of State are as follows:[7]

"Supervises the United States Foreign Service" and "administers the Department of State"
Advises the President on matters relating to U.S. foreign policy including the appointment of diplomatic representatives to other nations and on the acceptance, recall, or dismissal of representatives from other nations
"Negotiates, interprets, or terminates treaties and agreements" and "conducts negotiations relating to U.S. foreign affairs"
"Personally participates in or directs U.S. representatives to international conferences, organizations, and agencies"
Provides information and services to U.S. citizens living or traveling abroad such as providing credentials in the form of passports
"Ensures the protection of the U.S. Government to American citizens, property, and interests in foreign countries"
"Supervises the administration of the U.S. immigration policy abroad"
Communicates issues relating the U.S. foreign policy to Congress and to U.S. citizens
"Promotes beneficial economic intercourse between the U.S. and other countries"

The original duties of the Secretary of State include some domestic duties such as:[citation needed]

Receipt, publication, distribution, and preservation of the laws of the United States
Preparation, sealing, and recording of the commissions of Presidential appointees
Preparation and authentication of copies of records and authentication of copies under the Department's seal
Custody of the Great Seal of the United States
Custody of the records of former Secretary of the Continental Congress except for those of the Treasury and War departments

Most of the domestic functions of the Department of State have been transferred to other agencies. Those that remain include storage and use of the Great Seal of the United States, performance of protocol functions for the White House, and the drafting of certain proclamations. The Secretary also negotiates with the individual States over the extradition of fugitives to foreign countries.[8] Under Federal Law,[9] the resignation of a President or of a Vice President is only valid if declared in writing, in an instrument delivered to the office of the Secretary of State. Accordingly, the resignations of President Nixon and of Vice-President Spiro Agnew, domestic issues, were formalized in instruments delivered to the Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger.
As the highest-ranking member of the cabinet, the Secretary of State is the third-highest official of the executive branch of the Federal Government of the United States, after the President and Vice President and is fourth in line to succeed the Presidency, coming after the Vice President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate. Six Secretaries of State have gone on to be elected President. Others, including John Kerry, William Seward, Henry Clay, William Jennings Bryan and Hillary Clinton have been unsuccessful presidential candidates, either before or after their term of office as Secretary of State.
The nature of the position means that Secretaries of State engage in travel around the world. The record for most countries visited in a secretary's tenure is 112 by Hillary Clinton.[10] Second is Madeleine Albright with 96.[11] The record for most air miles traveled in a secretary's tenure is 1.380 million miles by John Kerry.[12] Second is Condoleezza Rice's 1.059 million miles, and third is Clinton's 956,733 miles.[10]


What are the Qualifications of a Secretary of State? He ought to be a Man of universal Reading in Laws, Governments, History. Our whole terrestrial Universe ought to be summarily comprehended in his Mind.
“
”

—John Adams[13]
Line of succession[edit]
The line of succession for the Secretary of State is as follows:[14]

Deputy Secretary of State
Deputy Secretary of State for Management and Resources
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
Under Secretary of State for Management
Remaining Under Secretaries of State (following in the order they took the oath of office)

Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security Affairs
Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs
Under Secretary of State for Civilian Security, Democracy, and Human Rights
Under Secretary of State for Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment


Assistant Secretaries of States for regional bureaus (following in the order they took the oath of office)

Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs


Other Officers (following in the order they took the oath of office)

Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for International Security and Nonproliferation
Assistant Secretary of State for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for Administration
Assistant Secretary of State for Population, Refugees, and Migration
Legal Adviser of the Department of State
Coordinator for International Information Programs
Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for Diplomatic Security
Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for Intelligence and Research
Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor
Assistant Secretary of State for Arms Control, Verification, and Compliance
Director General of the Foreign Service
Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs
Assistant Secretary of State for Conflict and Stabilization Operations
Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs
Coordinator for Counterterrorism


United States Ambassador to the United Nations (New York)
Deputy United States Ambassador to the United Nations (New York)
Remaining U.S. representatives to the United Nations (New York) (following in the order they took the oath of office)

Alternative United States Representative to the United Nations for Special Political Affairs
United States Representative to the United Nations for UN Management and Reform
United States Representative on the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations


The following Chiefs of Missions (in the following order)

United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom
United States Ambassador to Canada
United States Ambassador to Australia
United States Ambassador to Mexico
United States Ambassador to Japan
United States Ambassador to India


Other officers (following in the order they took the oath of office)

United States Ambassadors at Large
Counselor of the United States Department of State
Special Representatives of the President


Remaining Chiefs of Missions (following in the order they took the oath of office)

List of Secretaries of State[edit]
Further information: List of Secretaries of State of the United States

References[edit]


^ "3 U.S. Code § 19 - Vacancy in offices of both President and Vice President; officers eligible to act". Cornell Law School. 
^ "Pay & Leave: Salaries & Wages". Salary Table No. 2015-EX. United States Office of Personnel Management. January 1, 2015. Retrieved January 4, 2016. 
^ a b 5 U.S.C. § 5312.
^ "Heads of State, Heads of Government, Ministers for Foreign Affairs", Protocol and Liaison Service, United Nations. Retrieved November 2, 2012.
^ NATO Member Countries, NATO. Retrieved November 2, 2012.
^ Cabinets and Counselors: The President and the Executive Branch (1997). Congressional Quarterly. p. 87.
^ "Duties of the Secretary of State". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 2017-02-01. 
^ "Duties of the Secretary of State of the United States". www.state.gov. United States Department of State. January 20, 2009. Retrieved March 28, 2010. 
^ "3 U.S. Code § 20 - Resignation or refusal of office". 
^ a b Mark Landler (January 4, 2013). "Scare Adds to Fears That Clinton's Work Has Taken Toll". The New York Times. 
^ Lee, Matthew (June 28, 2012). "Frequent flier Hillary Clinton hits 100-country mark". Detroit Free Press. Associated Press. [dead link]
^ Associated Press (April 6, 2016). "Kerry breaks record for miles traveled by secretary of state". Fox News. 
^ Ford, Worthington C., ed. (1927). Statesman and Friend: Correspondence of John Adams with Benjamin Waterhouse, 1784–1822. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, and Company. p. 57. 
^ "Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of State". Federal Register. 2002-01-11. Retrieved 2016-10-30. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Secretaries of State of the United States.



Listen to this article (info/dl)












This audio file was created from a revision of the article "United States Secretary of State" dated 2010-02-23, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles


Official website



Current U.S. order of precedence (ceremonial)


Preceded by
Ambassadors from the United States
(while at their posts)
Order of Precedence of the United States
as Secretary of State
Succeeded by
Ambassadors to the United States
(in order of tenure)


Preceded by
Otherwise Barack Obama
as Former President
Succeeded by
Otherwise António Guterres
as Secretary-General of the United Nations


Current U.S. presidential line of succession


Preceded by
President pro tempore of the Senate
Orrin Hatch
4th in line
Succeeded by
Secretary of the Treasury
Steve Mnuchin








v
t
e


United States Secretaries of State



Secretary of Foreign Affairs
1781–89



R. Livingston
Jay








Secretary of State
1789–present



Jefferson
Randolph
Pickering
J. Marshall
Madison
Smith
Monroe
Adams
Clay
Van Buren
E. Livingston
McLane
Forsyth
Webster
Upshur
Calhoun
Buchanan
Clayton
Webster
Everett
Marcy
Cass
Black
Seward
Washburne
Fish
Evarts
Blaine
Frelinghuysen
Bayard
Blaine
Foster
Gresham
Olney
Sherman
Day
Hay
Root
Bacon
Knox
Bryan
Lansing
Colby
Hughes
Kellogg
Stimson
Hull
Stettinius
Byrnes
G. Marshall
Acheson
Dulles
Herter
Rusk
Rogers
Kissinger
Vance
Muskie
Haig
Shultz
Baker
Eagleburger
Christopher
Albright
Powell
Rice (tenure)
Clinton (tenure)
Kerry (tenure)
Tillerson












v
t
e


Agencies under the United States Department of State






Headquarters: Harry S Truman Building


Rex Tillerson, Secretary of State


John Sullivan, Deputy Secretary of State and Deputy Secretary of State for Management and Resources


Tom Shannon, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs





Deputy Secretary of State and
Deputy Secretary of State for Management and Resources



Counselor of the Department
Executive Secretariat
Office of U.S. Foreign Assistance Resources
Operations Center








Under Secretary for
Political Affairs



Bureau of African Affairs
Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs
Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs
Bureau of International Organization Affairs
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs
Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs
Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs





Under Secretary for
Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment



Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs
Bureau of Energy Resources
Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs
Office of the Science and Technology Adviser to the Secretary
Office of the Chief Economist





Under Secretary for
Arms Control and International Security Affairs



Bureau of Arms Control, Verification and Compliance
Bureau of International Security and Nonproliferation
Bureau of Political-Military Affairs





Under Secretary for
Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs



Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs
Bureau of Public Affairs
Bureau of International Information Programs
Department Spokesperson
Office of the Historian
Office of Policy, Planning, and Resources for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs
United States Diplomacy Center





Under Secretary for
Management



Bureau of Administration
Bureau of Budget and Planning
Bureau of Consular Affairs
Bureau of Diplomatic Security
Bureau of Human Resources
Bureau of Information Resource Management
Bureau of Overseas Buildings Operations
Diplomatic Reception Rooms
Foreign Service Institute
Office of Children's Issues
Office of eDiplomacy
Office of Foreign Missions
Office of Management Policy, Rightsizing, and Innovation
Office of Medical Services
Office of White House Liaison





Under Secretary for
Civilian Security, Democracy, and Human Rights



Bureau of Conflict and Stabilization Operations
Bureau of Counterterrorism and Countering Violent Extremism
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor
Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs
Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration
Office of Global Criminal Justice
Office of Global Youth Issues
Office to Monitor and Combat Anti-Semitism
Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons





Bureaus/Offices
reporting directly to the Secretary



Bureau of Intelligence and Research
Bureau of Legislative Affairs
Office of Civil Rights
Office of Inspector General
Office of the Legal Adviser
Office of Policy Planning Staff
Office of the Chief of Protocol
Office of Global Food Security
Office of Global Women's Issues
Office of the United States Global AIDS Coordinator
Office of Global Partnerships












v
t
e


Leaders of the United States federal executive departments



Current



Agriculture
Commerce
Defense
Education
Energy
Health and Human Services
Homeland Security
Housing and Urban Development
Interior
Justice
Labor
State
Transportation
Treasury
Veterans Affairs





Past



Commerce and Labor
Health, Education, and Welfare
Navy
Post Office
War












v
t
e


Presidential line of succession in the United States of America






Vice President (Mike Pence)
Speaker of the House of Representatives (Paul Ryan)
President pro tempore of the Senate (Orrin Hatch)
Secretary of State (Rex Tillerson)
Secretary of the Treasury (Steven Mnuchin)
Secretary of Defense (Jim Mattis)
Attorney General (Jeff Sessions)
Secretary of the Interior (Ryan Zinke)
Secretary of Agriculture (Sonny Perdue)
Secretary of Commerce (Wilbur Ross)
Secretary of Labor (Alex Acosta)
Secretary of Health and Human Services (Eric Hargan)
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (Ben Carson)
Secretary of Transportation (Elaine Chao[a])
Secretary of Energy (Rick Perry)
Secretary of Education (Betsy DeVos)
Secretary of Veterans Affairs (David Shulkin)
Secretary of Homeland Security (Kirstjen Nielsen)










^ Although Elaine Chao is the current Secretary of Transportation, she is not a natural-born citizen (acquired U.S. citizenship by naturalization) and thus ineligible for the Presidency.













						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Secretary_of_State&oldid=813229539"					Categories: United States Department of StateUnited States Secretaries of StateCabinet of the United StatesForeign ministersHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2017Spoken articlesArticles with hAudio microformats