





This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (May 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




United Nations Population Fund







Abbreviation
UNFPA


Formation
1969


Legal status
Active


Headquarters
New York City, United States



Head

vacant


Website
www.unfpa.org


The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), formerly the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, is a UN organization. The UNFPA says it "is the lead UN agency for delivering a world where every pregnancy is wanted, every childbirth is safe and every young person's potential is fulfilled".[1] Their work involves the improvement of reproductive health; including creation of national strategies and protocols, and providing supplies and services. The organization has recently been known for its worldwide campaign against child marriage, obstetric fistula and female genital mutilation.
The UNFPA supports programs in more than 150 countries and areas spread across four geographic regions: Arab States and Europe, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, and sub-Saharan Africa. Around three quarters of the staff work in the field. It is a member of the United Nations Development Fund and part of its Executive Committee.[2]



Contents


1 Origins
2 UNFPA and the Sustainable Development Goals
3 Leadership
4 Goodwill ambassadors
5 Areas of work

5.1 How UNFPA Works
5.2 Campaign to end fistula
5.3 Ending female genital mutilation


6 Relations with the US government
7 Other UN population agencies and entities
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Origins[edit]
UNFPA began operations in 1969 as the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (the name was changed in 1987) under the administration of the United Nations Development Fund.[3] In 1971 it was placed under the authority of the United Nations General Assembly.[4][5][6]
UNFPA and the Sustainable Development Goals[edit]
In September 2015, the 193 member states of the United Nations unanimously adopted the Sustainable Development Goals, a set of 17 goals aiming to transform the world over the next 15 years. These goals are designed to eliminate poverty, discrimination, abuse and preventable deaths, address environmental destruction, and usher in an era of development for all people, everywhere.
The Sustainable Development Goals are ambitious, and they will require enormous efforts across countries, continents, industries and disciplines, but they are achievable. UNFPA works with governments, partners and other UN agencies to directly tackle many of these goals – in particular Goal 3 on health, Goal 4 on education and Goal 5 on gender equality – and contributes in a variety of ways to achieving many of the other goals. [7]
Leadership[edit]
Executive Directors and Under-Secretaries-General of the UN
2017–  : Dr Natalia Kanem (Panama)
2011–2017: Dr Babatunde Osotimehin (Nigeria) (Deceased 4 June 2017)
2000–2010: Ms Thoraya Ahmed Obaid (Saudi Arabia)
1987–2000: Dr Nafis Sadik (Pakistan)
1969–1987: Mr Rafael M. Salas (Philippines)
Goodwill ambassadors[edit]
The Fund's Patron is Crown Princess Mary of Denmark.
Its goodwill ambassadors are:

Catarina Furtado
Goedele Liekens
Ashi Sangay Choden Wangchuck
Ashley Judd
Princess Basma bint Talal.

Areas of work[edit]
UNFPA is the world's largest multilateral source of funding for population and reproductive health programs. The Fund works with governments and non-governmental organizations in over 150 countries with the support of the international community, supporting programs that help women, men and young people:

voluntarily plan and have the number of children they desire and to avoid unwanted pregnancies
undergo safe pregnancy and childbirth
avoid spreading sexually transmitted infections
decrease violence against women
increase the equality of women

According to UNFPA these elements promote the right of "reproductive health", that is physical, mental, and social health in matters related to reproduction and the reproductive system.
The Fund raises awareness of and supports efforts to meet these needs, advocates close attention to population concerns and helps developing nations formulate policies and strategies in support of sustainable development. Dr. Osotimehin assumed leadership in January 2011. The Fund is also represented by UNFPA Goodwill Ambassadors and a Patron.
How UNFPA Works[edit]
UNFPA works in partnership with governments, along with other United Nations agencies, communities, NGOs, foundations and the private sector, to raise awareness and mobilize the support and resources needed to achieve its mission to promote the rights and health of women and young people.
Contributions from governments and the private sector to UNFPA in 2016 totaled $848 million. The amount includes $353 million to the organization’s core resources and $495 million earmarked for specific programs and initiatives.
Campaign to end fistula[edit]

This UNFPA-led global campaign works to prevent obstetric fistula, a devastating and socially isolating injury of childbirth, to treat women who live with the condition and help those who have been treated to return to their communities. The campaign works in more than 40 countries in Africa, the Arab States and South Asia.

Ending female genital mutilation[edit]

UNFPA has worked for many years to end the practice of female genital mutilation, the partial or total removal of external female genital organs for cultural or other non-medical reasons. The practice, which affects 100–140 million women and girls across the world, violates their right to health and bodily integrity. In 2007, UNFPA in partnership with UNICEF, launched a $44-million program to reduce the practice by 40 per cent in 16 countries by 2015 and to end it within a generation. UNFPA also recently sponsored a Global Technical Consultation,[8] which drew experts from all over the world to discuss strategies to convince communities to abandon the practice.[9] UNFPA supports the campaign to end female genital mutilation with The Guardian.

Relations with the US government[edit]
UNFPA has been [10] accused by groups opposed to abortion of providing support for government programs which have promoted forced-abortions and coercive sterilizations. UNFPA says it "does not provide support for abortion services".[11] Its charter includes a strong statement condemning coercion.[12] Controversies regarding these claims have resulted in a sometimes shaky relationship between the organization and three presidential administrations, that of Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush, withholding funding from the UNFPA.[13][14]
UNFPA provided aid to Peru's reproductive health program in the mid-to-late 1990s. When it was discovered a Peruvian program had been engaged in carrying out coercive sterilizations, UNFPA called for reforms and protocols to protect the rights of women seeking assistance. UNFPA continued work with the country after the abuses had become public to help end the abuses and reform laws and practices. [15]
From 2002 through 2008, the Bush Administration denied funding to UNFPA that had already been allocated by the US Congress, on the grounds that the UNFPA supported Chinese government programs which include forced abortions and coercive sterilizations. In a letter from the Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns to Congress, the administration said it had determined that UNFPA’s support for China’s population program “facilitates (its) government’s coercive abortion program”, thus violating the Kemp-Kasten Amendment, which bans the use of United States aid to finance organizations that support or take part in managing a program of coercive abortion of sterilization.[16]
The notion that UNFPA had any connection to China's administration of forced abortions was deemed to be unsubstantiated by investigations carried out by various US, UK, and UN teams sent to examine UNFPA activities in China.[10] Specifically, a three-person U.S State Department fact-finding team was sent on a two-week tour throughout China. It wrote in a report to the State Department that it found "no evidence that UNFPA has supported or participated in the management of a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization in China," as has been charged by critics.[10]
However, according to then-Secretary of State Colin Powell, the UNFPA contributed vehicles and computers to the Chinese to carry out their population planning policies. However, both the Washington Post and the Washington Times reported that Powell simply fell in line, signing a brief written by someone else. [17]




Colin Powell at the United Nations.


Rep. Chris Smith (R-NJ), criticized the State Department investigation, saying the investigators were shown "Potemkin Villages" where residents had been intimidated into lying about the family-planning program. Dr. Nafis Sadik, former director of UNFPA said her agency had been pivotal in reversing China's coercive population planning methods, but a 2005 report by Amnesty International and a separate report by the United States State Department found that coercive techniques were still regularly employed by the Chinese, casting doubt upon Sadik's statements.[18]
But Amnesty International found no evidence that UNFPA had supported the coercion. A 2001 study conducted by the pro-life Population Research Institute (PRI) claimed that the UNFPA shared an office with the Chinese family planning officials who were carrying out forced abortions.[19] "We located the family planning offices, and in that family planning office, we located the UNFPA office, and we confirmed from family planning officials there that there is no distinction between what the UNFPA does and what the Chinese Family Planning Office does," said Scott Weinberg, a spokesman for PRI.[20] However, United Nations Members disagreed and approved UNFPA’s new country program me in January 2006. The more than 130 members of the “Group of 77” developing countries in the United Nations expressed support for the UNFPA programmes. In addition, speaking for European democracies – Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, the Netherlands, France, Belgium, Switzerland and Germany – the United Kingdom stated, ”UNFPA’s activities in China, as in the rest of the world, are in strict conformity with the unanimously adopted Programme of Action of the ICPD, and play a key role in supporting our common endeavor, the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms.” [21]
President Bush denied funding to the UNFPA.[22] Over the course of the Bush Administration, a total of $244 million in Congressionally approved funding was blocked by the Executive Branch.
In response, the EU decided to fill the gap left behind by the US under the Sandbaek report. According to its Annual Report for 2008, the UNFPA received its funding mainly from European Governments: Of the total income of M845.3 M, $118 was donated by the Netherlands, $67 M by Sweden, $62 M by Norway, $54 M by Denmark, $53 M by the UK, $52 M by Spain, $19 M by Luxembourg. The European Commission donated further $36 M. The most important non-European donor State was Japan ($36 M). The number of donors exceeded 180 in one year.
In the United States, nonprofit organizations like Friends of UNFPA (formerly Americans for UNFPA) worked to compensate for the loss of United States federal funding by raising private donations.
In January 2009 President Barack Obama restored US funding to UNFPA, saying in a public statement that he would "look forward to working with Congress to restore US financial support for the UN Population Fund. By resuming funding to UNFPA, the US will be joining 180 other donor nations working collaboratively to reduce poverty, improve the health of women and children, prevent HIV/AIDS and provide family planning assistance to women in 154 countries." [23][24]
In April 2017, the U.S. announced that it will cut off funding to UNFPA, on the grounds that it "supports, or participates in the management of, a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization."[25] UNFPA refuted this claim, as all of its work promotes the human rights of individuals and couples to make their own decisions, free of coercion or discrimination. In addition, this is what the United States[26] said during the UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS Executive Board meeting that considered the China programme in 2015:
“During its recent visit, the U.S. delegation observed the positive impact of UNFPA’s rights-based programming in China. We commend the Fund’s adherence to demonstrating the advantages of a voluntary approach to family planning and were pleased to see – in support of its ICPD commitments – increased provider emphasis on patient rights.”
Other UN population agencies and entities[edit]
Entities with competencies about population in the United Nations:

Commission on Population and Development
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs

See also[edit]


United Nations portal



Sandbæk Report
Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition

References[edit]



^ "About us - UNFPA - United Nations Population Fund". Retrieved 21 December 2016. 
^ UNFPA in the UN system. Retrieved 28 February 2013.
^ "UNFPA in the United Nations System". United Nations Population Fund. 
^ United Nations General Assembly  Session -1  Resolution 2815. United Nations Fund for Population Activities A/RES/2815(XXVI)  14 December 1971.  Retrieved 11 July 2008.
^ United Nations General Assembly  Session -1  Resolution 3019. United Nations Fund for Population Activities A/RES/3019(XXVII)  18 December 1972.  Retrieved 11 July 2008.
^ United Nations General Assembly  Session 34  Resolution 104. United Nations Fund for Population Activities A/RES/34/104  14 December 1979.  Retrieved 11 July 2008.
^ "Sustainable development goals - United Nations". Retrieved 21 December 2016. 
^ "Technical Consultation on the Medicalization of Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting". unfpa.org. Retrieved 7 May 2015. 
^ "Gender-based violence - UNFPA - United Nations Population Fund". unfpa.org. Retrieved 7 May 2015. 
^ a b c Cabatu, Elena; Bonk, Kathy (July 4, 2002). "Global Population Media Analysis: UNFPA". National Council for Science and the Environment. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. 
^ "About us". unfpa.org. Retrieved 7 May 2015. 
^ "Maternal health - UNFPA - United Nations Population Fund". unfpa.org. Retrieved 7 May 2015. 
^ Marquis, Christopher (17 July 2004). "U.S. Cuts Off Financing Of U.N. Unit For 3rd Year". The New York Times. 
^ "U.S. Funding for the United National Population Fund (UNFPA) Witheld for the Third Consecutive Year". SIECUS. July 2004. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 8 July 2009. Retrieved 4 September 2009. 
^ Background on withheld US funds Archived 11 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine., United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 2007
^ "Withholding Funds Will Cost Lives In China". Retrieved 21 December 2016. 
^ "China's one-child controversy reignites - Washington Times". The Washingtion Times. Retrieved 7 May 2015. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2008. Retrieved 11 December 2008. 
^ "Congressional Hearing Shows UNFPA Involvement in Forced Abortions". tennesseerighttolife.org. Retrieved 7 May 2015. 
^ Section, United Nations News Service (30 January 2006). "UN News - UN Population Fund's governing body approves new country programme for China". Retrieved 21 December 2016. 
^ Purdum, Todd S. (23 July 2002). "U.S. BLOCKS MONEY FOR FAMILY CLINICS PROMOTED BY U.N". Retrieved 21 December 2016 – via NYTimes.com. 
^ "UNFPA Welcomes Restoration of U.S. Funding". unfpa.org. Retrieved 7 May 2015. 
^ "Mexico City Policy - Voluntary Population Planning". The White House. Retrieved 7 May 2015. 
^ U.S. withdraws funding for U.N. Population Fund - Reuters
^ United States statement at the UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS Executive Board meeting that considered the China programme in 2015



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to United Nations Population Fund.



Official website







v
t
e


 United Nations






António Guterres, Secretary-General
Amina J. Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General
Peter Thomson, General Assembly President





United Nations System




United Nations Charter



Preamble





Principal organs



General Assembly

President


Security Council

Members


Economic and Social Council
Secretariat

Secretary-General
Deputy Secretary-General
Under-Secretary-General


International Court of Justice

statute


Trusteeship Council





Secretariat Offices
and Departments



Headquarters
Envoy on Youth
Spokesperson for the Secretary-General
Geneva
Palace of Nations
Nairobi
Vienna
Economic and Social Affairs
Political Affairs
Public Information

Dag Hammarskjöld Library


Safety and Security
Palestinian Rights
Peacekeeping Operations
Internal Oversight
Legal Affairs
Developing Countries
Sport for Development and Peace
Disarmament Affairs
Outer Space Affairs
Partnerships
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UN organizations by location
United Nations Office for Developing Countries






Programmes and
specialized agencies




FAO
ICAO
IFAD
ILO
IMO
ITC
IPCC
IAEA
MINURSO
UNIDO
ITU
UNAIDS
SCSL
UNCTAD
UNCITRAL
UNCDF
UNDG
UNDP
UNDPI
UNDPKO

peacekeeping


UNEP

OzonAction
UNEP/GRID-Arendal
UNEP-WCMC


UNESCO
UNFIP
UNFPA
UN-HABITAT
OHCHR
UNHCR
UNHRC
UNICEF
UNICRI
UNIDIR
UNITAR
UN-Oceans
UNODC
UNOPS
UNOSAT
UNRISD
UNRWA
UNSSC
UNU

UNU-OP
UNU-CRIS


UNV
UN Women
UNWTO
UPU
WFP
WHO
WIPO
WMO








Members / observers



Full members
Founding members

UNSC Permanent members


Observers

European Union







History



League of Nations
Four Policemen
Declaration by United Nations
Peacekeeping missions

history
timeline


Enlargement





Resolutions



Security Council vetoes
General Assembly

66th
67th


Security Council

Cyprus
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Lebanon
Nagorno-Karabakh
North Korea
Palestine
Syria
Western Sahara







Elections



Secretary-General (2006
2016)
International Court of Justice 2011
General Assembly President (2012
2016)
Security Council (2015
2016)





Related



Bretton Woods system
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Criticism
Delivering as One
Flag

Honour Flag


Four Nations Initiative
Genocide Convention
UN Global Compact
ICC
International Years
UN laissez-passer
Military Staff Committee
Official languages
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Peacekeeping
Treaty Series
UN Day
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Millennium Declaration

Summit
Development Goals


Security Council veto power
UN reform

Security Council reform


UN Art Collection
UN Memorial Cemetery Korea





Other



Outline
UN television film series (1964–1966)
In popular culture












v
t
e


International human rights organisations and institutions



Types



Human rights group
Human rights commission
Human rights institutions
Truth and reconciliation commission





International institutions



Committee on the Rights of the Child
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
International Criminal Court
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
UN Human Rights Committee
UN Human Rights Council
UN Security Council





Regional bodies



African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights
African Court of Justice
European Court of Human Rights
European Committee for the Prevention of Torture
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
Inter-American Court of Human Rights





Multi-lateral bodies



European Union
Council of Europe
Organisation of American States (OAS)
UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA)
International Labour Organization (ILO)
World Health Organization (WHO)
UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
Joint UN Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA)
Commission on the Status of Women (CSW)
UN Population Fund (UNFPA)
UN Children's Fund (UNICEF)
UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
UN Development Programme (UNDP)
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO)
UN Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT)





Major NGOs



Amnesty International
FIDH
Human Rights Watch
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
Emergency NGO
Human Rights First












v
t
e


Global human population



Major topics



Biocapacity
Optimum population
Overpopulation

Malthusian catastrophe


Population
Population ethics
Population momentum
Sustainable development
Women's reproductive rights
Zero population growth





Biological and
related topics



Family planning

Pledge two or fewer


Human population planning

One-child policy
Two-child policy


Population biology
Population decline
Population density

Physiological density


Population dynamics
Population growth
Population model
Population pyramid
Projections of population growth





Human impact on
the environment



Deforestation
Desalination
Desertification
Environmental impact

of agriculture
of aviation
of biodiesel
of concrete
of electricity generation
of the energy industry
of fishing
of irrigation
of mining
of off-roading
of oil shale industry
of palm oil
of paper
of the petroleum industry
of reservoirs
of shipping
of war


Industrialisation
Land degradation
Land reclamation
Overconsumption
Pollution
Quarrying
Urbanization

Loss of green belts
Urban sprawl


Waste
Water scarcity

Overdrafting








Population
ecology




Carrying capacity
Deep ecology
Earth's energy budget
Food security
Habitat destruction
I = P × A  × T
Malthusian growth model
Overshoot (population)
World energy consumption
World energy resources
World3 model





Literature



A Modest Proposal
Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.
An Essay on the Principle of Population
"How Much Land Does a Man Need?"
Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth
Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits
The Limits to Growth
The Population Bomb
The Skeptical Environmentalist
The Ultimate Resource





Publications



Population and Environment
Population and Development Review





Lists



Population and housing censuses by country
Metropolitan areas by population
Population milestone babies






Events and
organizations




7 Billion Actions
International Conference on Population and Development
Population Action International
Population Connection
Population Matters
Population Research Institute
United Nations Population Fund
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
World Population Day
World Population Foundation





Related topics



Classic Maya collapse
Fertility and intelligence
Green Revolution
Holocene extinction
Migration








 Commons
 Human overpopulation
Human activities with impact on the environment
Human migration









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 312835193
LCCN: n89625214
ISNI: 0000 0001 2259 6552
GND: 1086149017
SELIBR: 300773
SUDOC: 027638855
BNF: cb11872728x (data)
NLA: 35632716
NDL: 00328963
NKC: kn20010710018
BNE: XX88409











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_Nations_Population_Fund&oldid=810297212"					Categories: Organizations established in 1969United Nations Development GroupUnited Nations Population FundHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles lacking reliable references from May 2015All articles lacking reliable referencesUse dmy dates from October 2010Official website different in Wikidata and WikipediaWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers