"DHS" redirects here. For other uses, see DHS (disambiguation).

United States Department of Homeland Security


Seal of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security




Flag of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security



Agency overview


Formed
November 25, 2002; 15 years ago (2002-11-25)


Jurisdiction
United States


Headquarters
Nebraska Avenue Complex, Washington, D.C., U.S
38°56′17″N 77°4′56″W﻿ / ﻿38.93806°N 77.08222°W﻿ / 38.93806; -77.08222


Employees
229,000 (2017) [1]


Annual budget
$40.6 billion (2017)[2]


Agency executives



Kirstjen Nielsen, Secretary
Elaine Duke, Deputy Secretary





Child agencies



United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
Federal Emergency Management Agency
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Transportation Security Administration
United States Coast Guard
National Protection and Programs Directorate
United States Secret Service
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
Citizenship & Immigration Services Ombudsmen
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office
Management Directorate
Office for Civil Rights & Civil Liberties
Office of General Counsel
Office of Health Affairs
Office of Intelligence & Analysis
Office of Legislative Affairs
Office of Operations Coordination
Office of Partnership & Engagement
Office of Policy
Office of Public Affairs
Office of the Inspector General
Privacy Office
Science & Technology Directorate





Website
www.dhs.gov








"The DHS March"



The United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is a cabinet department of the United States federal government with responsibilities in public security, roughly comparable to the interior or home ministries of other countries. Its stated missions involve anti-terrorism, border security, immigration and customs, cyber security, and disaster prevention and management.[3] It was created in response to the September 11 attacks, and is the youngest U.S. cabinet department.
In fiscal year 2017, it was allocated a net discretionary budget of $40.6 billion.[2] With more than 240,000 employees,[4] DHS is the third largest Cabinet department, after the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs.[5] Homeland security policy is coordinated at the White House by the Homeland Security Council. Other agencies with significant homeland security responsibilities include the Departments of Health and Human Services, Justice, and Energy.
The former Secretary, John F. Kelly, was replaced by Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen on December 5, 2017.[6]



Contents


1 Function
2 Structure
3 National Terrorism Advisory System
4 History

4.1 Creation
4.2 Changes under Michael Chertoff


5 Seal
6 Headquarters
7 Disaster preparedness and response

7.1 Ready.gov
7.2 National Incident Management System
7.3 National Response Framework
7.4 Surge Capacity Force


8 Cyber-security
9 Expenditures

9.1 Audit of expenditures


10 Criticism

10.1 Excess, waste, and ineffectiveness
10.2 Data mining (ADVISE)
10.3 Fusion centers

10.3.1 MIAC report
10.3.2 2009 Virginia terrorism threat assessment


10.4 Mail interception
10.5 Employee morale
10.6 Freedom of Information Act processing performance


11 See also
12 References
13 External links



Function[edit]
Whereas the Department of Defense is charged with military actions abroad, the Department of Homeland Security works in the civilian sphere to protect the United States within, at, and outside its borders. Its stated goal is to prepare for, prevent, and respond to domestic emergencies, particularly terrorism.[7] On March 1, 2003, DHS absorbed the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and assumed its duties. In doing so, it divided the enforcement and services functions into two separate and new agencies: Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Citizenship and Immigration Services. The investigative divisions and intelligence gathering units of the INS and Customs Service were merged forming Homeland Security Investigations. Additionally, the border enforcement functions of the INS, including the U.S. Border Patrol, the U.S. Customs Service, and the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service were consolidated into a new agency under DHS: U.S. Customs and Border Protection. The Federal Protective Service falls under the National Protection and Programs Directorate.
Structure[edit]




Organizational chart showing the chain of command among the top-level officials in the Department of Homeland Security, as of July 17, 2008




Play media


A video released in 2016 by the DHS, detailing its duties and responsibilities.


The Department of Homeland Security is headed by the Secretary of Homeland Security with the assistance of the Deputy Secretary. The Department contains the components listed below.[8]


Child Agency
Title of Head/Leader
Incumbent


Citizenship & Immigration Services Ombudsman
Director
Maria M. Odom[9]


Domestic Nuclear Detection Office
Director
James F. McDonnell


Federal Emergency Management Agency
Administrator
Brock Long


Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers
Director
Thomas J. Walters[10]


Management Directorate
Under Secretary
Russell Deyo[11]


National Protection and Programs Directorate
Under Secretary
Suzanne E. Spaulding


Office for Civil Rights & Civil Liberties
Officer
Megan H. Mack[12]


Office of General Counsel
General Counsel
Stevan E. Bunnell[13]


Office of Health Affairs
Assistant Secretary/Chief Medical Officer
Kathryn Brinsfield[14]


Office of Intelligence and Analysis
Under Secretary
David Glawe


Office of Legislative Affairs
Assistant Secretary
M. Tia Johnson[15]


Office of Operations Coordination
Director
Richard M. Chávez[16]


Office of Partnership & Engagement
Assistant Secretary



Office of Policy
Assistant Secretary



Office of Public Affairs
Assistant Secretary



Office of the Inspector General
Inspector General
John Roth[17]


Privacy Office
Chief Privacy Officer/Chief FOIA Officer
Jonathan R. Cantor[18]


Science & Technology Directorate
Under Secretary



Transportation Security Administration
Administrator
David Pekoske


United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
Acting Director
James McCament[19]


United States Coast Guard
Commandant
Admiral Paul F. Zukunft[20]


U.S. Customs and Border Protection
Acting Commissioner
Kevin K. McAleenan [21]


U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Acting Director
Thomas D. Homan[22]


United States Secret Service
Director
Randolph D. Alles[23]


Agencies:

United States Citizenship and Immigration Services: Processes and examines citizenship, residency, and asylum requests from aliens.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection: Law enforcement agency that enforces U.S. laws along its international borders (air, land, and sea) including its enforcement of U.S. immigration, customs, and agriculture laws while at and patrolling between all U.S. ports-of-entry.
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement: Law enforcement agency divided into two bureaus:




An agency that enforces U.S. laws while it investigates and gathers intelligence on national and international criminal activities that threaten the security of the homeland (Homeland Security Investigations); and
An agency that investigates violations of the Immigration and Nationality Act and enforces the detention, deportation, and removal of violators of United States immigration law (Enforcement and Removal Operations).




Transportation Security Administration: Responsible for aviation security (domestic and international, most notably conducting passenger screenings at airports), as well as land and water transportation security
United States Coast Guard: Military service responsible for law enforcement, maritime security, national defense, maritime mobility, and protection of natural resources.[24]
United States Secret Service: Law enforcement agency tasked with two distinct and critical national security missions:




Investigative Mission – The investigative mission of the USSS is to safeguard the payment and financial systems of the United States from a wide range of financial and electronic-based crimes.
Protective Mission – The protective mission of the USSS is to ensure the safety of the President of the United States, the Vice President of the United States, their immediate families, and foreign heads of state.




Federal Emergency Management Agency: agency that oversees the federal government's response to natural disasters like earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, forest fires, etc.

(Passports for U.S. citizens are issued by the United States Department of State, not the Department of Homeland Security.)
Advisory groups:

Homeland Security Advisory Council: State and local government, first responders, private sector, and academics
National Infrastructure Advisory Council: Advises on security of public and private information systems
Homeland Security Science and Technology Advisory Committee: Advise the Under Secretary for Science and Technology.
Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council: Coordinate infrastructure protection with private sector and other levels of government
Interagency Coordinating Council on Emergency Preparedness and Individuals with Disabilities
Task Force on New Americans: "An inter-agency effort to help immigrants learn English, embrace the common core of American civic culture, and become fully American."

Other components:

Domestic Nuclear Detection Office: Develop nuclear threat detection capabilities at all levels of government and in the private sector
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center: Interagency law enforcement training facilities located in Georgia, New Mexico, and South Carolina.
National Protection and Programs Directorate: risk-reduction, encompassing both physical and virtual threats and their associated human elements.

Federal Protective Service: Federal law enforcement and security agency that protects and investigates crimes against U.S. federal buildings, properties, assets, and federal government interests.
National Communications System


Directorate for Science and Technology: Research and development
Directorate for Management: Responsible for internal budgets, accounting, performance monitoring, and human resources
Office of Policy: Long-range policy planning and coordination

Office of Immigration Statistics


DHS Office of Health Affairs: Medical preparedness
Office of Intelligence and Analysis: Identify and assess threats based on intelligence from various agencies
Office of Operations Coordination: Monitor domestic security situation on a daily basis, coordinate activities with state and local authorities and private sector infrastructure
Office of the Secretary includes the Privacy Office, Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, Office of Inspector General, Citizenship and Immigration Services Ombudsman, Office of Legislative Affairs, Office of the General Counsel, Office of Public Affairs, Office of Counternarcotics Enforcement (CNE), Office of the Executive Secretariat (ESEC), and the Military Advisor's Office.
National Cybersecurity Center

In an August 5, 2002 speech, President Bush said: "We're fighting ... to secure freedom in the homeland."[25] Prior to the creation of DHS, American presidents had referred to the U.S. as "the nation" or "the republic", and to its internal policies as "domestic".[26] Also unprecedented was the use, from 2002, of the phrase "the homeland" by White House spokespeople.[26]
National Terrorism Advisory System[edit]
In 2011, the Department of Homeland Security phased out the old Homeland Security Advisory System, replacing it with a two-level National Terrorism Advisory System. The system has two types of advisories: Alerts and Bulletins. NTAS Bulletins permit the Secretary to communicate critical terrorism information that, while not necessarily indicative of a specific threat against the United States, can reach homeland security partners or the public quickly, thereby allowing recipients to implement necessary protective measures. Alerts are issued when there is specific and credible information of a terrorist threat against the United States. Alerts themselves have two levels: Elevated and Imminent. An Elevated Alert is issued when there is credible information about an attack but only general information about timing or a target. An Imminent Alert is issued when the threat is very specific and impending in the very near term.




The Homeland Security Advisory System scale


On March 12, 2002, the Homeland Security Advisory System, a color-coded terrorism risk advisory scale, was created as the result of a Presidential Directive to provide a "comprehensive and effective means to disseminate information regarding the risk of terrorist acts to Federal, State, and local authorities and to the American people." Many procedures at government facilities are tied into the alert level; for example a facility may search all entering vehicles when the alert is above a certain level. Since January 2003, it has been administered in coordination with DHS; it has also been the target of frequent jokes and ridicule on the part of the administration's detractors about its ineffectiveness. After resigning, Tom Ridge stated that he did not always agree with the threat level adjustments pushed by other government agencies.[27]
In January 2003, the office[clarification needed] was merged into the Department of Homeland Security and the White House Homeland Security Council, both of which were created by the Homeland Security Act of 2002. The Homeland Security Council, similar in nature to the National Security Council, retains a policy coordination and advisory role and is led by the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security.[28]
As of January 13, 2011, the DHS advised the American public of an 'elevated national threat' level, recommending that all Americans 'should establish an emergency preparedness kit and emergency plan for themselves and their family, and stay informed about what to do during an emergency'.[29]
History[edit]
Creation[edit]




Seal of the Office of Homeland Security, the predecessor to DHS


In response to the September 11 attacks, President George W. Bush announced the establishment of the Office of Homeland Security (OHS) to coordinate "homeland security" efforts. The office was headed by former Pennsylvania Governor Tom Ridge, who assumed the title of Assistant to the President for Homeland Security. The official announcement stated:


“
The mission of the Office will be to develop and coordinate the implementation of a comprehensive national strategy to secure the United States from terrorist threats or attacks. The Office will coordinate the executive branch's efforts to detect, prepare for, prevent, protect against, respond to, and recover from terrorist attacks within the United States.[28]
”


Ridge began his duties as OHS director on October 8, 2001.
According to Peter Andreas, a border theorist, the creation of DHS constituted the most significant government reorganization since the Cold War,[30] and the most substantial reorganization of federal agencies since the National Security Act of 1947, which placed the different military departments under a secretary of defense and created the National Security Council and Central Intelligence Agency. DHS also constitutes the most diverse merger of federal functions and responsibilities, incorporating 22 government agencies into a single organization.[31]
The Department of Homeland Security was established on November 25, 2002, by the Homeland Security Act of 2002. It was intended to consolidate U.S. executive branch organizations related to "homeland security" into a single Cabinet agency. The following 22 agencies were incorporated into the new department:[32]




A U.S. Customs and Border Protection Officer addresses Dick Cheney (center), then Vice President of the United States, Saxby Chambliss (center right), a U.S. senator from Georgia and Michael Chertoff (far right), then United States Secretary of Homeland Security in 2005





Original agency
Original department
New agency or office after transfer


U.S. Customs Service
Treasury
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement


Immigration and Naturalization Service
Justice
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services


Federal Protective Service
General Services Administration
National Protection and Programs Directorate


Transportation Security Administration
Transportation
Transportation Security Administration


Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
Treasury
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center


Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
(part)
Agriculture
U.S. Customs and Border Protection


Office for Domestic Preparedness
Justice
Responsibilities distributed within FEMA


Federal Emergency Management Agency
none
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)


Strategic National Stockpile
National Disaster Medical System
Health and Human Services
Returned to HHS, July, 2004


Nuclear Incident Response Team
Energy
Responsibilities distributed within FEMA


Domestic Emergency Support Team
Justice
Responsibilities distributed within FEMA


National Domestic Preparedness Office
Justice (FBI)
Responsibilities distributed within FEMA


CBRN Countermeasures Programs
Energy
Science & Technology Directorate


Environmental Measurements Laboratory
Energy
Science & Technology Directorate


National Biological Warfare
Defense Analysis Center
Defense
Science & Technology Directorate


Plum Island Animal Disease Center
Agriculture
Science & Technology Directorate


Federal Computer Incident Response Center
General Services Administration
US-CERT, Office of Cybersecurity and Communications
National Programs and Predaredness Directorate


National Communications System
Defense
Office of Cybersecurity and Communications
National Programs and Predaredness Directorate


National Infrastructure Protection Center
Justice (FBI)
Office of Operations Coordination
Office of Infrastructure Protection


Energy Security and Assurance Program
Energy
Office of Infrastructure Protection


U.S. Coast Guard
Transportation
U.S. Coast Guard


U.S. Secret Service
Treasury
U.S. Secret Service


Prior to the signing of the bill, controversy about its adoption centered on whether the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central Intelligence Agency should be incorporated in part or in whole (neither were included). The bill was also controversial for the presence of unrelated "riders", as well as for eliminating certain union-friendly civil service and labor protections for department employees. Without these protections, employees could be expeditiously reassigned or dismissed on grounds of security, incompetence or insubordination, and DHS would not be required to notify their union representatives.
The plan stripped 180,000 government employees of their union rights.[33] In 2002, Bush officials argued that the September 11 attacks made the proposed elimination of employee protections imperative.[34]
Congress ultimately passed the Homeland Security Act of 2002 without the union-friendly measures, and President Bush signed the bill into law on November 25, 2002. It was the largest U.S. government reorganization in the 50 years since the United States Department of Defense was created.
Tom Ridge was named secretary on January 24, 2003 and began naming his chief deputies. DHS officially began operations on January 24, 2003, but most of the department's component agencies were not transferred into the new Department until March 1.[28]




President George W. Bush signs the Homeland Security Appropriations Act of 2004 on October 1, 2003.


After establishing the basic structure of DHS and working to integrate its components and get the department functioning, Ridge announced his resignation on November 30, 2004, following the re-election of President Bush. Bush initially nominated former New York City Police Department commissioner Bernard Kerik as his successor, but on December 10, Kerik withdrew his nomination, citing personal reasons and saying it "would not be in the best interests" of the country for him to pursue the post.
Changes under Michael Chertoff[edit]
On January 11, 2005, President Bush nominated federal judge Michael Chertoff to succeed Ridge. Chertoff was confirmed on February 15, 2005, by a vote of 98–0 in the U.S. Senate. He was sworn in the same day.[28]
In February 2005, DHS and the Office of Personnel Management issued rules relating to employee pay and discipline for a new personnel system named MaxHR. The Washington Post said that the rules would allow DHS "to override any provision in a union contract by issuing a department-wide directive" and would make it "difficult, if not impossible, for unions to negotiate over arrangements for staffing, deployments, technology and other workplace matters."[34]
In August 2005, U.S. District Judge Rosemary M. Collyer blocked the plan on the grounds that it did not ensure collective-bargaining rights for DHS employees.[34]
A federal appeals court ruled against DHS in 2006; pending a final resolution to the litigation, Congress's fiscal year 2008 appropriations bill for DHS provided no funding for the proposed new personnel system.[34] DHS announced in early 2007 that it was retooling its pay and performance system and retiring the name "MaxHR".[28]
In a February 2008 court filing, DHS said that it would no longer pursue the new rules, and that it would abide by the existing civil service labor-management procedures. A federal court issued an order closing the case.[34]
Seal[edit]
Main article: Seal of the United States Department of Homeland Security




Seal of the Department of Homeland Security.


A DHS press release dated June 6, 2003[35] explains the seal as follows:

The seal is symbolic of the Department's mission – to prevent attacks and protect Americans – on the land, in the sea and in the air. In the center of the seal, a graphically styled white American eagle appears in a circular blue field. The eagle's outstretched wings break through an inner red ring into an outer white ring that contains the words "U.S. DEPARTMENT OF" in the top half and "HOMELAND SECURITY" in the bottom half in a circular placement. The eagle's wings break through the inner circle into the outer ring to suggest that the Department of Homeland Security will break through traditional bureaucracy and perform government functions differently. In the tradition of the Great Seal of the United States, the eagle's talon on the left holds an olive branch with 13 leaves and 13 seeds while the eagle's talon on the right grasps 13 arrows.


Centered on the eagle's breast is a shield divided into three sections containing elements that represent the American homeland – air, land, and sea. The top element, a dark blue sky, contains 22 stars representing the original 22 entities that have come together to form the department. The left shield element contains white mountains behind a green plain underneath a light blue sky. The right shield element contains four wave shapes representing the oceans alternating light and dark blue separated by white lines.

The seal was developed with input from senior DHS leadership, employees, and the U.S. Commission on Fine Arts. The Ad Council – which partners with DHS on its Ready.gov campaign – and the consulting company Landor Associates were responsible for graphic design and maintaining heraldic integrity.
Headquarters[edit]




Nebraska Avenue Complex in 2016.


Since its inception, the department has had its temporary headquarters in Washington, D.C.'s Nebraska Avenue Complex, a former naval facility. The 38-acre (15 ha) site, across from American University, has 32 buildings comprising 566,000 square feet (52,600 m2) of administrative space.[36] In early 2007, the Department submitted a $4.1 billion plan to Congress to consolidate its 60-plus Washington-area offices into a single headquarters complex at the St. Elizabeths Hospital campus in Anacostia, Southeast Washington, D.C. The earliest DHS would begin moving to St. Elizabeths is 2012.[37]
The move is being championed by District of Columbia officials because of the positive economic impact it will have on historically depressed Anacostia. The move has been criticized by historic preservationists, who claim the revitalization plans will destroy dozens of historic buildings on the campus.[38] Community activists have criticized the plans because the facility will remain walled off and have little interaction with the surrounding area.[39] On January 8, 2009, the National Capital Planning Commission approved the Department of Homeland Security's plans to move into the campus of St. Elizabeths Hospital.[40] In February 2015 the General Services Administration said that the site would open in 2021.[41]
Disaster preparedness and response[edit]
Ready.gov[edit]




Ready.gov program logo


Soon after the formation of Department of Homeland Security, the department worked with the Ad Council to launch the Ready Campaign, a national public service advertising (PSA) campaign to educate and empower Americans to prepare for and respond to emergencies including natural and man-made disasters. With pro bono creative support from the Martin Agency of Richmond, Virginia, the campaign website "Ready.gov" and materials were conceived in March 2002 and launched in February 2003, just before the launch of the Iraq War.[42][43][44] One of the first announcements that garnered widespread public attention to this campaign was one by Tom Ridge in which he stated that in the case of a chemical attack, citizens should use duct tape and plastic sheeting to build a homemade bunker, or "sheltering in place" to protect themselves.[45][46] As a result, the sales of duct tape skyrocketed and DHS was criticized for being too alarmist.[47]
On March 1, 2003, the Federal Emergency Management Agency was absorbed into the DHS, and in fall of 2008, took over coordination of the campaign. The Ready Campaign and its Spanish language version Listo.gov asks individuals to do three things: build an emergency supply kit,[48] make a family emergency plan[49] and be informed about the different types of emergencies that can occur and how to respond.[50] The campaign messages have been promoted through television, radio, print, outdoor and web PSAs,[51] as well as brochures, toll-free phone lines and the English and Spanish language websites Ready.gov and Listo.gov.
The general campaign aims to reach all Americans, but targeted resources are also available via "Ready Business" for small- to medium-sized business and "Ready Kids" for parents and teachers of children ages 8–12. In 2015, the campaign also launched a series of PSAs to help the whole community,[52] people with disabilities and others with access and functional needs prepare for emergencies, which included open captioning, a certified deaf interpreter and audio descriptions for viewers who are blind or have low vision.[53]
National Incident Management System[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



On March 1, 2004, the National Incident Management System (NIMS) was created. The stated purpose was to provide a consistent incident management approach for federal, state, local, and tribal governments. Under Homeland Security Presidential Directive-5, all federal departments were required to adopt the NIMS and to use it in their individual domestic incident management and emergency prevention, preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation program and activities.
National Response Framework[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In December 2004, the National Response Plan (NRP) was created, in an attempt to align federal coordination structures, capabilities, and resources into a unified, all-discipline, and all-hazards approach to domestic incident management. The NRP was built on the template of the NIMS.
On January 22, 2008, the National Response Framework was published in the Federal Register as an updated replacement of the NRP, effective March 22, 2008.
Surge Capacity Force[edit]
The Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act directs the DHS Secretary to designate employees from throughout the Department to staff a Surge Capacity Force (SCF). During a declared disaster, the DHS Secretary will determine if SCF support is necessary. The Secretary will then authorize FEMA to task and deploy designated personnel from DHS components and other Federal Executive Agencies to respond to extraordinary disasters.[54]
Cyber-security[edit]
See also: Cyber-security regulation
The DHS National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) is responsible for the response system, risk management program, and requirements for cyber-security in the U.S. The division is home to US-CERT operations and the National Cyber Alert System.[55][56] The DHS Science and Technology Directorate helps government and private end-users transition to new cyber-security capabilities. This directorate also funds the Cyber Security Research and Development Center, which identifies and prioritizes research and development for NCSD.[56] The center works on the Internet's routing infrastructure (the SPRI program) and Domain Name System (DNSSEC), identity theft and other online criminal activity (ITTC), Internet traffic and networks research (PREDICT datasets and the DETER testbed), Department of Defense and HSARPA exercises (Livewire and Determined Promise), and wireless security in cooperation with Canada.[57]
On October 30, 2009, DHS opened the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center. The center brings together government organizations responsible for protecting computer networks and networked infrastructure.[58]
In January 2017, DHS officially designated state-run election systems as critical infrastructure. The designation made it easier for state and local election officials to get cybersecurity help from the federal government. In October 2017, DHS convened a Government Coordinating Council (GCC) for the Election Infrastructure Subsection with representatives from various state and federal agencies such as the Election Assistance Commission and National Association of Secretaries of State.[59]
Expenditures[edit]
In the United States Federal Budget for 2010, entitled 'A New Era of Responsibility', the DHS was allocated a discretionary budget of $42.7 billion (financial year 2009: $40.1 billion).[60] The end-of-year DHS Annual Financial Report for financial year 2010 showed a net cost of operations of $56.4 billion (FY 2009, restated: $49.9 billion), out of total budgetary resources of $83.2 billion (FY 2009, restated: $85.2 billion).[61] The components with the highest net cost were US Coast Guard ($12.1 billion), U.S. Customs and Border Protection ($11.6 billion), and Federal Emergency Management Agency ($10.5 billion).[61] Revenues of $10.4 billion were generated in the year (FY 2009, restated: $9.8 billion).[61]
According to the Washington Post, "DHS has given $31 billion in grants since 2003 to state and local governments for homeland security and to improve their ability to find and protect against terrorists, including $3.8 billion in 2010."[62]
Audit of expenditures[edit]
The DHS independent auditor is KPMG, one of the Big Four audit firms.[63] Due to the level of material weaknesses identified, KPMG was unable to audit the DHS financial statements for FY 2010.[63] KPMG was unable to express an audit opinion on the FY 2009,[64] FY 2008,[65] FY 2007,[66] FY 2005,[67] and FY 2003[68] financial statements. Attempts to access the reports for FY 2006 and FY 2004 within the 'information for citizens' portal met with a 404 error.[69] The Message from the DHS Chief Financial Officer in the FY 2010 report states 'This Annual Financial Report (AFR) is our principal financial statement of accountability to the President, Congress and the American public. The AFR gives a comprehensive view of the Department's financial activities and demonstrates the Department's stewardship of taxpayer dollars.'[70] The Message from the DHS Chief Financial Officer concludes 'I am extremely proud of the Department's accomplishments ... we will continue to build upon our successes.'[70] The Secretary of Homeland Security endorsed this message saying that the DHS is 'continuing to be responsible stewards of taxpayer resources. The scope of our mission is broad, challenging, and vital to the security of the Nation ... Thank you for your partnership and collaboration. Yours very truly, Janet Napolitano.'[71]
Criticism[edit]
See also: Criticism of government response to Hurricane Katrina
The Department of Homeland Security has received substantial criticism over excessive bureaucracy, waste, fraud, ineffectiveness and lack of transparency. Its information sharing centers have been accused of violating American civil liberties and targeting American citizens as potential threats to national security.
Excess, waste, and ineffectiveness[edit]
The Department of Homeland Security has been dogged by persistent criticism over excessive bureaucracy, waste, ineffectiveness and lack of transparency. Congress estimates that the department has wasted roughly $15 billion in failed contracts (as of September 2008[update]).[72] In 2003, the department came under fire after the media revealed that Laura Callahan, Deputy Chief Information Officer at DHS with responsibilities for sensitive national security databases, had obtained her bachelor, masters, and doctorate computer science degrees through Hamilton University, a diploma mill in a small town in Wyoming.[73] The department was blamed for up to $2 billion of waste and fraud after audits by the Government Accountability Office revealed widespread misuse of government credit cards by DHS employees, with purchases including beer brewing kits, $70,000 of plastic dog booties that were later deemed unusable, boats purchased at double the retail price (many of which later could not be found), and iPods ostensibly for use in "data storage".[74][75][76][77]
A 2015 inspection of IT infrastructure found that the department was running over a hundred computer systems whose owners were unknown, including Secret and Top Secret databases, many with out of date security or weak passwords. Basic security reviews were absent, and the department had apparently made deliberate attempts to delay publication of information about the flaws.[78]
Data mining (ADVISE)[edit]
The Associated Press reported on September 5, 2007, that DHS had scrapped an anti-terrorism data mining tool called ADVISE (Analysis, Dissemination, Visualization, Insight and Semantic Enhancement) after the agency's internal Inspector General found that pilot testing of the system had been performed using data on real people without required privacy safeguards in place.[79][80] The system, in development at Lawrence Livermore and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory since 2003, has cost the agency $42 million to date. Controversy over the program is not new; in March 2007, the Government Accountability Office stated that "the ADVISE tool could misidentify or erroneously associate an individual with undesirable activity such as fraud, crime or terrorism." Homeland Security's Inspector General later said that ADVISE was poorly planned, time-consuming for analysts to use, and lacked adequate justifications.[81]
Fusion centers[edit]
Main article: Fusion center
Fusion centers are terrorism prevention and response centers, many of which were created under a joint project between the Department of Homeland Security and the US Department of Justice's Office of Justice Programs between 2003 and 2007. The fusion centers gather information not only from government sources, but also from their partners in the private sector.[82][83]
They are designed to promote information sharing at the federal level between agencies such as the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Department of Justice, US Military and state and local level government. As of July 2009[update], the Department of Homeland Security recognized at least seventy-two fusion centers.[84] Fusion centers may also be affiliated with an Emergency Operations Center that responds in the event of a disaster.
There are a number of documented criticisms of fusion centers, including relative ineffectiveness at counterterrorism activities, the potential to be used for secondary purposes unrelated to counterterrorism, and their links to violations of civil liberties of American citizens and others.[85]
David Rittgers of the Cato Institute has noted:

a long line of fusion center and DHS reports labeling broad swaths of the public as a threat to national security. The North Texas Fusion System labeled Muslim lobbyists as a potential threat; a DHS analyst in Wisconsin thought both pro- and anti-abortion activists were worrisome; a Pennsylvania homeland security contractor watched environmental activists, Tea Party groups, and a Second Amendment rally; the Maryland State Police put anti-death penalty and anti-war activists in a federal terrorism database; a fusion center in Missouri thought that all third-party voters and Ron Paul supporters were a threat....[86]

MIAC report[edit]
The Missouri Information Analysis Center (MIAC) made news in 2009 for targeting supporters of third party candidates (such as Ron Paul), pro-life activists, and conspiracy theorists as potential militia members.[87] Anti-war activists and Islamic lobby groups were targeted in Texas, drawing criticism from the American Civil Liberties Union.[88]
According to the Department of Homeland Security:[89]

The Privacy Office has identified a number of risks to privacy presented by the fusion center program:

Justification for fusion centers
Ambiguous Lines of Authority, Rules, and Oversight
Participation of the Military and the Private Sector
Data Mining
Excessive Secrecy
Inaccurate or Incomplete Information
Mission Creep


2009 Virginia terrorism threat assessment[edit]
In 2009, the Virginia Fusion Center came under criticism for publishing a terrorism threat assessment which stated that certain universities are potential hubs for terror related activity.[90] The report targeted historically black colleges and identified hacktivism as a form of terrorism.[91]
Mail interception[edit]
In 2006, MSNBC reported that Grant Goodman, "an 81-year-old retired University of Kansas history professor, received a letter from his friend in the Philippines that had been opened and resealed with a strip of dark green tape bearing the words "by Border Protection" and carrying the official Homeland Security seal."[92] The letter was sent by a devout Catholic Filipino woman with no history of supporting Islamic terrorism.[92] A spokesman for U.S. Customs and Border Protection "acknowledged that the agency can, will and does open mail coming to U.S. citizens that originates from a foreign country whenever it's deemed necessary":

"All mail originating outside the United States Customs territory that is to be delivered inside the U.S. Customs territory is subject to Customs examination," says the CBP Web site. That includes personal correspondence. "All mail means 'all mail,'" said John Mohan, a CBP spokesman, emphasizing the point.[92]

The Department declined to outline what criteria are used to determine when a piece of personal correspondence should be opened or to say how often or in what volume Customs might be opening mail.[92]
Goodman's story provoked outrage in the blogosphere,[93] as well as in the more established media. Reacting to the incident, Mother Jones remarked that "[u]nlike other prying government agencies, Homeland Security wants you to know it is watching you."[94] CNN observed that "[o]n the heels of the NSA wiretapping controversy, Goodman's letter raises more concern over the balance between privacy and security."[95]
Employee morale[edit]
In July 2006, the Office of Personnel Management conducted a survey of federal employees in all 36 federal agencies on job satisfaction and how they felt their respective agency was headed. DHS was last or near to last in every category including;

33rd on the talent management index
35th on the leadership and knowledge management index
36th on the job satisfaction index
36th on the results-oriented performance culture index

The low scores were attributed to major concerns about basic supervision, management and leadership within the agency. Examples from the survey reveal most concerns are about promotion and pay increase based on merit, dealing with poor performance, rewarding creativity and innovation, leadership generating high levels of motivation in the workforce, recognition for doing a good job, lack of satisfaction with various component policies and procedures and lack of information about what is going on with the organization.[96][97]
DHS is the only large federal agency to score below 50% in overall survey rankings. It was last of large federal agencies in 2014 with 44.0% and fell even lower in 2015 at 43.1%, again last place.[98]
Freedom of Information Act processing performance[edit]
In the Center for Effective Government analysis of 15 federal agencies which receive the most Freedom of Information Act FOIA requests, published in 2015 (using 2012 and 2013 data), the Department of Homeland Security earned a D by scoring 69 out of a possible 100 points, i.e. did not earn a satisfactory overall grade. It also had not updated its FOIA policies since the 2007 FOIA amendments.[99]
See also[edit]


United States portal



Container Security Initiative
E-Verify
Electronic System for Travel Authorization
Emergency Management Institute
Homeland Security USA
Homeland security grant
National Biodefense Analysis and Countermeasures Center (NBACC), Ft Detrick, MD
National Interoperability Field Operations Guide
National Strategy for Homeland Security
Project Hostile Intent
Public Safety Canada
Shadow Wolves
Terrorism in the United States
United States visas
United States Visitor and Immigrant Status Indicator Technology (US-VISIT)
Visa Waiver Program
Interior ministry. Generally in other countries "interior ministries" usually deal with internal police, immigration and border control duties.
Home Office (UK)

References[edit]


^ "Secretary of Homeland Security". Homeland Security. January 25, 2017. 
^ a b "Budget In Brief: Fiscal Year 2017" (PDF). Homeland Security. pp. 1, 2. Retrieved March 23, 2017. 
^ "Our Mission". Homeland Security. 
^ "About DHS". Homeland Security. June 29, 2016. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2010-03-10. Retrieved 2011-05-31. 
^ "Senate confirms Kirstjen Nielsen to head Homeland Security". CBS News. 2017-12-05. Retrieved 2017-12-05. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-02-21. Retrieved 2016-07-29. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2006-12-13. Retrieved 2006-12-14. 
^ "Maria M. Odom | Homeland Security". Homeland Security. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Our Leadership | FLETC". www.fletc.gov. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Russell C. Deyo | Homeland Security". Homeland Security. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Megan H. Mack | Homeland Security". Homeland Security. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Stevan E. Bunnell | Homeland Security". Homeland Security. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Kathryn Brinsfield | Homeland Security". Homeland Security. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "M. Tia Johnson | Homeland Security". Homeland Security. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Richard "Rich" M. Chávez | Homeland Security". Homeland Security. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Meet the IG". www.oig.dhs.gov. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Jonathan R. Cantor | Homeland Security". Homeland Security. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "James McCament, Acting Director, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services". USCIS. Retrieved 2017-04-04. 
^ "U. S. Coast Guard Senior Leadership". www.uscg.mil. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Commissioner R. Gil Kerlikowske | U.S. Customs and Border Protection". www.cbp.gov. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "ICE Leadership". www.ice.gov. Retrieved 2016-12-26. 
^ "Leadership". www.secretservice.gov. Retrieved 2017-05-12. 
^ The United States Coast Guard has both military and law enforcement functions. Title 14 of the United States Code provides that "The Coast Guard as established January 28, 1915, shall be a military service and a branch of the armed forces of the United States at all times." Coast Guard units, or ships of its predecessor service, the Revenue Cutter Service, have seen combat in every war and armed conflict of the United States since 1790, including the Iraq War.
^ Bovard, James. "Moral high ground not won on battlefield", USA Today, October 8, 2008. Retrieved on 2008-08-19.
^ a b Wolf, Naomi (2007). The End of America, page 27. Chelsea Green Publishing. ISBN 978-1-933392-79-0.
^ "Remarks by Governor Ridge Announcing Homeland Security Advisory System". Retrieved May 5, 2017. 
^ a b c d e "National Strategy For Homeland Security" (PDF). DHS. Retrieved October 31, 2007. [dead link]
^ "Copy of press release 0046". US Department of Defense. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ [Peter Andreas: Redrawing the line 2003:92], additional text.
^ Perl, Raphael (2004)."The Department of Homeland Security: Background and Challenges", Terrorism—reducing Vulnerabilities and Improving Responses, Committee on Counterterrorism Challenges for Russia and the United States, Office for Central Europe and Eurasia Development, Security, and Cooperation Policy and Global Affairs, in Cooperation with the Russian Academy of Sciences, page 176. National Academies Press. ISBN 0-309-08971-9.
^ "History: Who Became Part of the Department?" United States Department of Homeland Security website Archived 2012-07-12 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved on 2008-08-22.
^ Chomsky, Noam (2005). Imperial Ambitions, page 199. Metropolitan Books. ISBN 0-8050-7967-X.
^ a b c d e Stephen Barr. "DHS Withdraws Bid to Curb Union Rights", The Washington Post page D01, February 20, 2008. Retrieved on 2008-08-20.
^ "Fact Sheet: Department of Homeland Security Seal", DHS press release, June 19, 2003. DHS website Archived October 24, 2006, at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved on August 26, 2008.
^ "Statement of Secretary Tom Ridge". DHS. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ Losey, Stephen (March 19, 2007). "Homeland Security plans move to hospital compound". Federal Times. Archived from the original on January 2, 2013. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "Most Endangered Places". 2/2009. National Trust. Retrieved February 4, 2009. 
^ Holley, Joel (June 17, 2007). "Tussle Over St. Elizabeths". The Washington Post. p. C01. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "NCPC Approves Final Master Plan for DHS Headquarters at St. Elizabeths". Archived from the original on 2009-01-17. 
^ "DHS Gets Green Light". Federal Times. [dead link]
^ Forbes, Daniel (May 28, 2004). "$226 Million in Govt Ads Helped Pave the Way for War". Antiwar.com. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "Homeland Security: Ready.Gov". 12/29/2003. Outdoor Advertising Association of America. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "CNN Live at daybreak". Aired February 20, 2003. CNN. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "Homeland Security Frequently Asked Questions". ready.gov. Archived from the original on November 6, 2007. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "Clean Air". ready.gov. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "Are You Ready.gov?". February 21, 2003. lies.com. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "Build A Kit | Ready.gov". www.ready.gov. Retrieved 2016-10-31. 
^ "Make A Plan | Ready.gov". www.ready.gov. Retrieved 2016-10-31. 
^ "About the Ready Campaign | Ready.gov". www.ready.gov. Retrieved 2016-10-31. 
^ "Emergency Preparedness". AdCouncil. Retrieved 2016-10-31. 
^ Newswire, MultiVu - PR. "FEMA, Ad Council Launch New PSA Focused on People with Disabilities Preparing for Emergencies". Multivu. Retrieved 2016-10-31. 
^ "Individuals with Disabilities and Others with Access and Functional Needs | Ready.gov". ready.gov. Retrieved 2016-10-31. 
^ "Surge Capacity Force - Homeland Security". 
^ "National Cyber Security Division". U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved June 14, 2008. 
^ a b "FAQ: Cyber Security R&D Center". U.S. Department of Homeland Security S&T Directorate. Retrieved June 14, 2008. 
^ "Ongoing Research and Development". U.S. Department of Homeland Security S&T Directorate. Retrieved June 14, 2008. 
^ AFP-JiJi, "U.S. boots up cybersecurity center", October 31, 2009.
^ Murtha, Alex (2017-10-17). "DHS, partners convene for government council on protecting election infrastructure". Homeland Preparedness News. Retrieved 2017-12-20. 
^ "United States Federal Budget for Fiscal Year 2010 (vid. p.72)" (PDF). Government Printing Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 5, 2011. Retrieved January 9, 2010. 
^ a b c "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2010 (vid. pp.37,38,41)" (PDF). Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ Priest, Dana and Arkin, William (December 20, 2010) [1], The Washington Post
^ a b "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2010 (vid. pp.147 ff.)" (PDF). US Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2009 (vid. p.134)" (PDF). US Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2008 (vid. p.44)" (PDF). US Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2007 (vid. p.50)" (PDF). US Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2005 (vid. p.294)" (PDF). US Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2003 (vid. p.40)" (PDF). US Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2006, FY 2004 (404 error)". US Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ a b "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2010 (vid. pp.33 ff.)" (PDF). US Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ "US Department of Homeland Security Annual Financial Report FY 2010 (vid. pp.4 f.)" (PDF). US Department of Homeland Security. Retrieved January 13, 2011. 
^ Hedgpeth, Dana (September 17, 2008). "Congress Says DHS Oversaw $15 Billion in Failed Contracts". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 17, 2008. 
^ Diplomas For Sale - Retrieved 2015-08-05
^ Lipton, Eric (July 19, 2006). "Homeland Security Department Is Accused of Credit Card Misuse". The New York Times. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ Jakes Jordan, Lara (July 19, 2006). "Credit Card Fraud at DHS". Homeland Security Weekly. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "Government's Katrina credit cards criticized". Associated Press. September 15, 2005. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ Hedgpeth, Dana (September 17, 2008). "Congress says DHS oversaw $15 billion in failed contracts". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 17, 2008. 
^ McCarthy, Kieren (November 20, 2015). "Who's running dozens of top-secret unpatched databases? The Dept of Homeland Security". The Register. Retrieved January 3, 2016. 
^ "ADVISE Could Support Intelligence Analysis More Effectively" (PDF). pdf file. DHS. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ Singel, Ryan (March 20, 2007). "Homeland Data Tool Needs Privacy Help, Report Says". Wired. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ Sniffen, Michael J. (September 5, 2007). "DHS Ends Criticized Data-Mining Program". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ Monahan, T. 2009. The Murky World of 'Fusion Centres'. Criminal Justice Matters 75 (1): 20-21.
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2011-04-29. Retrieved 2011-02-02. 
^ Report on Fusion Centers July 29, 2009 Democracy Now
^ Monahan, T. and Palmer, N.A. 2009. The Emerging Politics of DHS Fusion Centers. Security Dialogue 40 (6): 617-636.
^ Rittgers, David (2011-02-02) We're All Terrorists Now Archived 2011-04-15 at the Wayback Machine., Cato Institute
^ "'Fusion Centers' Expand Criteria to Identify Militia Members". Fox News. March 23, 2009. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2012-04-08. Retrieved 2012-07-13. 
^ Privacy Impact Assessment for the Department of Homeland Security State, Local, and Regional Fusion Center Initiative December 11, 2008 [2]
^ "The Raw Story - Fusion center declares nation's oldest universities possible terror threat". 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-12-20. Retrieved 2011-02-02. 
^ a b c d Meeks, Brock (2006-01-06) Homeland Security opening private mail, MSNBC
^ Cole, John (2006-01-09) Your Mail- Free for Government Inspection, Balloon Juice
^ Dees, Diane (2006-01-09) Department of Homeland Security opens Kansas professor's mail, Mother Jones
^ Transcript from The Situation Room (January 12, 2006)
^ "Homeland Security employees rank last in job satisfaction survey". ABC Inc., WLS-TV Chicago. February 8, 2007. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ Conroy, Bill (January 31, 2007). "DHS memo reveals agency personnel are treated like "human capital"". Narco News. Retrieved October 31, 2007. 
^ "Best Places to Work Agency Rankings". Partnership for Public Service. 
^ Making the Grade: Access to Information Scorecard 2015 March 2015, 80 pages, Center for Effective Government, retrieved March 21, 2016


External links[edit]



Wikinews has related news: NSA to participate in U.S. cybersecurity





Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Department of Homeland Security.



Official website
DHS in the Federal Register
"DHS Organizational Chart" (PDF).  (144 KB) – from March 20, 2008.







v
t
e


Federal executive departments of the United States of America



Executive
Departments



Agriculture
Commerce
Defense
Education
Energy
Health and Human Services
Homeland Security
Housing and Urban Development
Interior
Justice
Labor
State
Transportation
Treasury
Veterans Affairs





Former



Air Force
Army
Commerce and Labor
Health, Education, and Welfare
Navy
Post Office
War












v
t
e


Agencies under the United States Department of Homeland Security






Headquarters: Nebraska Avenue Complex


Elaine Duke, Acting Secretary of Homeland Security
Elaine Duke, Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security





Deputy Secretary



United States Coast Guard
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Citizenship and Immigration Services
Customs and Border Protection
Federal Emergency Management Agency
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
United States Secret Service
Office of Operations Coordination
Transportation Security Administration
Office of Health Affairs
Office of Policy
Office of Immigration Statistics
Homeland Security Advisory Council








National Protection
and Programs

National Protection and Programs Directorate

Federal Protective Service
Office of Cybersecurity and Communications
Office of Infrastructure Protection
Office of Biometric Identity Management
Office of Cyber and Infrastructure Analysis





Science and
Technology

Science and Technology Directorate

Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency
Explosives Division
Chemical and Biological Defense Division
Border and Maritime Security Division
Human Factors and Behavioral Sciences Division
Infrastructure Protection and Disaster Management Division
Cyber Security Division (National Cybersecurity Center)





Intelligence and Analysis



Office of Intelligence and Analysis





Management



Management Directorate








Law enforcement in the United States
Terrorism in the United States












v
t
e


Current leadership of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security






Secretary: Elaine Duke (Acting)
Deputy Secretary: Elaine Duke
Chief of Staff for Operations: Jan Lesher
Chief of Staff for Policy: Noah Kroloff
Executive Secretary / Executive Director for Operations and Administration: Phil McNamara
General Counsel: Ivan Fong
Senior Military Advisor: Rear Admiral Charles Michel
Under Secretary, Management Directorate: Claire Grady
Deputy Under Secretary, Management Directorate: Shari Barbeau
Chief Administrative Services Officer: Donald G. Bathurst
Acting Chief Financial Officer: Peggy Sherry
Chief Human Capital Officer: Jeff Neal
Chief Information Officer: Richard Spires
Acting Chief Procurement Officer: Thomas Essig
Chief Security Officer: Jerry Williams
Under Secretary, National Protection & Programs Directorate (NPPD): Rand Beers
Acting Assistant Secretary, Cyber Security and Communications: Rear Admiral Mike Brown
Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of Infrastructure Protection: James Snyder
Under Secretary, Science & Technology Directorate (S&T): Tara O'Toole
Deputy Under Secretary, Science & Technology Directorate (S&T): Bradley Buswell
Acting Under Secretary, Office of Intelligence & Analysis (I&A): Bart Johnson
Assistant Secretary, Intergovernmental Affairs: Philip A. McNamara
Assistant Secretary (acting as Under Secretary-equivalent), Office of Policy (PLCY): David Heyman
Chairman, Homeland Security Advisory Council: William H. Webster
Assistant Secretary, International Affairs: Alan Bersin
Assistant Secretary, Policy Development: Arif Alikhan
Assistant Secretary, Private Sector: Douglas A. Smith
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Strategic Plans: Alan Cohn
Assistant Secretary, State and Local Law Enforcement: Vacant
Director, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS): Lee Cissna
Commandant, United States Coast Guard (USCG): Admiral Robert J. Papp, Jr.
Commissioner, United States Customs and Border Protection (CBP): W. Ralph Basham
Acting Assistant Secretary, United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE): John P. Torres
Administrator, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): W. Craig Fugate
Director, United States Secret Service: Mark J. Sullivan
Assistant Secretary/Administrator, Transportation Security Administration (TSA): John Pistole
Citizenship and Immigration Services Ombudsman: Prakash I. Khatri
Officer for Civil Rights & Civil Liberties: Daniel W. Sutherland
Acting Director of the Office of Counternarcotics Enforcement: John Leech
Acting Director of the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office: Chuck Galloway
Director, Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLTEC): Connie L. Patrick
Acting Federal Coordinator, Recovery and Rebuilding of Gulf Coast Region: Paul Conway
Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of Health Affairs/Chief Medical Officer: Dr. Jon R. Kromher
Inspector General: Richard L. Skinner
Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of Legislative Affairs: James Howe
Director, Operations Coordination: Roger T. Rufe, Jr. (USCG Ret)
Acting Chief Privacy Officer: John Kropf
Assistant Secretary, Office of Public Affairs: William R. Knoche












v
t
e


United States Armed Forces






 Book
 Portal

A
MC
N
AF
CG


 Category

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Navbox

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Leadership



Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
Secretary of Defense
Deputy Secretary of Defense
Secretary of Homeland Security
Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security
Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Chairman
Vice Chairman


United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:

Senate
House


Active duty four-star officers
United States military seniority
National Security Act of 1947
Goldwater–Nichols Act





Organization




Service departments



Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
Navy (Secretary)
Air Force (Secretary)
Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard





Branches



Army (Chief of Staff)
Marine Corps (Commandant)
Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
Air Force (Chief of Staff)
Coast Guard (Commandant)





Reserve components



Reserves:

Army
Marine Corps Reserve
N
AF
CG


National Guard:

A
AF







Civilian auxiliaries



Military Auxiliary Radio System
Merchant Marine
Civil Air Patrol
Coast Guard Auxiliary





Unified Combatant Command



Northern
Central
European
Pacific
Southern
Africa
Special Operations
Strategic
Transportation








Structure



United States Code

Title 10
Title 14
Title 32
Title 50


The Pentagon
Installations
Units:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Logistics
Media
Unit mottoes





Operations and history



Current deployments
Conflicts
Wars
Timeline
History:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Colonial
World War II
Civil affairs
African Americans
Asian Americans
Buddhist Americans
Jewish Americans
Muslim Americans
Pakistani Americans
Sikh Americans
Historiography:

Army Center of Military History
MC History Division
Naval History and Heritage Command
Air Force Historical Research Agency


American official war artists:

Army Art Program
AF Art Program







Personnel




Training



MEPS
ASVAB
Recruit training:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Officer candidate school:

A
MC
N
AF


Warrant:

A
MC


Service academies:

A (prep)
N (prep)
AF (prep)
CG
Merchant Marine


ROTC

A:ECP
MC/N
AF


Medical
Other education





Uniforms



Uniforms:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Awards & decorations:

Inter-service
A
MC/N
AF
CG
Foreign
International
Devices


Badges:

Identification
A
MC
N
AF
CG







Ranks



Enlisted:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Warrant officers
Officer:

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Other



Oath:

Enlistment
Office


Creeds & Codes:

Code of Conduct
NCO
A
MC
N
AF
CG


Service numbers:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
Pay
Uniform Code of Military Justice
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Military Health System/TRICARE
Separation
Veterans Affairs
Conscription
Chiefs of Chaplains:

A
MC
N
AF
CG










Equipment



A
MC:

vehicles
weapons
other


N
AF
CG




Land



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles (active)





Sea



All watercraft
Ships:

A
N (active)
AF
CG
MSC


Weapons:

N
CG


Aircraft:

N
CG


Reactors





Air



Aircraft

World War I
active


Aircraft designation
Missiles
Helicopter arms





Other



Nuclear football
Electronics (designations)
Flags:

A
MC
N
AF
CG
Ensign
Jack
Guidons


Food
WMDs:

Nuclear
Biological
Chemical













Legend
A = Army
MC = Marine Corps
N = Navy
AF = Air Force
CG = Coast Guard












v
t
e


Immigration to the United States and related topics




Relevant colonial era,
United States and
international laws





Colonial era



Nationality law in the American Colonies
Plantation Act 1740





18th century



Naturalization Act 1790 / 1795 / 1798





19th century



Naturalization Law 1802
Civil Rights Act of 1866
14th Amendment (1868)
Naturalization Act 1870
Page Act (1875)
Immigration Act of 1882
Chinese Exclusion (1882)
Scott Act (1888)
Immigration Act of 1891
Geary Act (1892)





1900–1949



Naturalization Act 1906
Gentlemen's Agreement (1907)
Immigration Act of 1907
Immigration Act 1917 (Asian Barred Zone)
Emergency Quota Act (1921)
Cable Act (1922)
Immigration Act 1924
Tydings–McDuffie Act (1934)
Filipino Repatriation Act (1935)
Nationality Act of 1940
Bracero Program (1942–1964)
Magnuson Act (1943)
War Brides Act (1945)
Luce–Celler Act (1946)





1950–1999



UN Refugee Convention (1951)
Immigration and Nationality Act 1952 / 1965
Refugee Act (1980)
Immigration Reform and Control Act (1986)
American Homecoming Act (1989)
Immigration Act 1990
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) (1996)
Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act (NACARA) (1997)
American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act (ACWIA) (1998)





21st century



American Competitiveness in the 21st Century Act (AC21) (2000)
Legal Immigration Family Equity Act (LIFE Act) (2000)
H-1B Visa Reform Act (2004)
REAL ID Act (2005)
Secure Fence Act (2006)
DACA (2012)
Executive Order 13769 (2017)
Executive Order 13780 (2017)








Visas and policies



Visa policy

Permanent residence
Visa Waiver Program
Temporary protected status
Asylum
Green Card Lottery


US-VISIT
Security Advisory Opinion
E-Verify
Section 287(g)
National Origins Formula






Government
organizations




Department of Homeland Security
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
U.S. Border Patrol
U.S. Customs and Border Protection
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS)
Board of Immigration Appeals





Supreme Court cases



United States v. Wong Kim Ark (1898)
United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind (1923)
United States v. Brignoni-Ponce (1975)
Chamber of Commerce v. Whiting (2011)






Related issues
and events




Economic impact
Eugenics in the United States
Guest worker program
Human trafficking
Human smuggling

Coyotaje


Immigration reform
Immigration reduction
Mexico–United States barrier
Labor shortage
March for America
Illegal immigrant population
Reverse immigration
2006 protests
Unaccompanied minors from Central America
List of people deported from the United States





Geography



Mexico–United States border
Canada–United States border
United States Border Patrol interior checkpoints





Proposed legislation



DREAM Act (2001–2010)
H.R. 4437 (2005)
McCain–Kennedy (2005)
SKIL (2006)
Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2006
STRIVE Act (2007)
Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act 2007
Uniting American Families Act (2000–2013)
Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013
SAFE Act (2015)
RAISE Act (2017)





Immigration stations
and points of entry



Angel Island
Castle Garden
East Boston
Ellis Island
Sullivan's Island
Washington Avenue





Operations



"Wetback" (1954)
"Peter Pan" (1960–1962)
"Babylift" (1975)
"Gatekeeper" (1994)
"Endgame" (2003–2012)
"Front Line" (2004–2005)
"Streamline" (2005–present)
"Return to Sender" (2006–2007)
"Jump Start" (2006–2008)





State legislation



California DREAM Act (2006–2010)
Arizona SB 1070 (2010)
Alabama HB 56 (2011)






Non-governmental
organizations




Arizona Border Recon
Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles
Coalition for Comprehensive Immigration Reform
National Immigration Forum
Center for Community Change
We Are America Alliance
CASA of Maryland
Mexica Movement
Mexicans Without Borders
Federation for American Immigration Reform
Minuteman Project
Minuteman Civil Defense Corps
California Coalition for Immigration Reform
Save Our State
Center for Immigration Studies
National Korean American Service & Education Consortium (NAKASEC)
NumbersUSA
Negative Population Growth
Migration Policy Institute
Utah Compact
Center for Migration Studies of New York









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 121741457
LCCN: no2002051730
ISNI: 0000 0001 2214 8194
GND: 10062583-6











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Department_of_Homeland_Security&oldid=817415711"					Categories: 2002 establishments in the United StatesDisaster preparedness in the United StatesHistory of the United States (1991–present)Internal affairs ministriesMinistries established in 2002Organizations based in Washington, D.C.Public safety ministriesRussian interference in the 2016 United States electionsUnited States Department of Homeland SecurityUnited States federal executive departmentsUnited States intelligence agenciesHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Webarchive template wayback linksUse mdy dates from December 2017Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesWikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2010Articles needing additional references from December 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing potentially dated statements from September 2008All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing potentially dated statements from July 2009Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers