This article is about the American Census of Agriculture. For the Canadian Census of Agriculture, see Canadian Census of Agriculture.






This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (August 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





United States Census of Agriculture



National Agricultural Statistics Service logo.



Country
United States


Inaugurated
1840; 178 years ago (1840)


Website


agcensus.usda.gov


The Census of Agriculture is a census conducted every five years by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) that provides the only source of uniform, comprehensive agricultural data for every county in the United States.



Contents


1 Overview
2 History
3 Uses of census data
4 External links



Overview[edit]
The census is a complete count of U.S. farms and ranches and the people who operate them. The Census looks at land use and ownership, operator characteristics, production practices, income and expenditures and many other areas. This picture, when compared to earlier censuses, helps to measure trends and new developments in the agricultural sector of our nation’s economy.
Title 7 of the United States Code requires all those who receive a census report form to respond – even if they did not operate a farm or ranch during the census year. The same law protects the confidentiality of all census respondents. NASS uses the information only for statistical purposes and publishes data only in tabulated totals. The report cannot be used for purposes of taxation, investigation or regulation. The privacy of individual census records is also protected from disclosure through the Freedom of Information Act.
For census purposes, a farm is defined as a place from which $1,000 or more of agricultural products were produced and sold, or normally would have been sold, during the census year. This farm definition has changed nine times throughout history and the current definition has been in effect since 1974.
History[edit]
The first Census of Agriculture was taken in 1840 as part of the sixth decennial population census. The census remained a part of the decennial census through 1950, with separate mid-decade Censuses of Agriculture taken in 1925, 1935 and 1945. As time passed, census years were adjusted until the reference year coincided with the economic censuses covering other sectors of the nation’s economy. Currently, the Census of Agriculture is conducted for years ending in 2 and 7.
The 1997 Census of Agriculture has historical significance because it was the first conducted by NASS after the 1997 Appropriations Act shifted responsibility of the Census of Agriculture from the U.S. Census Bureau, which is part of the U.S. Department of Commerce, to USDA.
Uses of census data[edit]
Census data is used by all those who serve farmers and rural communities – federal, state and local governments, agribusinesses, trade associations and many others. For instance:

Companies and cooperatives use the information to determine the locations of facilities that will serve agricultural producers.
Community planners use the information to target needed services to rural residents.
USDA uses the information to ensure that local service centers are staffed at appropriate levels.
Legislators use the information when shaping farm policies and programs.
Farmers and ranchers use Census data to help make informed decisions about the future of their own operations.

External links[edit]

Census of Agriculture — official website
NASS web site
7 U.S.C. § 2204g: Authority of Secretary of Agriculture to conduct census of agriculture







v
t
e


United States Censuses






1790
1800
1810
1820
1830
1840
1850
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020








United States Census Bureau
United States Census of Agriculture












v
t
e


 Agencies under the United States Department of Agriculture






Headquarters: Jamie L. Whitten Building


Sonny Perdue, Secretary of Agriculture
Stephen Censky, Deputy Secretary of Agriculture





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Natural Resources and Environment



Forest Service
Office of Environmental Markets








Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Rural Development*



Rural Housing Service
Rural Utilities Service
Rural Business-Cooperative Service





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services



Food and Nutrition Service
Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Food Safety



Food Safety and Inspection Service





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Research, Education, and Economics



Agricultural Research Service
Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service
Economic Research Service
National Agricultural Library
National Agricultural Statistics Service
National Institute of Food and Agriculture





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Marketing and Regulatory Programs



Agricultural Marketing Service
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Trade and Foreign Agricultural Affairs**



Foreign Agricultural Service
Commodity Credit Corporation





Under Secretary of Agriculture for
Farm Production and Conservation**



Farm Service Agency
Risk Management Agency
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation
Natural Resources Conservation Service





Office of the Chief Financial Officer



National Finance Center






*Reports directly to the Secretary of Agriculture
**Created from Under Secretary of Agriculture for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Census_of_Agriculture&oldid=777407597"					Categories: Censuses in the United StatesUnited States Department of AgricultureUnited States CensusHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2008All articles lacking in-text citationsPages using deprecated image syntax