Coordinates: 38°02′06″N 78°30′18″W﻿ / ﻿38.035°N 78.505°W﻿ / 38.035; -78.505

University of Virginia




Type
Public, Flagship


Established
1819



Academic affiliations

AAU
APLU
ORAU
URA
SURA


Endowment
$8.621 billion (2016)[1]


Budget
$1.39 billion[2]


President
Teresa A. Sullivan



Academic staff

2,102


Students
22,391[2]


Undergraduates
15,891[2]


Postgraduates
6,500[2]


Location
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States


Campus
Small city (Rural/Suburban)
1,682 acres (6.81 km2)
World Heritage Site


Colors
Orange and Blue[3]
         


Nickname
Cavaliers
Wahoos



Sporting affiliations

NCAA Division I – ACC


Mascot
Cavalier


Website
www.virginia.edu


  






UNESCO World Heritage Site



Official name
Monticello and the University of Virginia in Charlottesville


Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, iv, vi


Designated
1987 (11th session)


Reference no.
442


Region
Europe and North America








The University of Virginia (U.Va. or UVA), frequently referred to simply as Virginia, is a public research university and the flagship for the Commonwealth of Virginia. Founded in 1819 by Declaration of Independence author Thomas Jefferson, UVA is known for its historic foundations, student-run honor code, and secret societies.
UNESCO designated UVA as America's first collegiate World Heritage Site in 1987, an honor shared jointly with Jefferson's nearby homestead, Monticello.[4] The university's original governing Board of Visitors included Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe. Monroe was the sitting President of the United States at the time of its foundation. Earlier Presidents Jefferson and Madison were UVA's first two rectors, and Jefferson conceived and designed the original courses of study and Academical Village.
UVA is the first elected member of the research-driven Association of American Universities within the American South, since 1904, and remains the only AAU member in Virginia. The university is classified as a Research University with Very High Research by the Carnegie Foundation, and is considered Virginia's flagship university by the College Board.[5][6][7] Its recent research efforts have been recognized by such scientific media as the journal Science, which named UVA faculty as discovering two of its top ten global scientific breakthroughs for 2015.[8] UVA faculty and alumni have also founded a large number of companies, such as Reddit, that produce more than $1.6 trillion in annual revenue, equivalent to the 10th-largest economy in the world.[9][10]
UVA's academic strength is broad, with 121 majors across the eight undergraduate and three professional schools.[11] Students come to attend the university in Charlottesville from all 50 states and 148 countries.[12][13][14] The historic 1,682-acre (2.6 sq mi; 680.7 ha) campus is internationally protected by UNESCO and has been ranked as one of the most beautiful collegiate grounds in the country.[15] UVA additionally maintains 2,913 acres southeast of the city, at Morven Farm.[16] The university also manages the College at Wise in Southwest Virginia, and until 1972 operated George Mason University and the University of Mary Washington in Northern Virginia.
Virginia student athletes compete in 27 collegiate sports and the Cavaliers lead the Atlantic Coast Conference in men's team NCAA championships with 18, additionally placing second in women's national titles with seven. UVA was awarded the men's Capital One Cup in 2015 after fielding the top overall men's athletics program in the nation.[17]



Contents


1 History

1.1 1800s
1.2 1900s
1.3 2000s


2 Campus

2.1 Academical Village
2.2 Libraries
2.3 Other areas
2.4 Student housing


3 Organization and administration
4 Academics

4.1 Research
4.2 Innovation
4.3 Rankings
4.4 Other recognition
4.5 Admissions and financial aid


5 Student life

5.1 Student-faculty interaction and connections
5.2 Global citizenship initiatives
5.3 Student leadership opportunities
5.4 Secret societies and debating societies
5.5 Honor system
5.6 Student activities
5.7 Greek life
5.8 Transportation


6 Athletics

6.1 Championships
6.2 Rivalries
6.3 Sponsorship


7 People

7.1 Faculty
7.2 Alumni


8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the University of Virginia
1800s[edit]




Thomas Jefferson is the founder of the university


In 1802, while serving as President of the United States, Thomas Jefferson wrote to artist Charles Willson Peale that his concept of the new university would be "on the most extensive and liberal scale that our circumstances would call for and our faculties meet," and that it might even attract talented students from "other states to come, and drink of the cup of knowledge".[18] Virginia was already home to the College of William and Mary, but Jefferson lost all confidence in his alma mater, partly because of its religious nature – it required all its students to recite a catechism – and its stifling of the sciences.[19][20] Jefferson had flourished under William and Mary professors William Small and George Wythe decades earlier, but the college was in a period of great decline and his concern became so dire by 1800 that he expressed to British chemist Joseph Priestley, "we have in that State, a college just well enough endowed to draw out the miserable existence to which a miserable constitution has doomed it."[19][21][22] These words would ring true some seventy years later when William and Mary fell bankrupt after the Civil War and the Williamsburg college was shuttered completely in 1881, later being revived only in a limited capacity as a small college for teachers until the twentieth century.[23]
In 1817, three Presidents (Jefferson, James Monroe, and James Madison) and Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court John Marshall joined 24 other dignitaries at a meeting held in the Mountain Top Tavern at Rockfish Gap. After some deliberation, they selected nearby Charlottesville as the site of the new University of Virginia.[24] Farmland just outside Charlottesville was purchased from James Monroe by the Board of Visitors as Central College. The school laid its first building's cornerstone late in that same year, and the Commonwealth of Virginia chartered the new university on January 25, 1819. John Hartwell Cocke collaborated with James Madison, Monroe, and Joseph Carrington Cabell to fulfill Jefferson's dream to establish the university. Cocke and Jefferson were appointed to the building committee to supervise the construction.[25] The university's first classes met on March 7, 1825.[26]
In contrast to other universities of the day, at which one could study in either medicine, law, or divinity, the first students at the University of Virginia could study in one or several of eight independent schools – medicine, law, mathematics, chemistry, ancient languages, modern languages, natural philosophy, and moral philosophy.[27] Another innovation of the new university was that higher education would be separated from religious doctrine. UVA had no divinity school, was established independently of any religious sect, and the Grounds were planned and centered upon a library, the Rotunda, rather than a church, distinguishing it from peer universities still primarily functioning as seminaries for one particular strain of Protestantism or another.[28] Jefferson opined to philosopher Thomas Cooper that "a professorship of theology should have no place in our institution", and never has there been one. There were initially two degrees awarded by the university: Graduate, to a student who had completed the courses of one school; and Doctor to a graduate in more than one school who had shown research prowess.[29]




James Madison was the 2nd rector of the University of Virginia until 1836


Jefferson was intimately involved in the university to the end, hosting Sunday dinners at his Monticello home for faculty and students until his death. So taken with the import of what he viewed the university's foundations and potential to be, and counting it amongst his greatest accomplishments, Jefferson insisted his grave mention only his status as author of the Declaration of Independence and Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, and father of the University of Virginia. Thus, he eschewed mention of his national accomplishments, such as the Louisiana Purchase and any other aspects of his presidency, in favor of his role with the young university.
Initially, some of the students arriving at the University matched the then-common picture of college students; wealthy, spoiled aristocrats with a sense of privilege which often led to brawling, or worse. This was a source of frustration for Jefferson, who assembled the students during the school's first year, on October 3, 1825, to criticize such behavior; but was too overcome to speak. He later spoke of this moment as "the most painful event" of his life.[30]
Although the frequency of such irresponsible behavior dropped after Jefferson's expression of concern, it did not die away completely. Like many universities and colleges, it experienced periodic student riots, culminating in the shooting death of Professor John A. G. Davis, Chairman of the Faculty, in 1840. This event, in conjunction with the growing popularity of temperance and a rise in religious affiliation in society in general, seems to have resulted in a permanent change in student attitudes, and the streak of seriously antisocial behavior among students which had so bothered Jefferson finally vanished.[30]
In the year of Jefferson's death, poet Edgar Allan Poe enrolled at the university, where he excelled in Latin.[31] The Raven Society, an organization named after Poe's most famous poem, continues to maintain 13 West Range, the room Poe inhabited during the single semester he attended the university.[32] He left because of financial difficulties. The School of Engineering and Applied Science opened in 1836, making UVA the first comprehensive university to open an engineering school.
Unlike the vast majority of peer colleges in the South, the university was kept open throughout the Civil War, an especially remarkable feat with its state seeing more bloodshed than any other and the near 100% conscription of the entire American South.[33] After Jubal Early's total loss at the Battle of Waynesboro, Charlottesville was willingly surrendered to Union forces to avoid mass bloodshed and UVA faculty convinced George Armstrong Custer to preserve Jefferson's university.[34] Though Union troops camped on the Lawn and damaged many of the Pavilions, Custer's men left four days later without bloodshed and the university was able to return to its educational mission. However, an extremely high number of officers of both Confederacy and Union were alumni.[35] UVA produced 1,481 officers in the Confederate Army alone, including four major-generals, twenty-one brigadier-generals, and sixty-seven colonels from ten different states.[35] John S. Mosby, the infamous "Gray Ghost" and commander of the lightning-fast 43rd Battalion Virginia Cavalry ranger unit, had also been a UVA student.



Wikisource has the text of an 1879 American Cyclopædia article about UVA's 16 schools in operation as of 1879.


Thanks to a grant from the Commonwealth of Virginia, tuition became free for all Virginians in 1875.[36] During this period the University of Virginia remained unique in that it had no president and mandated no core curriculum from its students, who often studied in and took degrees from more than one school.[36] However, the university was also experiencing growing pains. As the original Rotunda caught fire and was gutted in 1895, there would soon be sweeping change afoot, changes much greater than merely reconstructing the Rotunda in 1899.
1900s[edit]




Edwin Alderman was UVA's first president between 1904 and 1931, and instituted many reforms toward modernization





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
July 1905 Popular Science article about UVA taking a President



Jefferson had originally decided that the University of Virginia would have no president. Rather, this power was to be shared by a rector and a Board of Visitors. But as the 19th century waned, it became obvious this cumbersome arrangement was incapable of adequately handling the many administrative and fundraising tasks of the growing university.[37] Edwin Alderman, who had only recently moved from his post as president of UNC-Chapel Hill since 1896 to become president of Tulane University in 1900, accepted an offer as president of the University of Virginia in 1904. His appointment was not without controversy, and national media such as Popular Science lamented the end of one of the things that made UVA unique among universities.[38]
Alderman would stay 27 years, and became known as a prolific fund-raiser, a well-known orator, and a close adviser to U.S. President and UVA alumnus Woodrow Wilson.[37] He added significantly to the University Hospital to support new sickbeds and public health research, and helped create departments of geology and forestry, the Curry School of Education, the McIntire School of Commerce, and the summer school programs at which a young Georgia O'Keeffe would soon take art.[39] Perhaps his greatest ambition was the funding and construction of a library on a scale of millions of books, much larger than the Rotunda could bear. Delayed by the Great Depression, Alderman Library was named in his honor in 1938. Alderman, who seven years earlier had died in office en route to giving a public speech at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, is still the longest-tenured president of the university.
In 1904, the University of Virginia became the first university in the American South to be elected to the prestigious Association of American Universities. After a gift by Andrew Carnegie in 1909 the University of Virginia was organized into twenty-six departments including the Andrew Carnegie School of Engineering, the James Madison School of Law, the James Monroe School of International Law, the James Wilson School of Political Economy, the Edgar Allan Poe School of English and the Walter Reed School of Pathology.[29] The honorific historical names for these departments are no longer used.
The university first admitted a few selected women to graduate studies in the late 1890s and to certain programs such as nursing and education in the 1920s and 1930s.[40] In 1944, Mary Washington College in Fredericksburg, Virginia, became the Women's Undergraduate Arts and Sciences Division of the University of Virginia. With this branch campus in Fredericksburg exclusively for women, UVA maintained its main campus in Charlottesville as near-exclusively for men, until a civil rights lawsuit of the 1960s forced it to commingle the sexes.[41] In 1970, the Charlottesville campus became fully co-educational, and in 1972 Mary Washington became an independent state university.[42] When the first female class arrived, 450 undergraduate women entered UVA, comprising 39 percent of undergraduates, while the number of men admitted remained constant. By 1999, women made up a 52 percent majority of the total student body.[40][43]
The University of Virginia began the process of integration even before the 1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision mandated school desegregation for all grade levels, when Gregory Swanson sued to gain entrance into the university's law school in 1950.[44] Following his successful lawsuit, a handful of black graduate and professional students were admitted during the 1950s, though no black undergraduates were admitted until 1955, and UVA did not fully integrate until the 1960s.[44]
In December 1953, the University of Virginia joined the Atlantic Coast Conference for athletics. At the time, UVA had a football program that had just broken through to be nationally ranked in 1950, 1951, and 1952, and consistently beat its rivals North Carolina and Virginia Tech by such scores as 34–7 and 44–0. Other sports were very competitive as well. However, the administration of Colgate Darden de-emphasized athletics, barely allowing the school to join the nascent ACC. It would take until the 1980s for the bulk of programs to fully recover, but approaching the 2000s UVA was again one of the most successful all-around sports programs with NCAA national titles achieved in an array of different sports.
UVA established a junior college in 1954, then called Clinch Valley College. Today it is a four-year public liberal arts college called the University of Virginia's College at Wise and currently enrolls 2,000 students. George Mason University and the aforementioned Mary Washington University used to exist as similar satellite campuses, but those are now wholly self-administered.
2000s[edit]




President Sullivan speaks with U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry in front of The Rotunda in 2013


Due to a continual decline in state funding for the university, today only 6 percent of its budget comes from the Commonwealth of Virginia.[45] A Charter initiative was signed into law by then-Governor Mark Warner in 2005, negotiated with the university to have greater autonomy over its own affairs in exchange for accepting this decline in financial support.[46][47]
The university welcomed Teresa A. Sullivan as its first female president in 2010.[48] Just two years later its first woman rector, Helen Dragas, engineered a forced-resignation to remove President Sullivan from office.[49][50] The attempted ouster elicited a faculty Senate vote of no confidence in Rector Dragas, and demands from student government for an explanation.[51][52] In the face of mounting pressure including alumni threats to cease contributions, and a mandate from then-Governor Robert McDonnell to resolve the issue or face removal of the entire Board of Visitors, the Board unanimously reinstated President Sullivan.[53][54][55] In 2013 and 2014, the Board passed new bylaws that made it harder to remove a president and possible to remove a rector.[56]
In November 2014, the university suspended fraternity and sorority functions pending investigation of an article by Rolling Stone concerning an alleged rape story, later determined to be a "hoax" after the story was confirmed to be false through investigation by The Washington Post.[57][58][59][60] The university nonetheless instituted new rules banning "pre-mixed drinks, punches or any other common source of alcohol" such as beer kegs and requiring "sober and lucid" fraternity members to monitor parties.[61] In April 2015, Rolling Stone fully retracted the article after the Columbia School of Journalism released a report of what went wrong with the article in a scathing and discrediting report.[62][63] Even before release of the Columbia University report, the Rolling Stone story was named "Error of the Year" by the Poynter Institute.[64]
UVA experienced significant triumphs of both academia and athletics in 2015 as Science found its faculty to have discovered two of the world's top ten scientific breakthroughs that year, and the athletics department was awarded the Capital One Cup for fielding the nation's top overall men's sports program.[8][17] In the same year, Charlottesville (largely because of UVA founders and funders) was named the No. 1 fastest growing U.S. metropolitan area for venture capital, and UVA won the 2015 Paul Simon Award for Comprehensive Internationalization on the basis of its global citizen initiatives.[65][66]
Campus[edit]
The Grounds, a term commonly used to refer to the UVA campus,[67] is renowned for its Jeffersonian architecture and place in U.S. history as a model for college and university campuses throughout the country.
Academical Village[edit]
See also: The Lawn, The Rotunda, and The Range




One of the serpentine walls


Throughout its history, the University of Virginia has won praise for its unique Jeffersonian architecture. In January 1895, less than a year before the Great Rotunda Fire, The New York Times said that the design of the University of Virginia "was incomparably the most ambitious and monumental architectural project that had or has yet been conceived in this century."[68] In the United States Bicentennial issue of their AIA Journal, the American Institute of Architects called it "the proudest achievement of American architecture in the past 200 years."[69]
Jefferson's original architectural design revolves around the Academical Village, and that name remains in use today to describe both the specific area of the Lawn, a grand, terraced green space surrounded by residential and academic buildings, the gardens, the Range, and the larger university surrounding it. The principal building of the design, the Rotunda, stands at the north end of the Lawn, and is the most recognizable symbol of the university. It is half the height and width of the Pantheon in Rome, which was the primary inspiration for the building. The Lawn and the Rotunda were the model for many similar designs of "centralized green areas" at universities across the country. The space was designed for students and professors to live in the same area. The Rotunda, which symbolized knowledge, showed hierarchy. The south end of the lawn was left open to symbolize the view of cultivated fields to the south, as reflective of Jefferson's ideal for an agrarian-focused nation.
Most notably designed by inspiration of the Rotunda and Lawn are the expansive green spaces headed by similar buildings built at: Duke University in 1892; Columbia University in 1895; Johns Hopkins University in 1902; Rice University in 1910; Peabody College of Vanderbilt University in 1915; Killian Court at MIT in 1916; the Grand Auditorium of Tsinghua University built in 1917 in Beijing, China; the Sterling Quad of Yale Divinity School in 1932; and the university's own Darden School in 1996.
Flanking both sides of the Rotunda and extending down the length of the Lawn are ten Pavilions interspersed with student rooms. Each has its own classical architectural style, as well as its own walled garden separated by Jeffersonian Serpentine walls. These walls are called "serpentine" because they run a sinusoidal course, one that lends strength to the wall and allows for the wall to be only one brick thick, one of many innovations by which Jefferson attempted to combine aesthetics with utility.[70]




Inside the Dome Room


On October 27, 1895, the Rotunda burned to a shell because of an electrical fire that started in the Rotunda Annex, a long multi-story structure built in 1853 to house additional classrooms. The electrical fire was no doubt assisted by the unfortunate help of overzealous faculty member William "Reddy" Echols, who attempted to save it by throwing roughly 100 pounds (45 kg) of dynamite into the main fire in the hopes that the blast would separate the burning Annex from Jefferson's own Rotunda. His last-ditch effort ultimately failed. Perhaps ironically, one of the university's main honors student programs is named for him. University officials swiftly approached celebrity architect Stanford White to rebuild the Rotunda. White took the charge further, disregarding Jefferson's design and redesigning the Rotunda interior—making it two floors instead of three, adding three buildings to the foot of the Lawn, and designing a president's house. He did omit rebuilding the Rotunda Annex, the remnants of which were used as fill and to create part of the modern-day Rotunda's northern-facing plaza. The classes formerly occupying the Annex were moved to the South Lawn in White's new buildings.
The White buildings have the effect of closing off the sweeping perspective, as originally conceived by Jefferson, down the Lawn across open countryside toward the distant mountains. The White buildings at the foot of the Lawn effectively create a huge "quadrangle", albeit one far grander than any traditional college quadrangle at the University of Cambridge or University of Oxford.
In concert with the United States Bicentennial in 1976, Stanford White's changes to the Rotunda were removed and the building was returned to Jefferson's original design. Renovated according to original sketches and historical photographs, a three-story Rotunda opened on Jefferson's birthday, April 13, 1976. Queen Elizabeth II came to visit the Rotunda in that same year for the Bicentennial, and had a well-publicized stroll of The Lawn.
The university, together with Jefferson's home at Monticello, is a World Heritage Site, one of only three modern man-made sites so listed in the U.S. with the Statue of Liberty and Independence Hall. The first collegiate World Heritage Site in the world, it was codified as such by UNESCO in 1987. The university was listed by Travel + Leisure in September 2011 as one of the most beautiful campuses in the United States and by MSN as one of the most beautiful college campuses in the world.[71][72]
Libraries[edit]




Inside the Law Library


The University of Virginia Library System holds 5 million volumes. Its Electronic Text Center, established in 1992, has put 70,000 books online as well as 350,000 images that go with them. These e-texts are open to anyone and, as of 2002[update], were receiving 37,000 daily visits (compared to 6,000 daily visitors to the physical libraries).[73] Alderman Library holds the most extensive Tibetan collection in the world, and holds ten floors of book "stacks" of varying ages and historical value. The renowned Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library features one of the premier collections of American Literature in the country as well as two copies of the original printing of the Declaration of Independence. It was in this library in 2006 that Robert Stilling, an English graduate student, discovered an unpublished Robert Frost poem from 1918.[74] Clark Hall is the library for SEAS (the engineering school), and one of its notable features is the Mural Room, decorated by two three-panel murals by Allyn Cox, depicting the Moral Law and the Civil Law. The murals were finished and set in place in 1934.[75] As of 2006[update], the university and Google were working on the digitization of selected collections from the library system.[76]
Since 1992, the University of Virginia also hosts the Rare Book School, a non-profit organization in study of historical books and the history of printing that began at Columbia University in 1983.
Other areas[edit]
Housing for first-year students, Brown College, the School of Engineering and Applied Science and the University of Virginia Medical School are located near the historic Lawn and Range area. The McIntire School of Commerce is situated on the actual Lawn, in Rouss Hall.




Recessed windows of the monolithic Hereford College


Away from the historic area, UVA's architecture and its allegiance to the Jeffersonian design are controversial. The 1990s saw the construction of two deeply contrasting visions: the Williams Tsien post-modernist Hereford College in 1992 and the unapologetically Jeffersonian Darden School of Business in 1996. Commentary on both was broad and partisan, as the University of Virginia School of Architecture and The New York Times lauded Hereford for its bold new lines, while some independent press and wealthy donors praised the traditional design of Darden.[77][78] The latter group appeared to have largely won the day when the South Lawn Project was designed in the early 2000s.[78][79]
Billionaire John Kluge donated 7,379 acres (29.86 km2) of additional lands to the university in 2001. Kluge desired the core of the land, the 2,913-acre Morven, to be developed by the university and the surrounding land to be sold to fund an endowment supporting the core. Five farms totaling 1,261 acres (510 ha) of the gift were soon sold to musician Dave Matthews, of the Dave Matthews Band, to be utilized in an organic farming project to complement his nearby Blenheim Vineyards.[80] Morven has since hosted the Morven Summer Institute, a rigorous immersion program of study in civil society, sustainability, and creativity.[81] As of 2014[update], the university is developing further plans for Morven and has hired an architecture firm for the nearly three thousand acre property.[81]
The Virginia Department of Transportation maintains the roads through the university grounds as State Route 302.[82]
Student housing[edit]
Main article: Student housing at the University of Virginia




Fifty-four students are selected to live on The Lawn during their final year


The primary housing areas for first-year students are McCormick Road Dormitories, often called "Old Dorms," and Alderman Road Dormitories, often called "New Dorms." The 1970s-era Alderman Road Dorms are in the process of being fully replaced with brand new dormitory buildings located in the same area. The replacements feature hall-style living arrangements with common areas and many modern amenities. Instead of being torn down and replaced like the original New Dorms, the Old Dorms will see a $105 million renovation project between 2017 and 2022.[83] They were constructed in 1950, and are also hall-style constructions but with fewer amenities. However, generally the Old Dorms are closer to the students' classes.
There are three residential colleges at the university: Brown College, Hereford College, and the International Residential College. These involve an application process to live there, and are filled with both upperclass and first year students. The application process can be extremely competitive, especially for Brown because of its location in central Grounds.
It is considered a great honor to be invited to live on The Lawn, and 54 fourth-year undergraduates do so each year, joining ten members of the faculty who permanently live and teach in the Pavilions there.[84] Similarly, graduate students may live on The Range. Edgar Allan Poe formerly lived in 13 West Range, and since 1904 the Raven Society has retrofitted and preserved his room much as it may have existed in the 1820s.
Organization and administration[edit]
The university has several affiliated centers including the Rare Book School, headquarters of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, University of Virginia Center for Politics, Weldon Cooper Center for Public Service, Sorensen Institute for Political Leadership, and Miller Center of Public Affairs. The Fralin Museum of Art is dedicated to creating an environment where both the university community and the general public can study and learn from directly experiencing works of art. The university has its own internal recruiting firm, the Executive Search Group and Strategic Resourcing. Since 2013, this department has been housed under the Office of the President.


College/school founding


College/school
Year founded






School of Architecture
1954


College of Arts & Sciences
1824


Darden School of Business
1954


McIntire School of Commerce
1921


School of Continuing and Professional Studies



Curry School of Education
1905


School of Engineering and Applied Science
1836


School of Law
1819


School of Medicine
1819


School of Nursing
1901


Frank Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy
2007


In 2006, then-President Casteen announced an ambitious $3 billion capital campaign to be completed by December 2011.[85] During the Great Recession, President Sullivan missed the 2011 deadline, and extended it indefinitely.[86] The $3 billion goal would be met a year and a half later, which President Sullivan announced at graduation ceremonies in May 2013.[87]
As of 2013[update], UVA's $1.4 billion academic budget is paid for primarily by tuition and fees (32%), research grants (23%), endowment and gifts (19%), and sales and services (12%).[88] A mere 10% of academic funds come from state appropriation from the Commonwealth of Virginia.[88] For the overall (including non-academic) university budget of $2.6 billion, 45% comes from medical patient revenue.[88] The Commonwealth contributes less than 6%.[88]
Though UVA is the flagship university of Virginia, state funding has decreased for several consecutive decades.[45] Financial support from the state dropped by half from 12 percent of total revenue in 2001-02 to six percent in 2013-14.[45] The portion of academic revenue coming from the state fell by even more in the same period, from 22 percent to just nine percent.[45] This nominal support from the state, contributing just $154 million of UVA's $2.6 billion budget in 2012-13, has led President Sullivan and others to contemplate the partial privatization of the University of Virginia.[5] UVA's Darden School and Law School are already self-sufficient.
Hunter R. Rawlings III, President of the prominent Association of American Universities research group of universities to which UVA is an elected member, came to Charlottesville to make a speech to university faculty which included a statement about the proposal: "there's no possibility, as far as I can see, that any state will ever relinquish its ownership and governance of its public universities, much less of its flagship research university".[5] He encouraged university leaders to stop talking about privatization and instead push their state lawmakers to increase funding for higher education and research as a public good.[5]
The University of Virginia is one of only two public universities in the United States that has a Triple-A credit rating from all three major credit rating agencies, along with the University of Texas at Austin.[89]
Academics[edit]




Alderman Library


UVA offers 48 bachelor's degrees, 94 master's degrees, 55 doctoral degrees, 6 educational specialist degrees, and 2 first-professional degrees (Medicine and Law) to its students. It has never bestowed an honorary degree to any person.[90][91][92]
The Jefferson Scholars Foundation offers four-year full-tuition scholarships based on regional, international, and at-large competitions. Students are nominated by their high schools, interviewed, then invited to weekend-long series of tests of character, aptitude, and general suitability. Approximately 3% of those nominated successfully earn the scholarship. Echols Scholars (College of Arts and Sciences) and Rodman Scholars (School of Engineering and Applied Sciences), which include 6-7% of undergraduate students, receive no financial benefits, but are entitled to special advisors, priority course registration, residence in designated dorms and fewer curricular constraints than other students.[93]
Research[edit]
UVA was recently recognized by Science as leading two of the Top 10 scientific discoveries in the world in 2015.[8]




Recent UVA research "redrew the map" of the human lymphatic system, shown here in the 1858 Gray's Anatomy.


The first breakthrough was when UVA School of Medicine researchers Jonathan Kipnis and Antoine Louveau discovered previously unknown vessels connecting the human brain directly to the lymphatic system.[8] The discovery "redrew the map" of the lymphatic system, rewrote medical textbooks, and struck down long-held beliefs about how the immune system functions in the brain.[8] The discovery may help greatly in combating neurological diseases from multiple sclerosis to Alzheimer's disease.[8] The second globally recognized breakthrough of 2015 was when UVA psychology professor Brian Nosek examined the reproducibility of 100 psychology studies and found that fewer than half could be reproduced.[8] The discovery may have profound impacts on how psychological studies are performed and documented.[8] More than 270 researchers on five continents were involved, and twenty-two students and faculty from UVA were listed as co-authors on the scientific paper.[8]
UVA is home to globally recognized research on hypersonic flight.[94] The United States Air Force, NASA, National Science Foundation, and National Center for Hypersonic Combined Cycle Propulsion have given UVA researchers millions each in funding for the university's ongoing broad and deep research into ultra-high velocity flight.[94]
In the field of astrophysics, the university is a member of a consortium engaged in the construction and operation of the Large Binocular Telescope in the Mount Graham International Observatory of the Pinaleno Mountains of southeastern Arizona. It is also a member of both the Astrophysical Research Consortium, which operates telescopes at Apache Point Observatory in New Mexico, and the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy which operates the National Optical Astronomy Observatory, the Gemini Observatory and the Space Telescope Science Institute. The University of Virginia hosts the headquarters of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, which operates the Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia and the Very Large Array radio telescope made famous in the Carl Sagan television documentary Cosmos and film Contact. The North American Atacama Large Millimeter Array Science Center is also located at the Charlottesville NRAO site.
The University of Virginia has been an elected member of the Association of American Universities since 1904, and remains today the only Virginia-based member of this research organization of leading American universities. As of 2012[update], UVA received $218,499,000 in U.S. federal research grants, the most of any university in Virginia.[95]
Innovation[edit]




Reddit was founded by UVA roommates


The Charlottesville area has been named the No. 1 fastest growing metropolitan area for venture capital in the United States, with $27.7 million in annual funding as of 2015.[65] A majority of the successful startups in the Charlottesville region have been started by or funded by UVA students and graduates.[65] One example of a startup launched by university students is Reddit, now one of the top 40 most viewed websites in the world with nearly 100 billion annual pageviews, founded by UVA dormitory roommates Steve Huffman and Alexis Ohanian in 2005. They were students at the School of Engineering and Applied Science and the McIntire School of Commerce, respectively. Having grown so large, Reddit is now headquartered in San Francisco.
In addition to McIntire and SEAS, the Darden School has spawned highly innovative graduates and entrepreneurs. For example, a wearable glove that helps to rehabilitate stroke patients was brought to market by a Darden graduate in South Korea during 2015.[96] According to a study by researchers at the Darden School and Stanford University, UVA alumni overall have founded over 65,000 companies which have employed 2.3 million people worldwide with annual global revenues of $1.6 trillion.[9]
Rankings[edit]


University rankings


National


ARWU[97]
61-70


Forbes[98]
40


U.S. News & World Report[99]
25


Washington Monthly[100]
36


Global


ARWU[101]
151-200


QS[102]
173


Times[103]
113


U.S. News & World Report[104]
99


U.S. News & World Report ranks UVA 24th overall and 2nd among public universities in its 2017 report.[105] Among the professional schools of UVA, U.S. News & World Report's 2016 rankings place its law school tied for 8th overall and tied for 1st among public universities, its graduate Darden School of Business 11th overall and 2nd among public universities, its medical school tied for 25th overall and tied for 17th among public universities in the "Primary Care" category and 28th overall and 10th among public universities in the "Research" category, and its engineering school 39th overall and 21st among public universities.[105] In its 2015 rankings, The Economist lists Darden 2nd overall internationally and 1st among public institutions.[106] In its 2016 listing, Bloomberg BusinessWeek ranks the McIntire School of Commerce, UVA's undergraduate business program, 5th overall and 2nd among public universities.[107]
Washington Monthly ranked UVA 36th in its non-traditional 2017 ranking, which attempts to measure social mobility and public service.[108] Another non-traditional ranking, from The Daily Caller, ranks UVA 1st overall, and states it "blows away the competition" for the second consecutive year as of 2015[update], when additional factors such as cost, professor ratings, and "student hotness" are added to the more traditional methodology.[109][110] In its 2016 report, Business Insider, which strives to measure preparation for the professional workforce, ranks UVA 9th overall and 1st among public universities.[111]
Other recognition[edit]
A National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) study of "high-achieving" undergraduate applicants found UVA to be the nation's highest preference among public universities for those students in December 2005,[112] besting its closest competitors UC Berkeley, Georgia Tech, and UNC-Chapel Hill in each of three methods of measurement.
The University of Virginia has also been recognized for consistently having the highest African American graduation rate among national public universities.[113][114][115][116] According to the Fall 2005 issue of Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, UVA "has the highest black student graduation rate of the Public Ivies" and "by far the most impressive is the University of Virginia with its high black student graduation rate and its small racial difference in graduation rates."[117]



Wikisource has the text of a 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article about circa 1911 organization of the university.


Historically, UVA was recognized as a Class I (the top category of) university in the nation's first academic classification system published by the U.S. Bureau of Education in 1911.[118][119] It was one of only two universities in the American South (the other the University of Texas at Austin) to be recognized as such.[118]
Admissions and financial aid[edit]
For the undergraduate Class of 2021, the University of Virginia received approximately 36,800 applications, admitting 27 percent.[120] The university has seen steady increases in the applicant pool throughout the past decade, and the number of applications has more than doubled since the Class of 2008 received 15,094 applications.[121] Interested applicants may arrange an overnight visit through the Monroe Society, a student-run organization.[14] In 2014, 93% of admitted applicants ranked in the top 10 percent of their high school classes.[14][122] Matriculated students come from all 50 states and 147 foreign countries.[123][14] The average LSAT score was 169 at the School of Law, while at the Darden School of Business the average GMAT score was 706.[124][125]
Financial aid is an area of focus at UVA, and its students value the emphasis to the extent that the America's Best Colleges edition of U.S. News and World Report has described the university as "chock full of academic stars who turn down private schools like Duke, Princeton, and Cornell for, they say, a better value."[126] The university meets 100 percent of demonstrated need for all admitted undergraduate students, making it one of only two public universities in the U.S. to reach this level of financial aid for its students.[127][128] For 2014, the university ranked 4th overall by the Princeton Review for "Great Financial Aid".[129] In 2008 the Center for College Affordability and Productivity named UVA the top value among all national public colleges and universities; and in 2009, UVA was again named the "No. 1 Best Value" among public universities in the United States in a separate ranking by USA TODAY and the Princeton Review.[130][131][132] Kiplinger in 2014 ranked UVA 2nd out of the top 100 best-value public colleges and universities in the nation.[133]
Student life[edit]
Student life at the University of Virginia is marked by a number of unique traditions. The campus of the university is referred to as the "Grounds." Freshmen, sophomores, juniors, and seniors are instead called first-, second-, third-, and fourth-years in order to reflect Jefferson's belief that learning is a lifelong process, rather than one to be completed within four years.




William Faulkner once lived at UVA, discussing his works with students but with his only responsibility to write, not teach


Student-faculty interaction and connections[edit]
Professors are traditionally addressed as "Mr." or "Ms." at UVA instead of "Doctor" (although medical doctors are the exception) in deference to Jefferson's desire to have an equality of ideas, discriminated by merit and unburdened by title. UVA facilitates close interactions between students and professors in a number of ways.
First-year students in the College of Arts & Sciences have the opportunity to take two University Seminars, one per semester, which are later made available to other students as well. These small classes, numbering from 4 to 19 students each, provide opportunities to work closely with professors at the university from the outset of a student's academic career. The small groupings also help facilitate more frequent and intense discussions between students in this closer environment.
Select faculty live at Brown College at Monroe Hill, Hereford College, International Residential College, and in Pavilions on The Lawn. This gives more opportunities for professors to invite students to lunches and dinners, which regularly happens, and creates chances for impromptu meetings and interactions between faculty and students around Grounds.
Reflecting this close student-faculty interaction at UVA, it welcomed Nobel Laureate William Faulkner to a position as "Writer-in-Residence" in 1957.[134] He had no teaching responsibilities, and was paid merely to live among the students and write. He was badly injured in a horse riding accident in 1959, and did not return to the state before his death in 1962.[134] Faulkner then bequeathed the majority of his papers to Alderman Library, giving UVA the largest Faulkner archives in the world.[135]
Global citizenship initiatives[edit]
UVA has several programs in place to make each of its students a citizen of the globe, not just of the United States.
The International Residential College is a residential college at UVA that attracts and celebrates students from across the globe who choose to attend the university. It is one of three major residential colleges at UVA. Students there come from 45 different countries, representing 40% of the student population; but U.S. students are encouraged to live at IRC as well to learn about the countries from which their classmates have journeyed to attend UVA.




The S.S. Universe Explorer docked in Vancouver, British Columbia, shortly before embarking on the Fall 1997 Semester at Sea voyage.


UVA has been the academic sponsor for Semester at Sea since 2006. Throughout the history of the program since 1963, nearly 55,000 undergraduate students[136] from more than 1,500 colleges and universities have participated in Semester at Sea. During the spring and fall semesters, the approximately 100-day program circumnavigates the globe, with up to 720 undergraduates[137] traveling from North America heading either east across the Atlantic or west across the Pacific, visiting from 8 to 11 countries in Asia, Africa, Europe and South America, before ending the voyage in another North American port. The program previously had voyages that would sail through the Mediterranean and the Suez Canal, but due to piracy concerns in the Gulf of Aden, voyages now typically travel around Africa. Past lecturers and guests of Semester at Sea include Mikhail Gorbachev, Nelson Mandela, and Mother Teresa.
UVA received the 2015 Paul Simon Award for Comprehensive Internationalization, by the Association of International Educators.[66] This award confirms the university's success and commitment in educating its students on a global scale as well as nationally.[66]
Student leadership opportunities[edit]
There are a number of UVA undergraduate leadership opportunities that are offered in addition to the standard student government or fraternity and sororiety positions found at many universities. They include UVA's secret societies and debating societies, the student-run honor committees, and the chance to be recognized as a fourth-year student at the pinnacle of student leadership by being asked to live on The Lawn.
The Frank Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy, established in 2007, expands on these unique student leadership opportunities to study Leadership itself as a cross-disciplinary subject of focus and is closely aligned with many of the university's schools, including the Architecture, Education, Engineering, Law, Medical, and Darden schools, as well as with programs in politics, economics, and applied ethics.
Secret societies and debating societies[edit]
Main article: Secret Societies at the University of Virginia




The mark of one out of many secret societies active on Grounds at the university


A number of secret societies at the university, most notably the Seven Society, Z Society, and IMP Society, have operated for decades or centuries, leaving their painted marks on university buildings. Other significant secret societies include Eli Banana, T.I.L.K.A., the Purple Shadows (who commemorate Jefferson's birthday shortly after dawn on the Lawn each April 13), The Sons of Liberty, and the 21 Society. Not all the secret societies keep their membership unknown, but even those who don't hide their identities generally keep most of their good works and activities far from the public eye.
Student societies have existed on grounds since the early 19th Century. The Jefferson Literary and Debating Society, founded in 1825, is the second oldest Greek-Lettered organization in the nation (the oldest being the Phi Beta Kappa honor fraternity). It continues to meet every Friday at 7:29 PM in Jefferson Hall. The Washington Literary Society and Debating Union also meets every week, and the two organizations often engage in a friendly rivalry. In the days before social fraternities existed and intercollegiate athletics became popular, these societies were often the focal point of social activity on grounds.[138]
Honor system[edit]
Main article: Honor system at the University of Virginia

Honor Pledge[139]

On my honor, I have neither given nor received aid on this assignment.


The nation's first codified honor system was instituted by UVA law professor Henry St. George Tucker, Sr. in 1842, after a fellow professor was shot to death on The Lawn. There are three tenets to the system: students simply must not lie, cheat, or steal. It is a "single sanction system," meaning that committing any of these three offenses will result in expulsion from the university. If accused, students are tried before their peers – fellow students, never faculty, serve as counsel and jury.
The honor system is intended to be student-run and student-administered.[140] Although Honor Committee resources have been strained by mass cheating scandals such as a case in 2001 of 122 suspected cheaters over several years in a single large Physics survey course, and federal lawsuits have challenged the system, its verdicts are rarely overturned.[141][142][143] There is only one documented case of direct UVA administration interference in an honor system proceeding: the trial and subsequent retrial of Christopher Leggett.[144]
Student activities[edit]
Many events take place at the University of Virginia, on the Lawn and across grounds. One of the largest events at UVA is Springfest, hosted by the University Programs Council. It takes place every year in the spring, and features a large free concert, various inflatables and games. Another popular event is Foxfield, a steeplechase and social gathering that takes place nearby in Albemarle County in April, and which is annually attended by thousands of students from the University of Virginia and neighboring colleges.[145]




The University Amphitheater is often used for outdoor lectures and student gatherings


The student life building is called Newcomb Hall. It is home to the Student Activities Center (SAC) and the Media Activities Center (MAC), where student groups can get leadership consulting and use computing and copying resources, as well as several meeting rooms for student groups. Student Council, the student self-governing body, holds meetings Tuesdays at 6 p.m. in the Newcomb South Meeting Room. Student Council, or "StudCo", also holds office hours and regular committee meetings in the newly renovated Newcomb Programs and Council (PAC) Room. The PAC also houses the University Programs Council and Class Councils. Newcomb basement is home to both the office of the independent student newspaper The Declaration, The Cavalier Daily, and the Consortium of University Publications.
In 2005, the university was named "Hottest for Fitness" by Newsweek magazine,[146] due in part to 94% of its students using one of the four indoor athletics facilities. Particularly popular is the Aquatics and Fitness Center, situated across the street from the Alderman Dorms. The University of Virginia sent more workers to the Peace Corps in 2006[147] and 2008[148] than any other "medium-sized" university in the United States. Volunteerism at the university is centered around Madison House which offers numerous opportunities to serve others. Among the numerous programs offered are tutoring, housing improvement, an organization called Hoos Against Hunger, which gives leftover food from restaurants to the homeless of Charlottesville rather than allowing it to be discarded, among numerous other volunteer programs.
As at many universities, alcohol use is a part of the social life of many undergraduate students. Concerns particularly arose about a past trend of fourth-years consuming excessive alcohol during the day of the last home football game.[149] President Casteen announced a $2.5 million donation from Anheuser-Busch to fund a new UVA-based Social Norms Institute in September 2006.[150] A spokesman said: "the goal is to get students to emulate the positive behavior of the vast majority of students". On the other hand, the university was ranked first in Playboy's 2012 list of Top 10 Party Schools based on ratings of sex, sports, and nightlife.[151]
Greek life[edit]
Main article: University of Virginia Greek life




Boyd Tinsley's "jam sessions" would last for entire nights while he was a UVA student


The University of Virginia has a number of Greek organizations on campus, encompassing the traditional social fraternities and sororities as well as coeducational professional, service, and honor fraternities. Social life at the university was originally dominated by debating societies.[152] The first fraternity chapter founded at UVA was Delta Kappa Epsilon in 1852, and it was quickly followed by many more; the University of Virginia was the birthplace of two national fraternities, Kappa Sigma and Pi Kappa Alpha, which exist at the university to this day.[153][154][155] Through the twentieth century, the Greek system at UVA evolved to encompass social sororities, professional fraternities and sororities, service fraternities, honor societies, black fraternities and sororities, and multicultural fraternities and sororities. Roughly 30% of the student body are members of social Greek organizations, with additional students involved with service, professional, and honor fraternities.[156] Rush and pledging occur in the spring semester for most organizations. Three social fraternities hold reserved rooms on the Lawn.[157]
Transportation[edit]
Charlottesville Union Station is located just 0.6 miles (0.97 km) from the University of Virginia, and energy efficient Amtrak passenger trains serve Charlottesville on three routes: the Cardinal (Chicago to New York City), Crescent (New Orleans to New York City), and Northeast Regional (Virginia to Boston). The long-haul Cardinal operates three times a week, while the Crescent and Northeast Regional both run daily. Charlottesville–Albemarle Airport, 8 miles (13 km) away, has nonstop flights to Chicago, New York, Atlanta, Charlotte, and Philadelphia. The larger Richmond International Airport is 77 miles (124 km) to the southeast, and the still larger Dulles International Airport is 99 miles (159 km) to the northeast. The Starlight Express offers direct express bus service from Charlottesville to New York City, and I-64 and U.S. 29, both major highways, are frequently trafficked.
Athletics[edit]
Main article: Virginia Cavaliers
The Cavaliers lead the 15-team Atlantic Coast Conference in NCAA championships for men's sports with 18, and are second in women's sports with seven.[158] They have been the Cavaliers since 1923, predating the NBA's Cleveland Cavaliers by five decades, and have competed in the ACC since 1953. The Athletic Director is Craig Littlepage, the first African American to hold that position anywhere in the ACC when hired in August 2001. Since then, UVA has added many significant hires who have demonstrated success near the top of their respective sports, including Tony Bennett, Brian O'Connor, Bronco Mendenhall, Augie Busch, and Brian Boland, who led UVA men's tennis to an undefeated run of 140–0 in ACC matches spanning more than an entire decade (2006–2016), unprecedented in any sport.[159] Among coaches who have longer tenures, George Gelnovatch has won two NCAA men's soccer national titles since 2009. Steve Swanson has led women's soccer teams to six ACC titles and 24 consecutive winning seasons. Kevin Sauer has led UVA women's rowing to two NCAA titles since 2010 and nine consecutive Top 6 national finishes as of 2015.
UVA has ranked near the top of NCAA collegiate programs in recent years. In 2015, Virginia won the Capital One Cup for the best overall program in men's sports after its teams won the 2014 College Cup, the 2015 College World Series, and the 2015 NCAA Tennis Championships. UVA ranks similarly high nationally in the yearly NACDA Directors' Cup combined men's and women's standings: taking third place nationally in 2009–10, and finishing fourth in 2013–14.




UVA lacrosse has won 10 national championships, including 8 national titles since NCAA oversight began.


Championships[edit]
In the 21st century alone, UVA has won twelve NCAA team national championships. The men's teams have won recent NCAA titles in baseball (2015); soccer (2014 and 2009); lacrosse (2011, 2006, and 2003); and tennis (2016, 2015, and 2013). UVA women have won recent NCAA titles in lacrosse (2004) and rowing (2012 and 2010).
The ACC is particularly known for college basketball, often being called the nation's best basketball conference.[160][161][162] Under Tony Bennett the Cavaliers have experienced a renaissance, winning back-to-back ACC regular season titles in 2014 and 2015, and dispatching Duke for the 2014 ACC Tournament Championship. UVA has become just the third ACC program, after Duke and UNC, to win 30 games in two consecutive seasons.
The baseball team under Brian O'Connor has also experienced tremendous success. UVA finished as national Runners Up in the 2014 College World Series and came back to win the 2015 College World Series. His teams have made the NCAA Tournament in all twelve of his years coaching at Virginia as of 2015.
Rivalries[edit]
Official ACC designated rivalry games include the Virginia–Virginia Tech rivalry and the brand new Virginia–Louisville series. These two rivalries are guaranteed home-and-away games each year in all sports but football, in which there is a guaranteed annual game. The Cavaliers competed against the Hokies in the Commonwealth Challenge and more recently compete in the Commonwealth Clash, under new rules, for many sports in which they compete head-to-head. The Cavaliers were 2–0 against the Hokies in the Challenge and are also 2–1 in the Clash (4–1 overall) as of 2017. Perhaps the most significant rivalry game ever played against the Hokies was on March 1, 2007. The two teams played a men's college basketball game in which the winner would clinch at least a share of the ACC regular season title. UVA won the game 69–56 and took their fifth (of seven) such ACC titles. The stakes have never been so high, yet, for the annual football game to contest the rivalry's Commonwealth Cup.




Tony Bennett has winning records against official ACC rivals Louisville (5–1) and Virginia Tech (11–5) as of 2017


UVA reigns clearly supreme in its official ACC basketball rivalries, leading Virginia Tech 90–55, and Louisville 10–4 as of 2017. A budding but lopsided series between UVA coach Tony Bennett and Rick Pitino saw Bennett win 5 out of 6 games between them before the latter's Hall of Fame career ended in scandal at Louisville.
In addition to these, the Virginia football team competes in the South's Oldest Rivalry against North Carolina, an old and historic rivalry game which a sitting President of the United States, Calvin Coolidge, made time to attend in Charlottesville in 1924. UVA currently trails in the long series against both North Carolina and Virginia Tech however, a lasting vestige of the period when Colgate Darden de-emphasized football and turned down a bid to the 1952 Orange Bowl at a time when Art Guepe was attaining national top 10 rankings for Virginia football and regularly beating both of its primary rivals by scores such as 34–7 and 44–0. The 1960s and 1970s were thus particularly dark decades for the football program, which later experienced a resurgence in the 1980s and 1990s under George Welsh. Coach Welsh led the program to most of its bowl bids beginning with the very first it was able to accept, the 1984 Peach Bowl. Welsh, who even attained several AP No. 1 rankings for the program throughout October 1990, is now a member of the College Football Hall of Fame after ranking second for most wins in ACC history behind Bobby Bowden of Florida State.[163] In a historic rivalry between two legendary coaches, Welsh finished two games up in his head-to-head series against Virginia Tech coach Frank Beamer, 8 wins to 6. He was also downright dominant against UNC in the South's Oldest Rivalry, finishing 13–5–1, including a perfect 10–0 record against North Carolina at Scott Stadium.
Sponsorship[edit]
The Cavaliers are sponsored by Nike, from which the program receives $3.5 million per year.[164]
People[edit]
Main article: List of University of Virginia people
Faculty[edit]




Kathryn C. Thornton, professor at the School of Engineering and Applied Science


Faculty were originally housed in the Academical Village among the students, serving as both instructors and advisors, continuing on to include the McCormick Road Old Dorms, though this has been phased out in favor of undergraduate student resident advisors (RAs). Several of the faculty, however, continue the university tradition of living on Grounds, either on the Lawn in the various Pavilions, or as fellows at one of three residential colleges (Brown College at Monroe Hill, Hereford College, and the International Residential College).
The university's faculty includes a National Humanities Medal and National Medal of Arts winner and former United States Poet Laureate, an awardee of the Order of Isabella the Catholic,[165] 25 Guggenheim fellows, 26 Fulbright fellows, six National Endowment for the Humanities fellows, two Presidential Young Investigator Award winners, three Sloan award winners, three Packard Foundation Award winners, and a winner of the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.[166] Physics professor James McCarthy was the lead academic liaison to the government in the establishment of SURANET, and the university has also participated in ARPANET, Abilene, Internet2, and Lambda Rail. On March 19, 1986, the university's domain name, VIRGINIA.EDU, became the first registration under the .EDU top-level domain originating from the Commonwealth of Virginia on what would become the World Wide Web.[167]




English professor Rita Dove has been honored as the United States Poet Laureate and awarded the National Humanities Medal and National Medal of Arts.


Larry Sabato has, according to The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post, become the most-cited professor in the country by national and regional news organizations, both on the Internet and in print.[168] Civil rights activist Julian Bond, a professor in the Corcoran Department of History from 1990 to 2012, was the Chairman of the NAACP from 1998 to 2009 and was chosen to host the Nobel Laureates conference in 1998.
Alumni[edit]
As of December 2014[update], the University of Virginia has 221,000 living graduates.[9] According to a study by researchers at the Darden School and Stanford University, UVA alumni have founded over 65,000 companies which have employed 2.3 million people worldwide with annual global revenues of $1.6 trillion.[9] Extrapolated numbers show companies founded by UVA alumni have created 371,000 jobs in the state of Virginia alone.[9] The relatively small amount that the Commonwealth gives UVA for support was determined by the study to have a tremendous return on investment for the state.[9]




United States dollar coin[169] featuring Robert F. Kennedy, LAW 1951


Eight NASA astronauts and launch directors are UVA alumni: Karl Gordon Henize, Bill Nelson, Thomas Marshburn, Leland Melvin, Jeff Wisoff, Kathryn Thornton, Patrick Forrester; and Michael Leinbach.
The Pulitzer Prize has been awarded to eight UVA alumni: Edward P. Jones, Ron Suskind, Virginius Dabney, Claudia Emerson, Henry Taylor, Lane DeGregory, George Rodrigue, and Michael Vitez.
Fifty-three Rhodes Scholars have graduated from UVA.[170] This is the most from any state-supported university, the most from any public or private university in the American South, and the eighth-most overall, placing UVA between Brown University at 55, and the University of Chicago at 50)[171] UVA's alumni ranks also include others who have achieved widespread fame: computer science pioneer John Backus; polar explorer Richard Byrd; scientists Walter Reed, Stuart Schreiber, Daniel Barringer, Richard Lutz, and Francis Collins; artists Edgar Allan Poe and Georgia O'Keefe; musicians Stephen Malkmus and Boyd Tinsley; self-made billionaire Paul Tudor Jones; national news anchors Katie Couric and Brit Hume; actors Tina Fey and Ben McKenzie; Team USA Olympic team captains John Harkes, Dawn Staley, and Claudio Reyna; and NBA All-Star MVP Ralph Sampson.
Famous government leaders include NATO Secretary General Javier Solana; United States President and Nobel Laureate Woodrow Wilson; U.S. Speaker of the House Robert M. T. Hunter; widely known United States Senators Harry Byrd, Robert F. Kennedy, and Ted Kennedy; the first African American Chief Justice of the Virginia Supreme Court, Leroy Hassell; the United States Supreme Court Justices Howell Edmunds Jackson, James Clark McReynolds, and Stanley Forman Reed; and President of the Supreme Court of Israel Asher Grunis.
Fourteen Governors of Virginia are UVA alumni: Gerald Baliles, Jim Gilmore, Chuck Robb, George Allen, John Dalton, Albertis Harrison, James Almond, John Battle, Colgate Darden, Elbert Trinkle, Westmoreland Davis, Claude Swanson, Andrew Jackson Montague, and Frederick Holiday.
Fourteen Governors of other U.S. states and territories, as well: James Paul Clarke, William Meade Fishback, and Joseph Taylor Robinson (Arkansas), Janet Napolitano (Arizona), Lowell Weicker (Connecticut), Charles Terry (Delaware), Millard Caldwell (Florida), Evan Bayh (Indiana), Brereton Jones (Kentucky), Sam McEnery (Louisiana), William Preston Lane (Maryland), Mark Sanford (South Carolina), Henry Mathews (West Virginia), and Luis Fortuño (Puerto Rico).
See also[edit]


University portal
Virginia portal



Academic honor code
Bibliography of Thomas Jefferson

Notes[edit]


^ As of October, 2017. "University of Virginia Investment Management Company 2016-2017 Annual Report" (PDF). University of Virginia Investment Management Company. 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 2, 2017. 
^ a b c d "Facts & Figures | The University of Virginia". Virginia.edu. Retrieved 2016-11-14. 
^ Colors | University of Virginia. October 17, 2017. Retrieved November 14, 2017. 
^ UNESCO World Heritage Centre. "UNESCO World Heritage Centre - World Heritage List". Archived from the original on November 1, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2015. 
^ a b c d U-Va. should break some ties with state, panel says in preliminary report Archived September 8, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 8, 2014
^ "Tuition and Fees at Flagship Universities over Time - Trends in Higher Education - The College Board". Trends.collegeboard.org. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved February 1, 2016. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 6, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2013. 
^ a b c d e f g h i Two UVA Findings in the Running for Year's Biggest Scientific Breakthroughs Archived February 24, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 17, 2016
^ a b c d e f U.Va. Darden School Survey Shows U.Va. Entrepreneurs' Significant Impact On Economy Archived October 8, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 28, 2016
^ "GDP and its breakdown at current prices in US Dollars". United Nations Statistics Division. December 2015. 
^ Departments and Schools of UVA Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 21, 2016
^ "Global The University of Virginia". Archived from the original on April 23, 2017. Retrieved April 23, 2017. 
^ Financing the University 101 Archived October 18, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., retrieved August 31, 2014
^ a b c d "Cavalier Admissions Volunteer Handbook" (PDF). Office of Engagement, University of Virginia. 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved August 31, 2014. 
^ Most Beautiful Colleges in America: UVA Again Named Most Beautiful Archived June 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed May 5, 2016
^ "Morven--History & Gardens". University of Virginia Foundation. Archived from the original on June 6, 2016. Retrieved June 10, 2016. 
^ a b UVa wins Capital One Cup for men's sports, retrieved June 16, 2015
^ Alf J. Mapp, Jr., Thomas Jefferson: Passionate Pilgrim, p. 19.
^ a b New Englander and Yale Review, Volume 37, W. L. Kingsley, "Ought the State provide for Higher Education?", 1878, page 378.
^ Phillips Russell, Jefferson, Champion of the Free Mind, p. 335.
^ Circular of Information, State Board of Education, United States Bureau of Education. Washington (State) Superintendent of Public Instruction. Published by State Board of Education, 1888. p. 48.
^ Higher Education in Transition: A History of American Colleges and Universities by John Seiler Brubacher, Willis Rudy. Published by Transaction Publishers, 1997. p. 148
^ An Act to Establish A Normal School, 5 March 1888 Archived September 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2014
^ ""Guide to SNP" - Turk Mountain Overlook to Rockfish Gap". guidetosnp.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2010. Retrieved June 19, 2009. 
^ Dabney, Virginius (1981). Mr. Jefferson's University: A History. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press. p. 3. ISBN 0-8139-0904-X. [permanent dead link]
^ Bruce, Philip Alexander (1920). History of the University of Virginia, vol. II. New York City: Macmillan. Archived from the original on March 16, 2016. 
^ Popular Science, July 1905, "The Progress of Science"
^ Joseph J. Ellis, American Sphinx, p. 283.
^ a b  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Virginia, University of". Encyclopædia Britannica. 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 125–126. 
^ a b "Bad Boys Archived December 29, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.", Virginia, Carlos Santos
^ "Edgar Allan Poe at the university". University of Virginia Library. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved September 18, 2012. 
^ Sampson, Zinie Chan (April 28, 2011). "Edgar Allan Poe's University of Virginia Room to Undergo Renovation". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on July 3, 2012. Retrieved September 18, 2012. 
^ Civil War Casualties by the Civil War Trust Archived 2013-01-13 at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2014
^ Charlottesville During the Civil War Archived September 6, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2014
^ a b University of Virginia Alumni News, Volume II, Issue 7, page 74, December 10, 1913. Accessed September 5, 2014
^ a b See wikisource link to the right
^ a b Encyclopedia Virginia President Edwin Alderman Archived December 28, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. "By the turn of the 20th century the administrative affairs had grown to such an extent that the old form of government became too cumbersome. The appointment of Alderman brought a new era of progressivism to the university and service to Virginia." Retrieved January 25, 2012
^ Popular Science, July 1905 Volume 67, "The Progress of Science"
^ Bruce, Philip Alexander (1921). The History of the University of Virginia: The Lengthening Shadow of One Man. V. New York: Macmillan. p. 61. 
^ a b "Breaking and Making Tradition: Women at U VA". University of Virginia Library. Retrieved September 14, 2012. 
^ Priya N. Parker (2004). "Storming the Gates of Knowledge: A Documentary History of Desegregation and Coeducation in Jefferson's Academical Village". Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 9, 2014. 
^ University of Mary Washington: History and Development of the University.[permanent dead link]
^ Historical Enrollment Data Archived September 7, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 6, 2014
^ a b "The Road to Desegregation: Jackson, NAACP, and Swanson". Archived from the original on October 21, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. 
^ a b c d University braces for likely cuts in state funds Archived September 8, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 8, 2014
^ "Legislation". Restructuring Higher Education. University of Virginia. Archived from the original on July 8, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2008. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)". Restructuring Higher Education. University of Virginia. Archived from the original on July 8, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2008. 
^ de Vise, Daniel, "Teresa Sullivan Is First Female President to Lead University of Virginia" Archived November 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Washington Post, January 19, 2010.
^ Rice, Andrew (September 11, 2012). "Anatomy of a Campus Coup". New York Times. Archived from the original on September 17, 2012. Retrieved September 17, 2012. 
^ The Hook, a Charlottesville weekly, posted a series of articles detailing events as they occurred, collected at Hawes Spencer. "The Ousting of a President". The Hook. Archived from the original on November 13, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2014. (2012-13)
^ Daily Progress Staff (June 14, 2012). "UVa Faculty Senate issues vote of no confidence in rector, Board of Visitors". The Daily Progress. Retrieved May 22, 2013. 
^ Karin Kapsidelis (June 15, 2012). "U.Va. Student Council seeks full explanation of ouster". Richmond Times-Dispatch. Archived from the original on February 5, 2013. Retrieved June 19, 2012. 
^ "Alumni Pledge Thousands in Donations Following Sullivan's Reinstatement". Newsplex.com. June 28, 2012. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved May 22, 2013. 
^ Anita Kumar & Jenna Johnson (June 22, 2012). "McDonnell tells U-Va. board to resolve leadership crisis, or he will remove members". Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 23, 2012. Retrieved June 26, 2012. 
^ Sara Hebel; Jack Stripling & Robin Wilson (June 26, 2012). "U. of Virginia Board Votes to Reinstate Sullivan". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Archived from the original on June 28, 2012. Retrieved June 26, 2012. 
^ Board to Vote on Rector Removal Clause Archived September 8, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 8, 2014
^ Phi Psi Files $25 million Lawsuit Against Rolling Stone Archived June 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 19, 2016
^ "SPECIAL: The UVA Story". On the Media. 6 December 2014. Retrieved 7 December 2014. 
^ The Lies of UVA's Jackie: Read All the Catfishing Texts Archived October 24, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 19, 2016
^ UVA Frat Sues Rolling Stone Archived February 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 19, 2016
^ Nick Anderson (January 7, 2015). "New safety rules announced for University of Virginia fraternity parties". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2015. 
^ Somaiya, Ravi (April 5, 2015). "Rolling Stone Retracts Article on Rape at University of Virginia". www.nytimes.com. New York Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. Retrieved April 5, 2015. 
^ A Rape on Campus: What Went Wrong Archived April 6, 2015, at the Wayback Machine., accessed April 8, 2015
^ "The year in media errors and corrections 2014". Poynter.org. Archived from the original on March 15, 2015. Retrieved March 14, 2015. 
^ a b c Charlottesville Named Fastest Growing Venture Capital Ecosystem in the US, accessed February 18, 2016
^ a b c President Sullivan Says Benefits of UVA's Globalization Are Far Reaching Archived March 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 19, 2016
^ "Students and Traditions". University of Virginia. 2015. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2015. 
^ Architectural Record," 4 (January–March 1895), pp. 351–353
^ AIA Journal, 65 (July 1976), p. 91
^ Keith Weimer. "Grizzard, Frank E.Documentary history of the construction of the buildings at the University of Virginia, 1817–1828. University of Virginia Libraries. 1996–2002". Archived from the original on September 27, 2012. Retrieved November 26, 2014. 
^ ""America's most beautiful college campuses" Travel+Leisure (September 2011)". Travel + Leisure. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014. Retrieved November 26, 2014. 
^ "Most beautiful universities". MSN. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. 
^ "Electronic Center at UVa Library". Digital Scholarship Services. Archived from the original on December 20, 2006. Retrieved December 20, 2006. 
^ Lim, Melinda (September 29, 2006). "Grad student discovers unpublished Frost poem". Cavalier Daily. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. Retrieved December 11, 2006. 
^ "Clark Hall Named to Virginia Landmarks Registry," UVa Today, July 10, 2008
^ "College Dean Search and Diversity Report Main Focus of Senate Meeting". University of Virginia. Archived from the original on December 12, 2012. Retrieved December 11, 2006. 
^ Jefferson's Legacy: Dialogues with the Past Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2014
^ a b Jeffersonian Quest Archived July 22, 2015, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2014
^ Going South: But where's the Lawn? Archived September 11, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 9, 2014
^ UVa Foundation sells five Kluge farms Archived September 10, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2014
^ a b University to further develop Morven Farms Archived September 11, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2014
^ "Virginia Route Index" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 1, 2015.  (239 KB), revised July 1, 2003
^ McCormick Road Dorms to See Massive Renovation Project Archived September 8, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 8, 2014
^ UVA Housing: Lawn Archived September 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2014
^ Kate Colwel (August 23, 2012). "Campaign Moves Past Difficulties". Cavalier Daily. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved June 24, 2013. 
^ Wiley, Kevin (January 5, 2012). "Oversized Check from Reality". Inside Higher Ed. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2013. 
^ Lee Gardner (May 21, 2013). "U. of Virginia Raises $3 Billion". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Archived from the original on June 11, 2013. Retrieved June 24, 2013. 
^ a b c d Financing the University 101 Archived October 18, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed December 14, 2014
^ U.Va. poised to issue $300 million in bonds to finance campus construction projects – Richmond Times-Dispatch
^ Rector and Visitors of The University of Virginia (1995). "Chapter 4: University Regulations: Honorary Degrees". Rector and Visitors of The University of Virginia. Archived from the original on August 31, 2006. Retrieved May 7, 2006.  "The University of Virginia does not award honorary degrees. In conjunction with the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation, the University presents the Thomas Jefferson Medal in Architecture and the Thomas Jefferson Award in Law each spring. The awards, recognizing excellence in two fields of interest to Jefferson, constitute the University's highest recognition of scholars outside the University."
^ "No honorary degrees is an MIT tradition going back to ... Thomas Jefferson". MIT News Office. June 8, 2001. Archived from the original on April 14, 2006. Retrieved May 7, 2006. :"MIT's founder, William Barton Rogers, regarded the practice of giving honorary degrees as 'literary almsgiving ... of spurious merit and noisy popularity ...' Rogers was a geologist from the University of Virginia who believed in Thomas Jefferson's policy barring honorary degrees at the university, which was founded in 1819."
^ Andrews, Elizabeth; Murphy, Nora; Rosko, Tom. "William Barton Rogers: MIT's Visionary Founder". Exhibits: Institute Archives & Special Collections: MIT Libraries. Archived from the original on May 12, 2008. Retrieved May 16, 2008. 
^ "Benefits of the Echols Scholars Program". University of Virginia. Archived from the original on February 27, 2009. Retrieved October 1, 2009. 
^ a b Making Hypersonic Flight Reality Archived February 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 17, 2016
^ The Top American Research Universities, 2012 Annual Report Archived February 9, 2015, at the Wayback Machine., accessed December 14, 2014
^ Innovation: Darden Savvy in Glove that Aids Recovery from Strokes Archived January 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 18, 2016
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017: USA". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "America's Top Colleges". Forbes. July 5, 2016. 
^ "Best Colleges 2017: National Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. September 12, 2016. 
^ "2016 Rankings - National Universities". Washington Monthly. Retrieved September 6, 2016. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "QS World University Rankings® 2018". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2017. Retrieved 25 July 2017. 
^ "World University Rankings 2016-17". THE Education Ltd. Retrieved September 21, 2016. 
^ "Best Global Universities Rankings: 2017". U.S. News & World Report LP. Retrieved October 25, 2016. 
^ a b "U.S. News Best Colleges Rankings - University of Virginia". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved January 4, 2016. 
^ Full Time MBA Ranking Archived October 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., accessed January 4, 2016
^ U.S. Undergraduate Business Programs Archived April 26, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2016
^ 2017 WM rankings, retrieved November 15, 2017
^ The Best 53 Colleges in America, Period, When You Consider Absolutely Everything That Matters Archived August 18, 2015, at the Wayback Machine., accessed August 17, 2015
^ The Best 52 Colleges in America, Period, When You Consider Absolutely Everything That Matters Archived September 8, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 6, 2014
^ The 50 best colleges in America Archived September 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 5, 2016
^ Avery, Christopher; Glickman, Mark E.; Hoxby, Caroline M; Metrick, Andrew (December 2005). "A Revealed Preference Ranking of U.S. Colleges and Universities, NBER Working Paper No. W10803". National Bureau of Economic Research. SSRN 601105 . 
^ U.Va.'s Black Graduation Rate Remains No. 1 Nationally Among Public Universities Retrieved November 19, 2009
^ U. Virginia's black grad rate tops among public universities Retrieved November 19, 2009[dead link]
^ University of Virginia Leads Public Universities with Highest African-American Graduation Rate for 12th Straight Year in 2006 Retrieved November 19, 2009
^ Black Student Graduation Rates – Journal of Blacks in Higher Education Archived December 9, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved November 19, 2009
^ "Comparing Black Enrollments at the Public Ivies. The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education. 2005". Archived from the original on November 9, 2014. Retrieved November 26, 2014. 
^ a b Babcock, Kendrick Charles (1911). A Classification of Universities and Colleges with Reference to Bachelor's Degrees. 
^ "How US college's rankings have—and haven't—changed over the past century". Quartz. Archived from the original on August 17, 2014. 
^ UVA Release Admissions Decisions, accessed May 25, 2017
^ "Online Applications Speed Admissions Process University Of Virginia Receives More Than 15,000 Applications, Extends Offers To 4,724 Students For Class Of 2008". University of Virginia News Office. March 31, 2004. Archived from the original on September 4, 2014. Retrieved August 31, 2014. 
^ "U.Va. Unofficial Admissions Statistics, 2013-14". UVa Admissions Office. March 31, 2014. Archived from the original on September 5, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. 
^ "Current On-Grounds Enrollment". Archived from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2014. 
^ Admissions Statistics Archived October 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.| accessdate=September 4, 2014
^ Darden Class Profile Archived 2010-09-05 at the Wayback Machine., accessdate=September 4, 2014
^ Butler, Carolyn Kleiner (2005-08-19). "Jefferson's Public Ivy". America's Best Colleges 2006. U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on March 10, 2007. Retrieved 2016-02-18. 
^ AccessUVa Questions & Answers Archived September 4, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., retrieved September 4, 2014
^ Best Values in Public Colleges Archived August 23, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed September 8, 2014
^ Princeton Review page on University of Virginia Archived September 4, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., accessed August 31, 2014
^ "DNRonline". Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved June 29, 2015. 
^ "Princeton Review's 2009 Best Value Colleges". Archived from the original on July 18, 2013. 
^ "Best Value Colleges for 2010 and how they were chosen". USA Today. January 12, 2010. Archived from the original on May 22, 2010. Retrieved May 27, 2010. 
^ "Kiplinger's Best College Values". Kiplinger. March 2014. Archived from the original on December 18, 2016. 
^ a b Blotner, J. and Frederick L. Gwynn, (eds.) (1959) Faulkner in the University: Conferences at the University of Virginia, 1957–1958.
^ Faulkner, Revisited Archived June 16, 2017, at the Wayback Machine., accessed June 6, 2017
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on October 5, 2011. Retrieved February 19, 2016. 
^ "Ship FAQ". Semester at Sea. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2013. 
^ "Society History". Karl Saur. Retrieved November 5, 2010. 
^ The Code of Honor Archived January 18, 2015, at the Wayback Machine., accessed December 15, 2014
^ "The Honor Committee". University of Virginia. December 11, 2006. Archived from the original on October 13, 2006. Retrieved January 9, 2007. 
^ Greta von Susteren (May 10, 2001). "University of Virginia Tackles Cheating Head On". CNN. Archived from the original on November 27, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2014. 
^ Meg Scheu (June 22, 1999). "Judge Denies Call to Dismiss Lawsuit". Cavalier Daily. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved November 13, 2014. 
^ In 1983 the Fourth Circuit rejected a challenge brought by an expelled law student, the Henson case Archived November 25, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., concluding U VA's student-run honor system afforded sufficient due process to pass constitutional scrutiny.
^ Robert O' Harrow Jr. (August 8, 1994). "Honor Case Causes Uproar at U-Va.; Some Angry Over Official Intervention, Student Panel's Unusual Reversal of Decision". Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 29, 2015. Retrieved November 13, 2014. 
^ Borden, Jeremy (April 27, 2008). "24,000-plus descend on Foxfield for annual steeplechase, social gathering". Daily Progress. Charlottesville. Archived from the original on September 15, 2008. 
^ "America's 25 Hot Schools". Newsweek. August 2004. Archived from the original on September 3, 2007. 
^ "Peace Corps – Top Producing Colleges and Universities" (PDF). Peace Corps. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 27, 2008. Retrieved December 8, 2006. 
^ "Peace Corps – Top Producing Colleges and Universities" (PDF). Peace Corps. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 15, 2009. Retrieved January 16, 2009. 
^ "High spirits: Wahoos tackle fourth-year fifth". Archived from the original on June 27, 2006. Retrieved December 11, 2006. 
^ "Busch league: UVA gets big bucks to ban binging". Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved December 11, 2006. 
^ "Top 10 Party Schools". Playboy. Archived from the original on September 27, 2012. Retrieved September 26, 2012. 
^ Patton, John (1906). Jefferson, Cabell, and the University of Virginia. New York: Neale Publishing Company. p. 235. 
^ Dabney, Virginius (1981). Mr. Jefferson's University: A History. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press. p. 20. 
^ "Baird's Manual of American College Fraternities". Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2015. 
^ "Baird's Manual of American College Fraternities". Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2015. 
^ "Fraternity and Sorority Life at the University of Virginia, 2014-2015" (PDF). University of Virginia Office of the Dean of Students. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2015. 
^ "Lawn Application: Application FAQs". Archived from the original on April 14, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015. 
^ See the list of NCAA schools with the most championships: UVA has 17, Syracuse has 13, Notre Dame and North Carolina have 11, and Duke has 9. Each of these schools has non-NCAA titles as well.
^ UVA's 140 Match ACC Winning Streak May Never Be Equaled, accessed March 6, 2016
^ Dick Vitale: ACC is the best basketball conference Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 22, 2016
^ College Basketball Caucus: Which is the Best Conference? Archived March 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 22, 2016
^ ACC Makes Its Case as Best Conference Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., accessed February 22, 2016
^ ACC History in Numbers: Coaching, accessed December 3, 2017
^ UVA signs lucrative extension with Nike, accessed August 13, 2015
^ "Spanish Professor David T. Gies is Awarded One of Spain's Highest Honors". UVA Today. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved November 26, 2014. 
^ "U.Va. Top News Daily". Archived from the original on April 4, 2010. Retrieved June 29, 2015. 
^ "University of Virginia – virginia.edu". Alexa Internet, Inc. Retrieved January 9, 2007. 
^ Center For Politics website. Retrieved June 23, 2006.
^ "The United States Mint". Usmint.gov. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved November 14, 2016. 
^ Two UVA Fourth Years Net Rhodes Scholarships Archived November 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., retrieved November 22, 2016.
^ Rhodes Scholarships by Institution Archived February 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., retrieved February 19, 2016.


References[edit]
Bibliography

Abernethy, Thomas Perkins (1948). Historical Sketch of the University of Virginia. Richmond: Dietz Press. 
Addis, Cameron (2003). Jefferson's Vision for Education, 1760–1845. New York: Peter Lang Publishing. ISBN 0-8204-5755-8. 
Barker, David Michael (2000). Thomas Jefferson and the Founding of the University of Virginia (Ph.D.). University of Illinois. 
Boyle, Sarah Patton (1962). The Desegregated Heart: A Virginian's Stand in a Time of Transition. New York: William Morrow & Company.
Bruce, Philip Alexander (1920–22). History of the University of Virginia, 1819–1919: The Lengthening Shadow of One Man (five vol. ed.). New York: Macmillan. 
Dabney, Virginius (1981). Mr. Jefferson's University: A History. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press. ISBN 0-8139-0904-X. 
Hein, David (2001). Noble Powell and the Episcopal Establishment in the Twentieth Century. Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-02643-8.  Chapter two covers student and faculty life at the University of Virginia in the 1920s, when Powell was de facto chaplain to the University.
Hitchcock, Susan Tyler (1999). The University of Virginia: A Pictorial History. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press. ISBN 0-8139-1902-9. 
Mapp, Alf J. (1991). Thomas Jefferson: Passionate Pilgrim. Lanham, MD: Madison Books. ISBN 0-8191-8053-X. 
Waggoner, Jennings L. (2004). Jefferson and Education. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 1-882886-24-0. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to University of Virginia.



Official website
UVa Athletics website
Thomas Jefferson's Plan for the University of Virginia: Lessons from the Lawn - a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places lesson plan







v
t
e


University of Virginia




Located in: Charlottesville, Virginia








Academics







Schools



School of Architecture
Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy
College of Arts & Sciences
School of Continuing and Professional Studies
Darden School of Business
McIntire School of Commerce
Curry School of Education
School of Engineering and Applied Science
School of Law
School of Medicine
School of Nursing
College at Wise
The Judge Advocate General's Legal Center and School





Scholarship programs



Echols Scholars
Jefferson Scholars
Rodman Scholars





Research



Association of American Universities
Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy
Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities
Japanese Text Initiative
Universitas 21
Mid Atlantic Terascale Partnership
Flexible Extensible Digital Object Repository Architecture
Applied Research in Patacriticism
Networked Infrastructure for Nineteenth-Century Electronic Scholarship
Legion
Mentat
Real-time Cmix





Research publications



University of Virginia Press
Virginia Law Review
Virginia Journal of International Law
Journal of Law & Politics





Other



Rare Book School
Semester at Sea
University of Virginia Demographics and Workforce Group
Sorensen Institute for Political Leadership
Miller Center of Public Affairs
University of Virginia Center for Politics
Sabato's Crystal Ball
















Athletics







Teams and music



Virginia Cavaliers
Virginia Pep Band
Cavalier Marching Band
Wahoos
The Good Old Song
The Cavalier Song





Sports



Baseball
Men's basketball
Women's basketball
Football
Men's lacrosse
Men's soccer
Men's tennis





Rivalries



Florida State Seminoles
Maryland Terrapins
North Carolina Tar Heels
Virginia Tech Hokies

football







Facilities



Davenport Field
John Paul Jones Arena
Klöckner Stadium
Lake Monticello
Memorial Gym
Scott Stadium
Sheridan Snyder Tennis Center
University Hall
University Hall Turf Field





Online publication



theSabre
















Grounds






The Lawn
The Range
The Rotunda
McIntire Amphitheatre
The Corner
Fan Mountain Observatory
Hereford College
Jefferson Hall
McCormick Observatory
Rugby Road
University of Virginia Cemetery













Student life







Publications



The Cavalier Daily
The Hedgehog Review
Virginia Law Weekly
Virginia Quarterly Review
The Yellow Journal





Radio stations



WTJU
WXTJ-LP





Online webcasts



CAV-TV





Greek life



University of Virginia Greek life





Debating societies



Jefferson Literary and Debating Society
Washington Literary Society and Debating Union





Performing arts



The Academical Village People
Hullabahoos
Sil'hooettes
The Virginia Belles
Virginia Gentlemen
Virginia Glee Club





Residential colleges



Brown College at Monroe Hill
Hereford College
International Residential College
First-year living areas

Alderman Road
McCormick Road







Secret societies



IMP Society
Seven Society
Z Society
Other
















People






Alumni and faculty
University Presidents









Established: 1819 – Endowment: $7.53 billion – Students: 22,391

 Commons
 Category










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Thomas Jefferson






3rd President of the United States (1801–1809)
2nd U.S. Vice President (1797–1801)
1st U.S. Secretary of State (1790–1793)
U.S. Minister to France (1785–1789)
2nd Governor of Virginia (1779–1781)
Delegate, Second Continental Congress (1775–1776)





Founding
documents of
the United States



A Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774)
Initial draft, Olive Branch Petition (1775)
Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms (1775)
1776 Declaration of Independence

Committee of Five
authored
physical history
"All men are created equal"
"Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness"
"Consent of the governed"


1786 Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom

freedom of religion







French Revolution



Co-author, Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1789)





Presidency



Inaugural Address (1801
1805)
Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves
Louisiana Purchase
Lewis and Clark Expedition

Corps of Discovery
timeline
Empire of Liberty


Red River Expedition
Pike Expedition
Cumberland Road
Embargo Act of 1807

Chesapeake–Leopard Affair
Non-Intercourse Act of 1809


First Barbary War
Native American policy
Marbury v. Madison
West Point Military Academy
State of the Union Addresses (texts
1801
1802
1805)
Cabinet
Federal judicial appointments





Other noted
accomplishments



Early life and career
Founder, University of Virginia

history


Land Ordinance of 1784

Northwest Ordinance 1787


Anti-Administration party
Democratic-Republican Party
Jeffersonian democracy

First Party System
republicanism


Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coinage, Weights, and Measure of the United States (1790)
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions
A Manual of Parliamentary Practice (1801)





Jeffersonian
architecture



Barboursville
Farmington
Monticello

gardens


Poplar Forest
University of Virginia

The Rotunda
The Lawn


Virginia State Capitol
White House Colonnades





Other writings



Notes on the State of Virginia (1785)
1787 European journey memorandums
Indian removal letters
Jefferson Bible (1895)
Jefferson manuscript collection at the Massachusetts Historical Society





Related



Age of Enlightenment
American Enlightenment
American Philosophical Society
American Revolution

patriots


Member, Virginia Committee of Correspondence
Committee of the States
Founding Fathers of the United States
Franco-American alliance
Jefferson and education
Religious views
Jefferson and slavery
Jefferson and the Library of Congress
Jefferson disk
Jefferson Pier
Pet mockingbird
National Gazette
Residence Act

Compromise of 1790


Sally Hemings

Jefferson–Hemings controversy
Betty Hemings


Separation of church and state
Swivel chair
The American Museum magazine
Virginia dynasty





Elections



United States Presidential election 1796
1800
1804





Legacy



Bibliography
Jefferson Memorial
Mount Rushmore
Birthday
Thomas Jefferson Building
Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression
Jefferson Lecture
Jefferson National Expansion Memorial
Thomas Jefferson Star for Foreign Service
Jefferson Lab
Monticello Association
Jefferson City, Missouri
Jefferson College
Thomas Jefferson School of Law
Thomas Jefferson University
Washington and Jefferson National Forests
Other placenames
Currency depictions

Jefferson nickel
Two-dollar bill


U.S. postage stamps





Popular culture



Ben and Me (1953 short)
1776 (1969 musical
1972 film)
Jefferson in Paris (1995 film)
Thomas Jefferson (1997 film)
Liberty! (1997 documentary series)
Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
John Adams (2008 miniseries)
Jefferson's Garden (2015 play)
Hamilton (2015 musical)
Jefferson–Eppes Trophy
Wine bottles controversy





Family



Peter Jefferson (father)
Jane Randolph Jefferson (mother)
Lucy Jefferson Lewis (sister)
Randolph Jefferson (brother)
Isham Randolph (grandfather)
William Randolph (great-grandfather)
Martha Jefferson (wife)
Martha Jefferson Randolph (daughter)
Mary Jefferson Eppes (daughter)
Harriet Hemings (daughter)
Madison Hemings (son)
Eston Hemings (son)
Thomas J. Randolph (grandson)
Francis Eppes (grandson)
George W. Randolph (grandson)
John Wayles Jefferson (grandson)
Thomas Mann Randolph Jr. (son-in-law)
John Wayles Eppes (son-in-law)
John Wayles (father-in-law)
Dabney Carr (brother-in-law)
Dabney Carr (nephew)








← John Adams
James Madison →


 Category












v
t
e


World Heritage Sites in the United States



Northeast



Independence Hall
Statue of Liberty








Midwest



Cahokia





South



Everglades
Great Smoky Mountains
Mammoth Cave
Monticello and the University of Virginia
Poverty Point
San Antonio Missions





West



Carlsbad Caverns
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
Grand Canyon National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Kluane-Wrangell–St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek1
Mesa Verde
Olympic National Park
Pueblo de Taos
Papahānaumokuākea
Redwood
Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park1
Yellowstone National Park
Yosemite National Park





Territories



La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site






1 Shared with Canada










v
t
e


Association of American Universities



Public



Arizona
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Florida
Georgia Tech
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
Kansas
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Missouri
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


North Carolina
Ohio State
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
Texas
Texas A&M
Virginia
Washington
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brandeis
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Emory
Harvard
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northwestern
NYU
UPenn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
USC
Stanford
Tulane
Vanderbilt
Wash U
Yale





Canadian (public)



McGill
Toronto












v
t
e


Universities Research Association



Public



Alabama
Arizona
Arizona State
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Colorado State
Florida
Florida State
Houston
Illinois

Chicago
Urbana–Champaign


Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
LSU
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Mississippi
Nebraska
New Mexico
New Mexico State
North Carolina
North Texas
Northern Illinois
Ohio State
Oklahoma
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
South Carolina
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


Tennessee
Texas

Arlington
Austin
Dallas


Texas A&M
Texas Tech
Virginia
Virginia Tech
Washington
Wayne State
William & Mary
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Harvard
Illinois Tech
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northeastern
Northwestern
Notre Dame
Penn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
Rockefeller
SMU
Stanford
Syracuse
Tufts
Tulane
Vanderbilt
WUSTL
Yale





International



McGill
Toronto
Pisa
Waseda
Manchester
Liverpool
UCL












v
t
e


Southeastern Universities Research Association



Standard members



Alabama
UAB
UAHuntsville
Arkansas
Auburn
Baylor
Catholic
UCF
Christopher Newport
Clemson
Delaware
Duke
East Carolina
Florida
Florida Atlantic
Florida Tech
FIU
Florida State
George Mason
George Washington
Georgetown
Georgia
Georgia Tech
Georgia State
Hampton
Houston
James Madison
Kentucky
UL Lafayette
LSU
Louisiana Tech
Maryland
UMBC
MIT
Memphis
Miami
Ole Miss
Mississippi State
New Orleans
Norfolk State
North Carolina A&T
North Carolina
NC State
Oklahoma
Old Dominion
Regina
Rice
Richmond
South Carolina
South Florida
Southern Miss
Tennessee
Texas
Texas A&M
Tulane
Vanderbilt
Virginia
VCU
Virginia Tech
Virginia State
West Virginia
William & Mary





Affiliate members



Idaho State
Ohio












v
t
e


Atlantic Coast Conference



Atlantic Division



Boston College Eagles
Clemson Tigers
Florida State Seminoles
Louisville Cardinals
North Carolina State Wolfpack
Notre Dame Fighting Irish (non-football member)
Syracuse Orange
Wake Forest Demon Deacons








Coastal Division



Duke Blue Devils
Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets
Miami Hurricanes
North Carolina Tar Heels
Pittsburgh Panthers
Virginia Cavaliers
Virginia Tech Hokies





Championships & awards



Conference champions
National championships
Athlete of the Year





Broadcast partners



Raycom Sports (ACC Network; list of affiliates)
ESPN (ACC Network Extra)












v
t
e


Colleges and universities in Virginia



Private



Appalachian College of Pharmacy
Appalachian School of Law
Art Institute of Virginia Beach
Art Institute of Washington
Atlantic University
Averett University
Baptist Theological Seminary at Richmond
Bluefield College
Bon Secours Memorial College of Nursing
Bridgewater College
Christendom College
Cordoba University
DeVry University
Eastern Mennonite University
ECPI University
Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine
Emory and Henry College
Ferrum College
George Washington University Virginia Campus
Hampden–Sydney College
Hampton University
Hartland College
Hollins University
Jefferson College of Health Sciences
John Leland Center for Theological Studies
Liberty University
Lynchburg College
Mary Baldwin University
Marymount University
Patrick Henry College
Randolph College
Randolph–Macon College
Regent University
Roanoke College
Shenandoah University
Southern Virginia University
Stratford University
Sweet Briar College
Union Theological Seminary & Presbyterian School of Christian Education
University of Management and Technology
University of the Potomac
University of Richmond
Virginia International University
Virginia Theological Seminary
Virginia Union University
Virginia University of Lynchburg
Virginia Wesleyan College
Washington and Lee University
Westwood College





Public



Christopher Newport University
College of William & Mary
Eastern Virginia Medical School
George Mason University
James Madison University
Joint Forces Staff College
Longwood University
Marine Corps University
Norfolk State University
Old Dominion University
Radford University
Richard Bland College
University of Mary Washington
University of Virginia
University of Virginia's College at Wise
Virginia Commonwealth University
Virginia Community College System
Virginia Military Institute
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Virginia State University
Virginia–Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine





Defunct



Blackstone College for Girls
Elizabeth College
Frederick College
Gibbs College
Marion College
Saint Paul's College
Sullins College
University of Northern Virginia
Virginia Intermont College








Complete list












v
t
e


Public Ivy universities




Richard Moll's 1985 list



Original Eight



College of William & Mary
Miami University
University of California
University of Michigan
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of Texas at Austin
University of Vermont
University of Virginia





"Worthy Runners-Up"



Binghamton University, State University of New York
University of Colorado Boulder
Georgia Institute of Technology
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
New College of Florida
Pennsylvania State University
University of Pittsburgh
University of Washington at Seattle
University of Wisconsin–Madison






Greenes' Guides 2001 list



Eastern



Binghamton University, State University of New York
College of William & Mary
Pennsylvania State University
Rutgers University
University of Connecticut
University of Delaware
University of Maryland
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of Vermont
University of Virginia





Western



University of Arizona
University of California:

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara


University of Colorado Boulder
University of Washington





Great Lakes & Midwest



Indiana University
Miami University
Ohio State University
University of Illinois
University of Iowa
University of Michigan
Michigan State University
University of Minnesota
University of Wisconsin





Southern



University of Florida
University of Georgia
University of Texas at Austin














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 126085929
LCCN: n79053979
ISNI: 0000 0000 9136 933X
GND: 36636-5
SUDOC: 026432234
BNF: cb11868081p (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_Virginia&oldid=814278442"					Categories: University of VirginiaUniversities and colleges in VirginiaEducation in Albemarle County, VirginiaEducation in Charlottesville, VirginiaLandmarks in VirginiaNeoclassical architecture in VirginiaPublic universities in VirginiaFlagship universities in the United StatesThomas JeffersonUniversities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and SchoolsWorld Heritage Sites in the United StatesEducational institutions established in 1819Tourist attractions in Charlottesville, VirginiaBuildings and structures in Charlottesville, VirginiaSummer schools1819 establishments in VirginiaV-12 Navy College Training ProgramHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles with dead external links from September 2016Articles with dead external links from June 2016Use mdy dates from May 2015Coordinates on WikidataPages using deprecated image syntaxArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2002All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2006Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2014Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers