
The University of Sydney


Coat of arms of the University of Sydney[1]



Latin: Universitas Sidneiensis


Motto
Latin: Sidere mens eadem mutato
English: "Though the constellations are changed, the mind is the same." (literal)


Type
Public research university


Established
1850


Endowment
A$1.8 billion
(2013)


Chancellor
Belinda Hutchinson


Vice-Chancellor
Michael Spence


Visitor
Governor of New South Wales ex officio



Administrative staff

5,350 (2015)


Students
52,789 (2014)[2]


Undergraduates
33,505 (2014)[2]


Postgraduates
19,284 (2014)[2]


Location
Sydney, Australia
33°53′16″S 151°11′14″E﻿ / ﻿33.88778°S 151.18722°E﻿ / -33.88778; 151.18722


Campus
Urban, parks


Colours

Red, Yellow & Blue  
              


Affiliations
Group of Eight, APRU, ASAIHL, AAUN, ACU, WUN


Website
sydney.edu.au





The University of Sydney (informally, USyd or USYD) is an Australian public research university in Sydney, Australia. Founded in 1850, it is Australia's first university and is regarded as one of the world's leading universities. It is ranked as the world's 50th most reputable university.[3] Its graduates are additionally ranked the 4th most employable in the world and 1st in Australia.[4] The university comprises 16 faculties and schools, through which it offers bachelor, master and doctoral degrees. In 2014 it had 33,505 undergraduate and 19,284 graduate students.[2]
The university is colloquially known as one of Australia's sandstone universities. Its campus is ranked in the top 10 of the world's most beautiful universities by the British Daily Telegraph and The Huffington Post, spreading across the inner-city suburbs of Camperdown and Darlington.[5][6]
Five Nobel and two Crafoord laureates have been affiliated with the university as graduates and faculty.[7] The university has educated seven Australian prime ministers, two Governors-General of Australia, nine state governors and territory administrators, and 24 justices of the High Court of Australia, including four chief justices. Sydney has produced 110 Rhodes Scholars and several Gates Scholars.
The University of Sydney is a member of the Group of Eight, Academic Consortium 21, the Association of Pacific Rim Universities (APRU), the Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning, the Australia-Africa Universities Network (AAUN), the Association of Commonwealth Universities and the Worldwide Universities Network.



Contents


1 History

1.1 1850–1950
1.2 1950–2000
1.3 2000–present
1.4 Controversies


2 Campus

2.1 Main campus
2.2 Satellite campuses
2.3 Library
2.4 Centre for Continuing Education
2.5 Museums and galleries
2.6 Halls of Residence & Residential Colleges


3 Organisation
4 Academic profile

4.1 Rankings
4.2 Endowments and research grants


5 Coat of arms
6 Student organisations
7 Notable alumni
8 Student well-being

8.1 Reports of on-campus sexual assault and harassment


9 See also
10 References
11 External links



History[edit]
1850–1950[edit]




The University of Sydney in the early 1870s, viewed from Parramatta Road






The Sydney University Regiment forming a guard of honour for the visiting Duke of York, 1927


In 1848, in the New South Wales Legislative Council, William Wentworth, a graduate of the University of Cambridge and Charles Nicholson, a medical graduate from the University of Edinburgh Medical School, proposed a plan to expand the existing Sydney College into a larger university. Wentworth argued that a state secular university was imperative for the growth of a society aspiring towards self-government, and that it would provide the opportunity for "the child of every class, to become great and useful in the destinies of his country".[8] It would take two attempts on Wentworth's behalf, however, before the plan was finally adopted.
The university was established via the passage of the University of Sydney Act,[9] on 24 September 1850 and was assented on 1 October 1850 by Sir Charles Fitzroy.[10] Two years later, the university was inaugurated on 11 October 1852 in the Big Schoolroom of what is now Sydney Grammar School. The first principal was John Woolley,[11] the first professor of chemistry and experimental physics was John Smith.[12] On 27 February 1858 the university received its Royal Charter from Queen Victoria, giving degrees conferred by the university rank and recognition equal to those given by universities in the United Kingdom.[13] By 1859, the university had moved to its current site in the Sydney suburb of Camperdown.
In 1858, the passage of the electoral act provided for the university to become a constituency for the New South Wales Legislative Assembly as soon as there were 100 graduates of the university holding higher degrees eligible for candidacy. This seat in the Parliament of New South Wales was first filled in 1876, but was abolished in 1880 one year after its second member, Edmund Barton, who later became the first Prime Minister of Australia, was elected to the Legislative Assembly.
Most of the estate of John Henry Challis was bequeathed to the university, which received a sum of £200,000 in 1889. This was thanks in part due to William Montagu Manning (Chancellor 1878–95) who argued against the claims by British Tax Commissioners. The following year seven professorships were created: anatomy; zoology; engineering; history; law; logic and mental philosophy; and modern literature.
1950–2000[edit]
The New England University College was founded as part of the University of Sydney in 1938 and later separated in 1954 to become the University of New England.
During the late 1960s, the University of Sydney was at the centre of rows to introduce courses on Marxism and feminism at the major Australian universities. At one stage, newspaper reporters descended on the university to cover brawls, demonstrations, secret memos and a walk-out by David Armstrong, a respected philosopher who held the Challis Chair of Philosophy from 1959 to 1991, after students at one of his lectures openly demanded a course on feminism.[14] The philosophy department split over the issue to become the Traditional and Modern Philosophy Department, headed by Armstrong and following a more traditional approach to philosophy, and the General Philosophy Department, which follows the French continental approach.
Under the terms of the Higher Education (Amalgamation) Act 1989 (NSW)[15] the following bodies were incorporated into the university in 1990:

Sydney Branch of the Sydney Conservatorium of Music
Cumberland College of Health Sciences
Sydney College of the Arts of the Institute of the Arts
Sydney Institute of Education of the Sydney College of Advanced Education
Institute of Nursing Studies of the Sydney College of Advanced Education
Guild Centre of the Sydney College of Advanced Education.

Prior to 1981, the Sydney Institute of Education was the Sydney Teachers College.
The Orange Agricultural College (OAC) was originally transferred to the University of New England under the Act, but then transferred to the University of Sydney in 1994, as part of the reforms to the University of New England undertaken by the University of New England Act 1993[16] and the Southern Cross University Act 1993.[17] In January 2005, the University of Sydney transferred the OAC to Charles Sturt University.
2000–present[edit]




The Main Quadrangle in its complete form as seen today


In February 2007, the university agreed to acquire a portion of the land granted to St John's College to develop the Sydney Institute of Health and Medical Research, now the Charles Perkins Centre, the first new research building to be built on campus in over 40 years. As a Roman Catholic institution, in handing over the land St John's placed limitations on the type of medical research which could be conducted on the premises, seeking to preserve the essence of the college's mission. This caused concern among some groups, who argued that it would interfere with scientific medical research. However, this was rejected by the university's administration because the building was not intended for this purpose and there were many other facilities in close proximity where such research could take place.[citation needed].




Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney


In 2010 the University received a rarely seen Pablo Picasso painting from the private collection of an anonymous donor. The painting, Jeune Fille Endormie, which had never been publicly seen since 1939, depicts the artist's lover, Marie-Thérèse Walter and was donated on the strict understanding that it would be sold and the proceeds directed to medical research.[18] In June 2011, the painting was auctioned at Christie's in London and sold for £13.5 million ($20.6 million AUD). The proceeds of the sale funded the establishment of many endowed professorial chairs at the yet to be constructed Charles Perkins Centre, where a room dedicated to the painting, now exists.[19]
At the start of 2010, the University controversially adopted a new logo. It retains the same university arms, however it takes on a more modern look. There have been stylistic changes, the main one being the coat of arm's mantling, the shape of the escutcheon (shield), the removal of the motto scroll, and also others more subtle within the arms itself, such as the mane and fur of the lion, the number of lines in the open book and the colouration.[20] The original Coat of Arms from 1857 continues to be used for ceremonial and other formal purposes, such as on testamurs.[21][22]
Concerns about public funding for higher education were reflected again in 2014 following the federal government's proposal to deregulate student fees. The university held a wide-ranging consultation process, which included a "town hall meeting" at the university's Great Hall 25 August 2014, where an audience of students, staff and alumni expressed deep concern about the government's plans and called on university leadership to lobby against the proposals.[23] Spence took a leading position among Australian vice-chancellors in repeatedly calling throughout 2014 for any change to funding to not undermine equitable access to university while arguing for fee deregulation to raise course costs for the majority of higher education students.[24][25]
In order to further enhance its competitiveness locally and internationally, the university has introduced plans to consolidate existing degrees to reduce the overall number of programs.[26]
Controversies[edit]
In 2001, the University of Sydney chancellor, Dame Leonie Kramer, was forced to resign by the university's governing body.[27] In 2003, Nick Greiner, a former Premier of New South Wales, resigned from his position as chair of the university's Graduate School of Management because of academic protests against his simultaneous chairmanship of British American Tobacco (Australia). Subsequently, his wife, Kathryn Greiner, resigned in protest from the two positions she held at the university as chair of the Sydney Peace Foundation and a member of the executive council of the Research Institute for Asia and the Pacific.[28]
In 2005, the Public Service Association of New South Wales and the Community and Public Sector Union were in dispute with the university over a proposal to privatise security at the main campus (and the Cumberland campus).[29]
Action initiated by Spence to improve the financial sustainability of the university has alienated some students and staff.[30] In 2012, Spence led efforts to cut the university's expenditure to address the financial impact of a slowdown in international student enrolments across Australia. This included redundancies of a number of university staff and faculty, though some at the university argued that the institution should cut back on building programs instead.[31] Critics argue the push for savings has been driven by managerial incompetence and indifference,[30] fuelling industrial action during a round of enterprise bargaining in 2013 that also reflected widespread concerns about public funding for higher education.[32]
An internal staff survey in 2012/13, which found widespread dissatisfaction with how the university is being managed.[33] Asked to rate their level of agreement with a series of statements about the university, 19 per cent of those surveyed believed "change and innovation" were handled well by the university. In the survey, 75 per cent of university staff indicated senior executives were not listening to them, while only 22 per cent said change was handled well and 33 per cent said senior executives were good role models.[34]
In the first week of semester, some staff passed a motion of no confidence in Spence because of concerns he was pushing staff to improve the budget while he received a performance bonus of $155,000 that took his total pay to $1 million, in the top 0.1 per cent of income earners in Australia.[35] Fairfax media reports Spence and other Uni bosses have salary packages worth ten times more than staff salaries and double that of the Prime Minister.[36]
During Spence's term, the university community was divided over allowing students from an elite private school, Scots College, to enter university via a "pathway of privilege" by means of enrolling in a Diploma of Tertiary Preparation rather than meeting HSC entry requirements.[37] The university charged students $12,000 to take the course and have since successfully admitted a number of students to degree courses. An expose by Fairfax media which turned out to be based on a misunderstanding as to VET and UAC matriculation standards, the scheme has been criticised by Phillip Heath, the national chairman of the Association of Heads of independent schools of Australia.[38] Heath later withdrew the statement, indicating that he had been taken out of context, confirming in a letter circulated to Scots parents that "the Diploma of Tertiary Preparation at Scots is clearly not a "sweetheart deal" as has been reported".
An investigation by Fairfax Media in 2015 revealed widespread cheating at universities across NSW, including the University of Sydney.[39] The university established a taskforce on academic misconduct in April 2015 to maintain its leadership position in covering up incidences of cheating and managerial misconduct.[40]
A recent investigation by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) exposed corporate deals between the Veterinary Faculty and large pet food companies had resulted in the withholding of harmful cat food product tested to protect corporate sponsors.[41]
The Daily Telegraph newspaper reports that education minister Mr. Simon Birmingham criticises that Sydney University Law School teaching a course pushing for recognition of sharia law, polygamy and young marriage in Australian legal system. Taught by lecturers Salim Farrar and Dr. Ghena Krayem, the course "Muslim Minorities And The Law" draws from a book wrote by the pair that claims “sharia and common law are not inherently incompatible”.[42]
Campus[edit]
Main campus[edit]




The MacLaurin Hall


The main campus has been ranked in the top 10 of the world's most beautiful universities by the British Daily Telegraph, and The Huffington Post, among others such as Oxford and Cambridge and is spread across the inner-city suburbs of Camperdown and Darlington.[5][6]




The interior of the Main Quadrangle Southern Range


Originally housed in what is now Sydney Grammar School, in 1855 the government granted land in Grose Farm to the university, three kilometres from the city, which is now the main Camperdown campus. The architect Edmund Blacket designed the original Neo-Gothic sandstone Quadrangle and Great Tower buildings, which were completed in 1862. The rapid expansion of the university in the mid-20th century resulted in the acquisition of land in Darlington across City Road. The Camperdown/Darlington campus houses the university's administrative headquarters, and the Faculties of Arts, Science, Education and Social Work, Pharmacy, Veterinary Science, Economics and Business, Architecture, and Engineering. It is also the home base of the large Faculty of Medicine, which has numerous affiliated teaching hospitals across the state.




Former jacaranda tree in the main quadrangle


The main campus is also the focus of the university's student life, with the student-run University of Sydney Union (known as "the Union") in possession of three buildings – Wentworth, Manning and Holme Buildings. These buildings house a large proportion of the university's catering outlets, and provide space for recreational rooms, bars and function centres. One of the largest activities organised by the Union is the Orientation Week (or 'O-week'), centring on stalls set up by clubs and societies on the Front Lawns.
The main campus is home to a variety of statues, artworks, and monuments. These include the Gilgamesh Statue and the Confucius Statue.
As of 2016 the university is undertaking a large capital works program with the aim of revitalising the campus and providing more office, teaching and student space.[43] The program will see the amalgamation of the smaller science and technical libraries into a larger library, and the construction of a central administration and student services building along City Road. A new building for the School of Information Technologies opened in late 2006 and has been located on a site adjacent to the Seymour Centre. The busy Eastern Avenue thoroughfare has been transformed into a pedestrian plaza and a new footbridge has been built over City Road. The new home for the Sydney Law School, located alongside Fisher Library on the site of the old Edgeworth David and Stephen Roberts buildings, has been completed. The university has opened a new building called "Abercrombie building" for business school students in early 2016.
The NSW state government has reduced transport links to the old campus and the closest Redfern railway station leaving main access to buses on the neighbouring Parramatta Road and City Road, prioritising the growth at other Sydney universities.[44]
From 2007, the university has used space in the former Eveleigh railway yards, just to the south of Darlington, for examination purposes.
Satellite campuses[edit]




The Great Tower (completed 1862) is on the eastern side of the Main Quadrangle



Mallett Street campus: The Mallett Street campus is home of the Faculty of Nursing.
Cumberland campus: Formerly an independent institution (the Cumberland College of Health Sciences), the Cumberland campus in the Sydney suburb of Lidcombe was incorporated into the university as part of the higher education reforms of the late 1980s. It is home to the Faculty of Health Sciences, which covers various allied health disciplines, including physiotherapy, speech pathology, radiation therapy, occupational therapy, as well as exercise science and health information management.
The Sydney Dental Hospital located in Surry Hills and the Westmead Centre for Oral Health which is attached to Westmead Hospital.
Rozelle Campus: The Sydney College of the Arts (SCA) is based in a former sanitorium in the Sydney suburb of Rozelle, overlooking Port Jackson. The college specialises in the fine (visual) arts.
Sydney Conservatorium of Music: Formerly the NSW State Conservatorium of Music, the Sydney Conservatorium of Music (SCM) is located in the Sydney CBD on the edge of Sydney's Royal Botanic Garden, a short distance from the Sydney Opera House. It became a faculty of the university in the 1990s and incorporates the main campus Department of Music, which was the subject of the documentary Facing the Music.
Camden campus: Located on Sydney's southwest rural fringe, the Camden campus houses research farms for agriculture and veterinary science.

The university also uses a number of other facilities for its teaching activities.

Sydney Medical School has eight clinical schools at its affiliated hospitals, responsible for clinical education at the hospitals.
One Tree Island is an island situated within the World Heritage Site Great Barrier Reef Marine Park about 20 km east-southeast of Heron Island and about 90 km east-northeast of Gladstone on the Queensland coast, and hosts a tropical marine research station of the School of Geosciences.
The IA Watson Grains Research Centre located at Narrabri in north-central New South Wales is a research station of the Faculty of Agriculture and Environment.
The Molonglo Observatory is located in the Australian Capital Territory.
Maningrida is a base camp for scientific expeditions in the Northern Territory.
Arthursleigh is an agricultural estate located near Goulburn. An art studio is located in Paris, France, while the Australian Archaeology Centre is located in Athens, Greece.
Taylors College at Waterloo in Sydney is operated by the University for its Foundation Program, catering to international students wishing to enter the University.

Library[edit]
The University of Sydney Library consists of 11 individual libraries located across the university's various campuses. According to the library's publications, it is the largest academic library in the southern hemisphere;[45] university statistics show that in 2007 the collection consisted of just under 5 million physical volumes and a further 300,000 e-books, for a total of approximately 5.3 million items.[46] The Rare Books Library possesses several extremely rare items, including one of the two extant copies of the Gospel of Barnabas and a first edition of Isaac Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica.




Lake Northam in Victoria Park


Centre for Continuing Education[edit]
The Centre for Continuing Education is an adult education provider within the university. Extension lectures at the university were inaugurated in 1886,[47] 36 years after the university's founding, making it Australia's longest running university continuing education program.[48]
Museums and galleries[edit]

The Nicholson Museum of Antiquities contains the largest and most prestigious collection of antiquities in Australia. The museum was founded in 1860 by the donation of Sir Charles Nicholson (Sydney University's second chancellor 1854-1862). It is also the country's oldest university museum, and features ancient artefacts from Egypt, the Middle East, Greece, Rome, Cyprus and Mesopotamia, collected by the university over many years and added to by recent archaeological expeditions. The museum is located in the historic Main Quadrangle at the University of Sydney and open freely to general public.
The Macleay Museum is named after Alexander Macleay, whose collection of insects begun in the late eighteenth century was the basis upon which the museum was founded. It has developed into an extraordinary collection of natural history specimens, ethnographic artefacts, scientific instruments and historic photographs.
The University Art Collection was founded in the 1860s and contains more than 7,000 pieces, constantly growing through donation, bequests, and acquisition. It is housed in several different places, including the Sir Hermann Black Gallery and the War Memorial Art Gallery.
The University Art Gallery opened in 1959. The Gallery hosted numerous exhibitions until 1972, when it was taken over for office space. It reopened in 1995 and continues to present a regularly changing program.[49]
The Rare Books Library is a part of the Fisher Library and holds 185,000 books and manuscripts which are rare, valuable or fragile, including eighty medieval manuscripts, works by Galileo, Halley and Copernicus and an extensive collection of Australiana. The copy of the Gospel of Barnabas, and a first edition of Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica by Sir Isaac Newton are held here. Regular exhibitions of rare books are held in the exhibition room.

Halls of Residence & Residential Colleges[edit]




St John's College






Quadrangle of Sancta Sophia College






Wesley College






St Andrew's College


The university has a number of halls of residence (based on research-lead living-learning principles) and residential colleges, each with its own distinctive style and facilities. All offer a wide range of cultural, social, sporting and leadership activities along with targeted academic support in a supportive communal environment. The Halls of Residence are owned and operated by the University Accommodation Service.[50] Starting in 2013, the University committed to creating the Halls of Residence (an additional 4,000-6,000 residential places) at an affordable price to enhance the educational experience of living on campus and to offer more students a rich academic environment in which to live.[51]

The Queen Mary Building[52]
Abercrombie Student Accommodation
Regiment Hall (Opening in 2018)

The University Student Accommodation Service were awarded the Asia-Pacific Student Housing Operation of the Year & Excellence in Facility Development and Management[53] in 2016.
The Student Accommodation Service and the Mana Yura Student Support Service were the first in Australia to implement an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander On-Campus Residence Halls Scholarship Guarantee.[51]
Additionally, the University owns and operates International House.
Affiliated with the University are six religiously denominated colleges. Unlike some residential colleges in British or American universities, the colleges are not affiliated with any specific discipline of study.

St John's College
St Andrew's College
St Paul's College
Sancta Sophia College
Wesley College
The Women's College
Mandelbaum House

There is a university-affiliated housing cooperative, Stucco.
The college also publishes a peer-reviewed online journal, Philament,[54] that focuses on work by postgraduate students including creative stories.[55] the journal is supported by an advisory board of faculty members, and is registered by the Australian Commonwealth Department of Education Science and Training (DEST).
Organisation[edit]
The university comprises 9 Faculties and 3 University Schools:[56]

Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences
University of Sydney Business School
Sydney Dental School
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technologies
Faculty of Health Sciences
Sydney Medical School
Sydney Nursing School
Sydney Pharmacy School
Faculty of Science
Sydney School of Architecture, Design and Planning
Sydney Conservatorium of Music
Sydney Law School

The five largest faculties and schools by 2011 student enrolments were (in descending order): Arts and Social Sciences; Business; Science; Engineering and Information Technologies; Health Sciences. Together they constituted 64.4% of the university's students and each had a student enrolment over 4,500 (at least 9% of students).[57]





The Main Quadrangle of the University of Sydney



Academic profile[edit]
Rankings[edit]


University rankings


University of Sydney


QS World[58]
50


THE-WUR World[59]
61


ARWU World[60]
82


USNWR World[61]
34


CWTS Leiden World[62]
29


Australian rankings


QS National[58]
5


THE-WUR National [63]
3


ARWU National[64]
4


USNWR National[65]
2


CWTS Leiden National[62]
1


ERA National[67]
5[66]






The Anderson Stuart Building, housing the Sydney Medical School






The Macleay Building housing the Macleay Museum, the oldest collection of natural history in Australia






The Madsen Building, housing the School of Geosciences, previously occupied by the CSIRO


The 2018 QS World University Rankings ranked the University of Sydney 50th in the world.[68] The 2017 QS World University Rankings by Subject,[69] Sydney was ranked 1st in Sports-related Subjects, 10th in Anatomy & Physiology, 11th in Veterinary Science, 11th in Education, 13th in Law, 15th in Medicine, 15th in Architecture, 18th in English Language and Literature, 20th in Accounting and Finance, 20th in Archaeology, 21st in Civil and Structural Engineering, 21st in History, 22nd in Social Policy and Administration, 23rd in Psychology, 23rd in Politics and International Studies.[70]
In terms of employability, the 2017 QS Graduate Employability Rankings placed University of Sydney graduates 4th in the world, 1st in Australia, and 2nd in the Asia Pacific region.[71] In 2012, a human resources consultancy in Paris conducted a survey of recruiters in 20 countries, and ranked Sydney as 49th in the world for employability.[72]
The Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2016–2017 placed the University of Sydney 60th in the world and 9th in the Asia Pacific.[73] Additionally, Sydney was ranked in the top bracket for teaching and research.[74] The Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2016 placed Sydney 29th in Arts and Humanities, 33rd in Clinical, Pre-clinical and Health, 52nd in Social Sciences and 73rd in Engineering and Technology. The Times Higher Education World Reputation Rankings 2015, placed Sydney as 51st-60th most reputable in the world.[75]
The 2018 US News & World Report's Best Global Universities ranking placed Sydney 34th in the world and 2nd in Australasia.[76]
In the 2016 Shanghai Ranking published by the Shanghai Ranking Consultancy, the University of Sydney was ranked in the 82nd and in the top 0.8% of universities in the world.[77]
Sydney is ranked 1st in Australia and 29th overall in the 2017 CWTS Leiden Rankings for research impact.[78] Additionally,
In the Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities 2015 by National Taiwan University, Sydney is ranked 36th in the world, 3rd in the Asia Pacific and 2nd in Australia.[79]
In terms of alumni wealth, the number of wealthy Sydney alumni was ranked fifth outside the United States, behind Oxford, Mumbai, Cambridge and LSE according to the ABC NEWS.[80] Business magazine Spear's placed the University of Sydney 44th in the world and 2nd in Australia in its table of "World's top 100 universities for producing millionaires".[81]
Endowments and research grants[edit]
The university has received a number of significant bequests and legacies over its history. The following are current professorships ("chairs"), funds and fellowships which are funded by bequests and legacies and named after benefactors:

Douglas Burrows Chair of Paediatrics and Child Health[82]
John Challis Bequest for chairs in Law, International Law, Jurisprudence, Anatomy, Biology, Civil Engineering, English Literature, History and philosophy (see Challis Professorship)[83]
Carlyle Greenwell Research Fund in Anthropology and Archaeology[84]
Edwin Cuthbert Hall Chair of Middle Eastern Archaeology[85]
Mitchell Notaras Fellowship in Colorectal Surgery[86]
Robert W Storr Chair for Hepatic Medicine[87]

Coat of arms[edit]




Arms used in the University of Sydney logo, pre-2010


The Grant of Arms was made by the College of Arms in 1857. The grant reads:

Argent on a Cross Azure an open book proper, clasps Gold, between four Stars of eight points Or, on a chief Gules a Lion passant Guardant also Or, together with this motto "Sidere mens eadem mutato" to be borne and used forever herafter by the said University of Sydney on their Common Seal, Shields or otherwise according to the Law of Arms.

The use of eight-pointed stars was unusual for arms at the time, although they had been used unofficially as emblems for New South Wales since the 1820s and on the arms of the Church of England Diocese of Australia in 1836.[88]
According to the university, the Latin motto Sidere mens eadem mutato can be translated to "the stars change, the mind remains the same."[1] Francis Merewether, later Vice Provost, in 1857 proposed "Coelum non animum mutant" from Horace (Ep.1.11.27) but after objections changed it to a metrical version including "Sidus" (Star), a neat reference to the Southern Cross and perhaps the Sydney family link with Sir Philip Sidney's "Astrophel (Star-Lover) & Stella (Star)".[89] Author and university alumnus Clive James quipped in his 1981 autobiography that the motto loosely implies "Sydney University is really Oxford or Cambridge laterally displaced approximately 12,000 miles."[90]
Student organisations[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Orientation Week at University Place



Student Representatives: Politically and academically, undergraduate students are represented by the Students' Representative Council (SRC) and postgraduate students by the Sydney University Postgraduate Representative Association (SUPRA).
University of Sydney Union: The University of Sydney Union (USU) is the oldest and largest university union in Australia. USU provides a range of activities, programs, services and facilities geared at giving students the university experience. This involves delivering a huge Clubs and Societies program, a varied entertainment program, student opportunities, a range of catering and retail services plus buildings and recreational spaces for students, staff and visitors.

The SRC and Union are both governed by student representatives, who are elected by students each year. Elections for the USU board of directors occur in first semester; elections for the SRC President, and for members of the Students' Representative Council itself, occur in second semester, along with a separate election for the editorial board of the student newspaper Honi Soit, which is published by the SRC. The elections are usually closely contested, and result in much of the main campus being covered with chalk messages from the various candidates.
Notable alumni[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: List of University of Sydney people
University of Sydney alumni have made significant contributions to Australia and the world.
Notable alumni of Sydney Law School include the current Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull and five other Prime Ministers, three Chief Justices of the High Court, four Federal Opposition Leaders, two Governors-General, nine Federal Attorneys-General, and 24 Justices of the High Court—more than any other law school in Australia. The faculty has also produced 24 Rhodes Scholars and several Gates Scholars. Internationally, alumni of Sydney Law School include the third President of the United Nations General Assembly and a President of the International Court of Justice (in each case, the only Australians to date to hold such positions).
The University of Sydney is associated with five Nobel laureates: in chemistry John Cornforth (alumnus; the only Nobel Laureate born in New South Wales) and Robert Robinson (staff); in economics, John Harsanyi (alumnus); and in physiology or medicine, John Eccles and Bernard Katz (both staff).
The School of Physics has played an important role in the development of radio astronomy in particular[91]: Ruby Payne-Scott conducted the first interferometric observations in radio astronomy with the sea-cliff interferometer at Dover Heights; alumnus Ron Bracewell proposed the nulling interferometer to image extrasolar planets, made contributions to the theory of the Fourier Transform and X-ray tomography, and proposed the idea of the Bracewell probe in SETI; and alumnus Bernard Mills led the construction of the Mills Cross Telescope and Molonglo Observatory Synthesis Telescope in the ACT. School of Physics alumnus and Crafoord Laureate Edwin Salpeter discovered the form of the initial mass function of stars, the importance of beryllium-8 in stellar nuclear fusion, and independently with Yakov Zel'dovich proposed the black hole accretion disk model of active galactic nuclei. The Apollo 14 Mission Scientist Philip K. Chapman and the first Australian-born astronaut to fly in space Paul Scully-Power are both alumni of the University. Chaos theory pioneer and Crafoord Laureate Robert May is an alumnus of and former Professor at the School of Physics, best known for his exploration of the logistic map bifurcations. Other famous alumni include Dolph Lundgren
Student well-being[edit]
Reports of on-campus sexual assault and harassment[edit]
Between 2011 and 2016 there were 52 officially reported cases of sexual abuse and harassment on campus released by the university, resulting in 1 expulsion, 1 suspension and 4 reprimands.[92] This is less than the 2017 Australian Human Rights Commission report on sexual assault and harassment which found reported figures substantially higher than this.[93] 71% of students surveyed in 2017 reported not knowing how to make a report relating to sexual assault or harassment. Imogen Grant from the SRC said students who had experienced sexual assault had come forward believing that "navigating the university bureaucracy exacerbates trauma and often seems futile".[94] Previously a 2015 survey of 2000 USyd students found that 57 per cent of respondents did not know where to seek help or how to report sexual misconduct at USyd, and only 1.4% of all serious sexual incidents are reported.[95] After the release of the 2017 report the vice-chancellor said the university was committed to implementing "all of the recommendations contained in the report".[94]
See also[edit]




New South Wales portal
University portal





Frontiers of Science (1962–87)
Great Hall of the University of Sydney
Jacaranda (University of Sydney)
List of universities in Australia
National Computer Science School
NICTA – National Information and Communication Technology Research Centre, co-supported by University of Sydney
Power Institute of Fine Arts

References[edit]

Williams, Bruce. Liberal education and useful knowledge: a brief history of the University of Sydney, 1850–2000, Chancellor's Committee, University of Sydney, 2002. ISBN 1-86487-439-2



^ a b "Our logo – About the University – The University of Sydney". sydney.edu.au. 19 March 2010. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ a b c d "Total Student Enrolments 2014". The University of Sydney. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 31 January 2015. 
^ "QS World University Rankings - Rankings Indicators, Academic Reputation". Top Universities. Retrieved 2017-10-14. 
^ "Graduate Employability Rankings". Top Universities. Retrieved 2017-10-14. 
^ a b "Beautiful universities around the world". The Daily Telegraph. London. 31 August 2012. 
^ a b "15 of the World's Most Beautiful Universities Revealed". The Huffington Post UK. 
^ "The University of Sydney – QS". Times QS. 2012. Archived from the original on 7 November 2012. Retrieved 1 October 2012. 
^ "Documenting Democracy". foundingdocs.gov.au. ; J. Horne, Political machinations and sectarian intrigue in the making of Sydney University, Journal of the Australian Catholic Historical Society 36 (2015), 4-15.
^ "Documenting Democracy". Foundingdocs.gov.au. Archived from the original on 17 October 2009. Retrieved 22 February 2010. 
^ "William Charles Wentworth". Rockhampton Bulletin. Qld. 21 May 1872. p. 4. Retrieved 1 May 2012 – via National Library of Australia. 
^ Cable, K. J. "Woolley, John (1816–66)". Australian Dictionary of Biography. Canberra: Australian National University. Retrieved 24 August 2013. 
^ Michael Hoare, Joan T. Radford. "Smith, John (1821–85)". Australian Dictionary of Biography. Canberra: Australian National University. Retrieved 23 August 2013. 
^ [1]
^ West, William (1 January 1992). "Argumentative days over". The Australian. p. Higher Education Supplement, p. 15. 
^ "HIGHER EDUCATION (AMALGAMATION) ACT 1989". Austlii.edu.au. 20 June 2006. Retrieved 22 February 2010. 
^ "UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND ACT 1993". Austlii.edu.au. 22 September 2008. Retrieved 22 February 2010. 
^ "SOUTHERN CROSS UNIVERSITY ACT 1993". Austlii.edu.au. 22 September 2008. Retrieved 22 February 2010. 
^ http://sydney.edu.au/perkins/partners/picasso.shtml
^ http://sydney.edu.au/news/84.html?newscategoryid=11&newsstoryid=7151
^ "News | The University of Sydney". sydney.edu.au. 8 January 2010. Retrieved 22 February 2010. 
^ "Report of the Vice-Chancellor and Principal" (PDF). 15 June 2009. Retrieved 12 June 2011. 
^ "Sydney Alumni Magazine" (PDF). sydney.edu.au. March 2010. Retrieved 12 June 2011. 
^ "Overwhelming opposition to fee deregulation at historic University of Sydney town hall meeting". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 16 July 2015. 
^ "Middle income families the losers in race to university". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 16 July 2015. 
^ "Lateline – 26/08/2014: Universities too reliant on international student fees". Retrieved 16 July 2015. 
^ "University of Sydney to cut 100 degrees". Retrieved 31 March 2016. 
^ Australian Broadcasting Corporation – PM, Dame Leonie Kramer Resigns. Retrieved 6 January 2007.
^ Sydney Morning Herald, Kathryn Follows Nick Out of Door in Protest, 8 November 2003. Retrieved 6 January 2007.
^ Public Service Association of NSW, Sydney University Petition on Security Services Archived 4 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved 6 January 2007.
^ a b Max Chalmers (10 March 2014). "The man, the myth, the manager". Retrieved 10 March 2014.
^ Stephen Matchett (12 March 2012). "Academics argue VC has not made his case". The Australian. Retrieved 12 February 2013. 
^ Barnsley, Kate (22 March 2013). "FAQs for Strike Day – March 26 and March 27". Retrieved 24 March 2013. 
^ Kirsty Needham (9 June 2013). "Sydney Uni staff rank as most dissatisfied"
^ "Staff Give Sydney Uni A Poor Grade". Retrieved 14 January 2014. 
^ Adam Adelpour (16 May 2012). "Michael Spence is the 1 per cent': the role of university management". Solidarity Online. .
^ Amy McNeilage (23 August 2013). "Uni bosses earn 10 times more than staff". Daily Life. .
^ "Scots boys got into Sydney University without HSC". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 16 July 2015. 
^ "Scots scandal: We don't want elitist, sweetheart deals with universities, says independent school principals chairman Phillip Heath". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 16 July 2015. 
^ "The lengths university students will go to cheat". Retrieved 11 August 2015. 
^ "News – The University of Sydney". 
^ "Cat food study prompts ethics overhaul at University of Sydney vet faculty". 23 March 2016. 
^ "Sydney University adopts law courses pushing for recognition of sharia law, polygamy and young marriage in Australian legal system". 
^ "Campus 2010 + Building for the Future". Facilities.usyd.edu.au. Archived from the original on 6 October 2011. Retrieved 11 October 2011. 
^ Template:Sydney Uni lashes out at government over 'serious impact' of train timetable changes
^ Hanfling, Su (October 2005). "A Library for the 21st century: new generations, new models" (PDF). Discover Newsletter. University of Sydney Library. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2008. Retrieved 29 February 2008. 
^ "The University of Sydney Statistics 2008" (PDF). University of Sydney. Retrieved 14 January 2009. [dead link]
^ University of Sydney, Senate Minutes, 5 July 1886, p.291.
^ Dymock, Darryl (July 2009). "A reservoir of learning: the beginnings of continuing education at the University of Sydney" (PDF). Australian Journal of Adult Learning. 49 (2): 247. Retrieved 9 August 2015. 
^ Ellis, David. "Preface", Into the Light: 150 years of cultural treasures at the University of Sydney, Miegunyah Press, University of Sydney, 2010, xiii.
^ "Student accommodation". The University of Sydney. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ a b "Subsidised accommodation a boost for Sydney Indigenous students". ABC News. 9 March 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "University-run accommodation". The University of Sydney. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "Past Award Winners - Australasian Association of College and University Housing Officers". www.aacuho.edu.au. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ "Philament – About". sydney.edu.au. 
^ "Beef Jerky" Short Story by Aaron Sommers. 2014
^ "Faculties and schools - The University of Sydney". Sydney.edu.au. 20 April 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017. 
^ "Sydney University: 2011 Enrolments – All Faculties". Sydney.edu.au. Retrieved 11 October 2011. 
^ a b "QS World University Rankings 2018". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 
^ "World University Rankings 2017-2018". TSL Education Limited. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 
^ "U.S. News and World Report Best Global Universities Rankings 2016". U.S. News and World Report. 
^ a b "CWTS Leiden Ranking 2017". Centre for Science and Technology Studies, Leiden University. 
^ "THE 2016-2017 - Australia". Times Higher Education. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017 - Australia". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 
^ "U.S. News and World Report Best Global Universities in Australia/New Zealand". U.S. News and World Report. 
^ "All unis winners in research audit". The Australian. 4 December 2015. Retrieved 21 February 2017. 
^ "Australian University Rankings". Australian Education Network. 
^ "QS World University Rankings 2018". Top Universities. Retrieved 9 June 2017. 
^ "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2017". Top Universities. 
^ "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2016". 
^ http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings/employability-rankings/2017
^ 'What the job market wants' ranking of universities
^ "THE World University Rankings 2017". THE. 2017. 
^ "University of Sydney". September 2016. 
^ "World Reputation Rankings 2013". Times Higher Education. 
^ "Top Universities in Australia/New Zealand – US News Best Global Universities". usnews.com. 
^ "ARWU World University Rankings 2016 - Academic Ranking of World Universities 2016 - Top 500 universities - Shanghai Ranking - 2016". 
^ http://sydney.edu.au/news-opinion/news/2017/05/19/sydney-tops-rankings-for-research-impact.html
^ "National Taiwan University Ranking 2015 – (NTURanking 2015)". ntu.edu.tw. 
^ "Top 20 Global Universities With the Wealthiest Alum". ABC News. 
^ "World's top 100 universities for producing millionaires". Times Higher Education. 
^ Douglas Burrows Chair of Paediatrics and Child Health Retrieved 9 August 2014.
^ The Challis Bequest Retrieved 9 August 2014.
^ Carlyle Greenwell Research Fund (Archaeology) Retrieved 9 August 2014.
^ "Gift to Varsity". The Courier-Mail. Brisbane. 6 August 1953. p. 1. Retrieved 9 August 2014 – via National Library of Australia. 
^ Mitchell J Notaras Fellowship in Colorectal Surgery Retrieved 9 August 2014.
^ The Robert W Storr Chair of Hepatic Medicine Retrieved 9 August 2014.
^ "The Badge of New South Wales as adopted in 1876". Heritage Council of New South Wales. 
^ Services, Archives and Records Management. "Quest for a coat of arms – Heraldry – The University of Sydney". sydney.edu.au. Retrieved 6 May 2016. 
^ James, Clive (1981), Unreliable memoirs, Pan Books, p. 127, ISBN 978-0-330-26463-1 
^ "University of Sydney Hall of Fame". University of Sydney. Retrieved 25 September 2017. 
^ Funnell, Nina (10 October 2016). "Full list of universities exposed by sexual assault investigation". News Limited. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ "Unis urged to act as 'shocking' survey reveals half of all students face sexual harassment". ABC News. 1 August 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. 
^ a b Landis-Hanley, Justine (1 August 2017). "USyd releases results on survey into sexual assault and harassment | Honi Soit". Honi Soit. Retrieved 9 August 2017. 
^ Munro, Kelsey (18 May 2016). "Under-reporting of sexual assault a serious problem at Sydney University". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 10 August 2017. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to University of Sydney.



University of Sydney website
University of Sydney Union







v
t
e


University of Sydney



Faculties and schools



Faculty of Agriculture and Environment
School of Architecture, Design and Planning
Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences
Business School
Sydney Dental School
School of Education and Social Work
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technologies
Faculty of Health Sciences
Sydney Law School
Sydney Medical School
Sydney Nursing School
Sydney Pharmacy School
Faculty of Science
School of Veterinary Science
Sydney College of the Arts
Sydney Conservatorium of Music








Residential colleges



St Andrew's
St John's
St Paul's
Sancta Sophia
Wesley
The Women's College





Athletics



Australian football
Baseball
Basketball
Boxing
Cricket
Handball
Rowing
Rugby league
Rugby union
Soccer football
Water polo
Sydney Uni Sport and Fitness





Campus



Centre for Continuing Education
Charles Perkins Centre
Great Hall
Jacaranda tree
Macleay Museum
Nicholson Museum
Quadrangle
Seymour Centre
University of Sydney Library





People



Alumni
Faculty
List of University of Sydney people





Publications



Arna
BULL
Hermes
Honi Soit
Pulp
Scholarly Electronic Text and Image Service
Southerly
SURG
Sydney eScholarship
Sydney University Press





Student life



Dramatic Society
Evangelical Union
Labor Club
Liberal Club
Postgraduate Representative Association
Speleological Society
Students' Representative Council
Symphony Orchestra
University of Sydney Union










Links to related articles











v
t
e


University groupings in Australia













Australian Technology Network



Curtin University
Queensland University of Technology
RMIT University
University of South Australia
University of Technology Sydney





Group of Eight



University of Adelaide
Australian National University
University of Melbourne
Monash University
University of New South Wales
University of Queensland
University of Sydney
University of Western Australia





Innovative Research Universities



Flinders University
Griffith University
James Cook University
La Trobe University
Murdoch University
Charles Darwin University





NUW Alliance



University of Newcastle
University of New South Wales
University of Wollongong





Regional Universities Network



Central Queensland University
Federation University Australia
Southern Cross University
University of New England
University of Southern Queensland
University of the Sunshine Coast





Sandstone Universities



University of Adelaide
University of Melbourne
University of Queensland
University of Sydney
University of Tasmania
University of Western Australia















v
t
e


 Universities in Australia






Tertiary education in Australia





Australian Capital Territory



Australian Defence Force Academy (UNSW accredited degrees)
Australian National University
University of Canberra





New South Wales



Charles Sturt University
Macquarie University
Southern Cross University
University of Newcastle
University of New England
University of New South Wales
University of Sydney
University of Technology Sydney
University of Wollongong
Western Sydney University





Northern Territory



Charles Darwin University





Queensland



Bond University
Central Queensland University
Griffith University
James Cook University
University of Queensland
Queensland University of Technology
University of Southern Queensland
University of the Sunshine Coast





South Australia



University of Adelaide
Carnegie Mellon University, Australia
Flinders University
University of South Australia
Torrens University Australia
UCL Australia





Tasmania



Australian Maritime College (UTAS accredited degrees)
University of Tasmania





Victoria



Deakin University
University of Divinity
Federation University Australia
La Trobe University
University of Melbourne
Monash University
RMIT University
Swinburne University of Technology
Victoria University





Western Australia



Curtin University
Edith Cowan University
Murdoch University
University of Notre Dame Australia
University of Western Australia





National



Australian Catholic University








Education in Australia












v
t
e


Education in Australia



Overview



National overview
States and territories

ACT
NSW
NT
Queensland
SA
Tasmania
Victoria
WA


Australian Qualifications Framework





Primary



Australian Curriculum
List of schools





Secondary



Australian Curriculum
List of schools
NAPLAN
Leaving certificates

ACT
NSW
NT
Queensland
SA
Tasmania
Victoria
WA
International Baccalaureate







Tertiary



Overview
Tuition fees
Academic grading
List of universities
TAFE





Federal agencies



Department of Education and Training
Australian Skills Quality Authority





State agencies



Department of Education and Training (ACT)
Department of Education and Communities (NSW)
Board of Studies (NSW)
Department of Education and Training (NT)
Department of Education, Training and Employment (Queensland)
Department of Education and Children's Services (SA)
Department of Education (Tasmania)
Department of Education and Training (Victoria)
Victorian Curriculum and Assessment Authority (Victoria)
Department of Education (WA)












v
t
e


Worldwide Universities Network






Australia
Sydney
Western Australia
Canada
Alberta
China
Zhejiang
CUHK
Ghana
Ghana
Netherlands
Maastricht
Norway
Bergen
New Zealand
Auckland
South Africa
Cape Town
Switzerland
Basel
United Kingdom
Bristol
Leeds
Sheffield
Southampton
York
United States
Massachusetts Amherst
Rochester












v
t
e


Association of Pacific Rim Universities






Australia
Australian National
Melbourne
Sydney
UNSW
Canada
British Columbia
Chile
Chile
China
Fudan
Nanjing
Peking
Tsinghua
USTC
Zhejiang
Hong Kong
HKU
HKUST
Indonesia
Indonesia
Japan
Keio
Kyoto
Osaka
Tohoku
Tokyo
Waseda
Malaysia
Malaya
Mexico
Monterrey Institute of Technology
UNAM
New Zealand
Auckland
Philippines
Philippines

Baguio
Cebu
Diliman
Los Baños
Manila
Mindanao
Open University
Visayas




Russia
Far Eastern Federal (FEFU)
Singapore
NUS
South Korea
Seoul National
Korea
Yonsei
Taiwan
National Taiwan
Thailand
Chulalongkorn
USA
Caltech
Stanford
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Oregon
USC
Washington












v
t
e


Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning








Southeast Asia







Brunei



Universiti Brunei Darussalam





Cambodia



Build Bright University, Phnom Penh
International University, Cambodia





Indonesia



Airlangga University
Andalas University
Bandung Institute of Technology
Bogor Agricultural University
University of Brawijaya
Cenderawasih University
Diponegoro University
Gadjah Mada University
Hasanuddin University
Indonesia University of Education
IKIP Padang
Syarif Hidayatullah State Islamic University Jakarta
Jember University
Lampung University
Manado State University
Muhammadiyah University of Magelang
Padjadjaran University
Riau University
Sebelas Maret University
Sriwijaya University
State Institute for Islamic Studies North Sumatera
State University of Semarang
STIE Perbanas Surabaya
Surabaya State University
Tadulako University
Tanjungpura University
Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology
Udayana University
Universitas Islam Negeri Alauddin Makassar
Universitas Merdeka Malang
Yogyakarta State University
University of Bengkulu
University of Indonesia
University of North Sumatra





Malaysia



INTI International University
International Islamic University Malaysia
Multimedia University
National University of Malaysia
Taylor's University
Universiti Malaysia Perlis
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak
Universiti Malaysia Sabah
Universiti Malaysia Terengganu
Universiti Putra Malaysia
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
Universiti Teknologi Petronas
Universiti Tenaga Nasional
Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka
Universiti Utara Malaysia
Universiti Tun Abdul Razak
University of Malaya





Myanmar



University of Yangon





Philippines



Adamson University
Baliuag University
Benguet State University
Bicol University
Central Colleges of the Philippines
Centro Escolar University
De La Salle University
De La Salle University – Dasmariñas
Emilio Aguinaldo College
Eulogio "Amang" Rodriguez Institute of Science and Technology
Far Eastern University
José Rizal University
La Consolacion College Manila
La Consolacion College–Bacolod
La Consolacion University Philippines
Lyceum of the Philippines University
Mindanao State University
National University
Philippine Normal University
Philippine Women's University
Polytechnic University of the Philippines
Rizal Technological University
Saint Louis University
Saint Mary's College of Quezon City
St. Paul University Quezon City
St. Scholastica's College, Manila
San Beda College
San Sebastian College – Recoletos de Manila
Technological Institute of the Philippines
Technological University of the Philippines
University of Batangas
University of Iloilo
University of Manila
University of Perpetual Help System DALTA
University of Santo Tomas
University of the City of Manila
University of the East
University of the Philippines





Singapore



Nanyang Technological University
National University of Singapore





Thailand



Asian Institute of Technology
Assumption University
Bangkok University
Burapha University
Chiang Mai University
Chulalongkorn University
Dhurakij Pundit University
Hatyai University
Kasem Bundit University
Kasetsart University
Khon Kaen University
King Mongkut's University of Technology North Bangkok
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi
Maejo University
Mahasarakham University
Mahidol University
Mae Fah Luang University
Naresuan University
Nakhon Phanom University
National Institute of Development Administration
Payap University
Prince of Songkla University
Ramkhamhaeng University
Rangsit University
Siam University
Silpakorn University
Srinakharinwirot University
Sripatum University
Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University
Suranaree University of Technology
Thaksin University
Thammasat University
University of the Thai Chamber of Commerce
Ubon Ratchathani University
Walailak University





Vietnam



Vietnam National University, Hanoi
















South Asia







India



Karnatak Lingayat Education Society





Iran



Islamic Azad University





Sri Lanka



University of Colombo
University of Kelaniya
















East Asia







Hong Kong



Chinese University of Hong Kong
City University of Hong Kong
Lingnan University
Hong Kong Baptist University
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong Shue Yan University
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
University of Hong Kong





Japan



Keio University
Kyoto University
Sōka University
University of the Ryukyus





Republic of China
(Taiwan)



National Taiwan University
















Oceania







Australia



Australian National University
Curtin University
Deakin University
Edith Cowan University
Griffith University
Macquarie University
Monash University
RMIT University
Swinburne University of Technology
University of Western Australia
University of Adelaide
University of Canberra
University of Queensland
University of Southern Queensland
University of Sydney
University of Tasmania
University of Technology, Sydney
University of Wollongong





New Zealand



Auckland University of Technology
Lincoln University
Massey University
University of Otago
University of Waikato
















Europe







Belgium



Groep T





France



Montpellier 2 University





Sweden



Lund University
















North America







Canada



Carleton University
University of British Columbia





United States



Baylor University
California State University, Long Beach
Kansas State University
Keuka College
Pittsburg State University
University of Hawaii at Manoa
University of Maryland University College


















v
t
e


CDIO Initiative



Africa




South Africa



University of Pretoria








Asia-Pacific




Australia



Chisholm Institute
Queensland University of Technology
University of Sydney





China



Beijing Jiaotong University
Chengdu University of Information Technology
Shantou University
Tsinghua University





Elsewhere



Taylor's University (Malaysia)
University of Auckland (New Zealand)
Singapore Polytechnic
Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City








Europe




Finland



Lahti University of Applied Sciences
Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences
Seinäjoki University of Applied Sciences
Turku University of Applied Sciences





Sweden



Chalmers University of Technology
Jönköping School of Engineering
Linköping University
Royal Institute of Technology
Umeå Institute of Technology





UK



Aston University
Queen's University Belfast
University of Bristol
Lancaster University
University of Liverpool
University of Leeds
University of Strathclyde





Elsewhere



Hogeschool Gent (Belgium)
Engineering College of Aarhus (Denmark)
Technical University of Denmark
Telecom Bretagne (France)
Hochschule Wismar (Germany)
Politecnico di Milano (Italy)
Instituto Superior de Engenharia do Porto (Portugal)
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (Spain)








North America




Canada



École Polytechnique de Montréal
Queen's University
University of Calgary
University of Manitoba





United States



Arizona State University
California State University
University of Colorado
Duke University
Embry–Riddle Aeronautical University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
University of Michigan
Pennsylvania State University
United States Naval Academy









Central and
South America





Chile



University of Chile
Catholic University of the Most Holy Conception
University of Santiago, Chile





Colombia



Pontifical Xavierian University
ICESI University




















v
t
e


Architecture of Sydney



Historical buildings and structures
(pre-1930s)



Central Local Court
Central railway station
Chief Secretary's
Conservatorium of Music
Downing Centre
Education Department
General Post Office
GIO Building
Government House
Hong Kong House
Hyde Park Barracks
Hyde Park Obelisk
Lands Department
Mortuary railway station
Parliament House
Queen Victoria Building
Registrar-General's
St Andrew's Cathedral
St Mary's Cathedral
Sydney Hospital
The Mint
Town Hall
Trades Hall
The Old Treasury
University of Sydney (Main Quad.)





Modern buildings and structures
(post-1930s)



ANZAC War Memorial
Auburn Gallipoli Mosque
Aurora Place
Australia Square
Central Park
Chifley Tower
Citigroup Centre
Dr Chau Chak Wing Building
Deutsche Bank Place
Dunc Gray Velodrome
Governor Phillip Tower
Grace Building
International Towers
Latitude
MLC Centre
Paddy's Markets (redev.)
Suncorp Place
Sydney Harbour Bridge
Sydney Opera House
Sydney Tower
UTS Tower
World Tower





Notable people



Architects
NSW Government architects





Styles



Non-residential
Residential
Tallest buildings











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_Sydney&oldid=816842295"					Categories: University of SydneyEducational institutions established in 1850Gothic Revival architecture in SydneyUniversities in Sydney1850 establishments in AustraliaGroup of Eight (Australian universities)Universities established in the 19th centuryEdmund Blacket buildings in SydneySandstone buildings in AustraliaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2016EngvarB from November 2015Articles containing Latin-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2016Articles needing additional references from October 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from December 2017Use dmy dates from August 2017