"St. Andrew's University" redirects here. For other universities, see St. Andrews University (disambiguation).

University of St Andrews


University of St Andrews shield



Latin: Universitas Sancti Andreae apud Scotos


Motto
Αἰὲν ἀριστεύειν
(Aien aristeuein)[1]



Motto in English

Ever to Excel
or
Ever To Be The Best


Type
Public research university/Ancient university


Established
1410–1413[2]


Endowment
£69.4m (as of 31 July 2017)[3]


Budget
£224.5 million (2016-17)[3]


Chancellor
The Lord Campbell of Pittenweem


Rector
Srdja Popovic


Principal
Sally Mapstone



Academic staff

1,074[3]



Administrative staff

1,498[3]


Students
10,745 (2015/16)[4]


Undergraduates
8,035 (2015/16)[4]


Postgraduates
2,710 (2015/16)[4]


Location
St Andrews, Fife, Scotland, United Kingdom


Campus
Urban / small town


Colours

University of St Andrews


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


St Mary's College


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


School of Medicine


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


St Leonard's College


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





Affiliations
EUA
Europaeum
Universities Scotland
Universities UK
Wallace Group


Sports
University of St Andrews Athletic Union


Website
St-Andrews.ac.uk


The University of St Andrews (informally known as St Andrews University or simply St Andrews; abbreviated as St And, from the Latin Sancti Andreae, in post-nominals) is a British public research university in St Andrews, Fife, Scotland. It is the oldest of the four ancient universities of Scotland and the third oldest university in the English-speaking world (following Oxford and Cambridge Universities). St Andrews was founded between 1410 and 1413, when the Avignon Antipope Benedict XIII issued a papal bull to a small founding group of Augustinian clergy.
St Andrews is made up of a variety of institutions, comprising three colleges (United College (a union of St Salvator's and St Leonard's Colleges)), St Mary's College, and St Leonard's College), the last named being a non-statutory revival of St Leonard's as a post-graduate society. There are 18 academic schools organised into four faculties.[5] The university occupies historic and modern buildings located throughout the town. The academic year is divided into two terms, Martinmas and Candlemas. In term time, over one-third of the town's population is either a staff member or student of the university.[6] The student body is notably diverse: over 135 nationalities are represented with 45% of its intake from countries outside the UK; about one-eighth of the students are from the rest of the EU and the remaining third are from overseas — 15% from North America alone.[7][8] The university's sport teams compete in BUCS competitions,[9] and the student body is known for preserving ancient traditions such as Raisin Weekend, May Dip, and the wearing of distinctive academic dress.[10]
It is consistently ranked as the third best university in the United Kingdom in all national league tables, behind Oxbridge.[11][12][13] The Guardian ranks first in the United Kingdom the Schools of Physics and Astronomy, International Relations, Computer Science, Geography, English and Mathematics,[12] whilst The Times and Sunday Times ranks the Schools of English, Management, Philosophy, Anatomy and Physiology and Middle Eastern and African Studies first[14] and the Complete University Guide ranks Management, Divinity and Middle Eastern and African Studies first.[15] The Times Higher Education World Universities Ranking names St Andrews among the world's Top 50 universities for Social Sciences, Arts and Humanities.[16][17] St Andrews has the highest student satisfaction (joint first) amongst all multi-faculty universities in the United Kingdom.[18]
St Andrews has many notable alumni and affiliated faculty, including eminent mathematicians, scientists, theologians, philosophers, and politicians. Recent alumni include the former First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmond; former Secretary of State for Defence Michael Fallon; HM British Ambassador to China Barbara Woodward; United States Ambassador to Hungary Colleen Bell; Olympic cycling gold medalist Chris Hoy; and royals Prince William, Duke of Cambridge, and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge. Six Nobel Laureates are among St Andrews' alumni and former staff: two in Chemistry and Physiology or Medicine, and one each in Peace and Literature.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Foundation
1.2 Development
1.3 Modern period
1.4 Links with the United States


2 Governance and administration

2.1 General Council
2.2 University Court
2.3 Senatus Academicus
2.4 Office of the Principal
2.5 Rector
2.6 Colleges
2.7 Faculties and schools


3 Academics

3.1 Semesters
3.2 Rankings and reputation
3.3 Admissions
3.4 Lecture series
3.5 Exchange programmes


4 Buildings, collections and facilities

4.1 Libraries and museums
4.2 Chapels
4.3 Student halls
4.4 Renewable energy projects


5 Student life

5.1 Students' association
5.2 Societies
5.3 Sports clubs and the athletic union


6 Traditions

6.1 Sponsio Academica
6.2 Gowns
6.3 Bejant
6.4 Academic parents
6.5 Raisin Weekend
6.6 Cobblestones
6.7 May Dip


7 Notable people

7.1 Alumni
7.2 Academics


8 In popular culture

8.1 Film
8.2 Literature


9 See also
10 References
11 Sources
12 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the University of St Andrews
Foundation[edit]




St Salvator's Chapel






College Hall, within the 16th century St Mary's College building


The university was founded in 1410 when a group of Augustinian clergy, driven from the University of Paris by the Avignon schism and from the universities of Oxford and Cambridge by the Anglo-Scottish Wars, formed a society of higher learning in St Andrews, which offered courses of lectures in divinity, logic, philosophy, and law. A charter of privilege was bestowed upon the society of masters and scholars by the Bishop of St Andrews, Henry Wardlaw, on 28 February 1411.[19] Wardlaw then successfully petitioned the Avignon Pope Benedict XIII to grant the school university status by issuing a series of papal bulls, which followed on 28 August 1413.[20] King James I of Scotland confirmed the charter of the university in 1432. Subsequent kings supported the university with King James V "confirming privileges of the university" in 1532.[21][22]
A college of theology and arts called St John's College was founded in 1418[23] by Robert of Montrose and Lawrence of Lindores. St Salvator's College was established in 1450, by Bishop James Kennedy.[24] St Leonard's College was founded in 1511 by Archbishop Alexander Stewart, who intended it to have a far more monastic character than either of the other colleges. St John's College was refounded by Cardinal James Beaton under the name St Mary's College in 1538 for the study of divinity and law. It was intended to encourage traditional Catholic teachings in opposition to the emerging Scottish Reformation, but once Scotland had formally split with the Papacy in 1560, it became a teaching institution for Protestant clergy.[25] Some university buildings that date from this period are still in use today, such as St Salvator's Chapel, St Leonard's College Chapel and St Mary's College quadrangle. At this time, the majority of the teaching was of a religious nature and was conducted by clerics associated with the cathedral.
Development[edit]
During the 17th and 18th centuries, the university had mixed fortunes and was often beset by civil and religious disturbances. In a particularly acute depression in 1747, severe financial problems triggered the dissolution of St Leonard's College, whose properties and staff were merged into St Salvator's College to form the United College of St Salvator and St Leonard.[19] Throughout this period student numbers were very low; for instance, when Samuel Johnson visited the university in 1773, the university had fewer than 100 pupils, and was in his opinion in a steady decline. He described it as "pining in decay and struggling for life".[26] The poverty of Scotland during this period also damaged St Andrews, as few were able to patronise the university and its colleges, and with state support being improbable, the income they received was scarce.
Modern period[edit]




St Salvator's Chapel in 1843


In the second half of the 19th century, pressure was building upon universities to open up higher education to women.[27] In 1876, the University Senate decided to allow women to receive an education at St Andrews at a level roughly equal to the Master of Arts degree that men were able to take at the time. The scheme came to be known as the 'L.L.A. examination' (Lady Literate in Arts). It required women to pass five subjects at an ordinary level and one at honours level and entitled them to hold a degree from the university.[28] In 1889 the Universities (Scotland) Act[29] made it possible to formally admit women to St Andrews and to receive an education equal to that of male students. Agnes Forbes Blackadder became the first woman to graduate from St Andrews on the same level as men in October 1894, gaining her MA. She entered the university in 1892, making St Andrews the first university in Scotland to admit female undergraduates on the same level as men.[30] In response to the increasing number of female students attending the university, the first women's hall was built in 1896 and was named University Hall.[31]
Up until the start of the 20th century, St Andrews offered a traditional education based on classical languages, divinity and philosophical studies, and was slow to embrace more practical fields such as science and medicine that were becoming more popular at other universities. In response to the need for modernisation and in order to increase student numbers and alleviate financial problems, the university merged with University College, Dundee in 1897, which had a focus on scientific and professional subjects. After the incorporation of University College Dundee, St Andrews' various problems generally receded. Of note is that, up until 1967, many students who obtained a degree from the University of St Andrews had in fact spent most, and sometimes all, of their undergraduate career based in Dundee.




The "Gateway" building, built in 2000 and now used for the university's management department


As the 20th century progressed, it became increasingly popular among the Scottish upper classes to send their children to the country's oldest higher learning institution,[citation needed] and the university's student population rose sharply.[tone] This revival has been maintained to the present day.[tone] Despite this, there have been some notable changes.[citation needed] In 1967, the union with University College Dundee ended, when that College became an independent institution under the name of the University of Dundee. As a result of this, St Andrews lost its capacity to provide degrees in many areas such as Law, Accountancy, Dentistry and Engineering, while it also lost the right to confer the undergraduate medical degree MBChB. However, the university has prospered in other ways.[citation needed][tone] In 1972, the College of St Leonard was reconstituted as a postgraduate institute.[32]
Links with the United States[edit]
St Andrews' historical links with the United States predate the country's independence. One of the signatories of the Declaration of Independence attended (but did not graduate from) St Andrews. James Wilson was one of six original justices appointed by George Washington to the Supreme Court of the United States and founder of the University of Pennsylvania Law School. Other prominent American figures associated with St Andrews include Scottish American industrialist Andrew Carnegie, who was elected Rector in 1901 and whose name is given to the prestigious Carnegie Scholarship, and Edward Harkness, an American philanthropist who in 1930 provided for the construction of St Salvator's Hall. American Bobby Jones, co-founder of the Augusta National Golf Club and the Masters Tournament, was named a Freeman of the City of St Andrews in 1958, becoming only the second American to be so honored, the other being Benjamin Franklin in 1759.[33] Today a highly competitive scholarship exchange, The Robert T. Jones Scholarship, exists between St Andrews and Emory University in Atlanta.
Links with the United States have been maintained into the present day and continue to grow. In 2009, Louise Richardson, an Irish-American political scientist specialized in the study of terrorism, was drawn from Harvard to serve as the first female Principal and Vice Chancellor of St Andrews.[34] She later went on to her next appointment as the Vice Chancellor to the University of Oxford.[35]
Active recruitment of students from North America first began in 1984, with Americans now making up around 1 in 6 of the student population in 2017.[36] Students from almost every state in the United States and province in Canada are represented.[7][37] This is the highest proportion and absolute number of American students amongst all British universities.[38][39] Media reports indicate growing numbers of American students are attracted to the university's academics, traditions, prestige, internationalism, and comparatively low tuition fees.[40][41][42][43] The university also regularly features as one of the few non-North American universities in the Fiske Guide to Colleges, an American college guide, as a 'Best Buy'.[44][45] St Andrews has developed a sizable alumni presence in the United States, with over 8000 alumni spread across all 50 states.[46] Most major cities host alumni clubs, the largest of which is in New York.[47] Both London and New York also host the St Andrews Angels, an alumni led angel investment network, which centres upon the wider university communities in both the United Kingdom and United States.[48] St Andrews has also established relationships with other university alumni clubs and private membership clubs in the United States to provide alumni with social and networking opportunities. For example, alumni are eligible for membership at the Princeton Club of New York and the Algonquin Club in Boston.[49][50]
In 2013, Hillary Clinton, former United States Secretary of State, took part in the academic celebration marking the 600th anniversary of the founding of the University of St Andrews.[51] Clinton received an honorary degree of Doctor of Laws and provided the graduation address, in which she said, "I do take comfort from knowing there is a long tradition of Americans being warmly welcomed here at St Andrews. Every year I learn you educate more than one thousand American students, exposing them to new ideas and perspectives as well as according them with a first class education. I’ve been proud and fortunate to hire a few St Andrews alumni over the years and I thank you for training them so well."[52]
Governance and administration[edit]




Courtyard of the United College


Main article: Governance of the University of St Andrews
As with the other ancient universities of Scotland, the governance of the university is determined by the Universities (Scotland) Act 1858. This Act created three bodies: the General Council, University Court and Academic Senate (Senatus Academicus).
General Council[edit]
Main article: General Council of St Andrews University
The General Council is a standing advisory body of all the graduates, academics and former academics of the university. It meets twice a year and appoints a business committee to manage business between these meetings. Its most important functions are to appoint two assessors to the University Court and elect the university's chancellor.
University Court[edit]




School of English


The University Court is the body responsible for administrative and financial matters, and is in effect the governing body of the university. It is chaired by the rector, who is elected by the matriculated students of the University. Members are appointed by the General Council, Academic Senate and Fife Council. The President of the Students' Association and Director of Representation are ex officio members of the Court. Several lay members are also co-opted and must include a fixed number of alumni of the University.
Senatus Academicus[edit]
The Academic Senate (Latin Senatus Academicus) is the supreme academic body for the university. Its members include all the professors of the university, certain senior readers, a number of senior lecturers and lecturers and three elected student senate representatives – one from the arts and divinity faculty, one from the science and medicine faculty and one postgraduate student. It is responsible for authorising degree programmes and issuing all degrees to graduates, and for managing student discipline. The President of the Senate is the University Principal.
Office of the Principal[edit]
The Principal is the chief executive of the university and is assisted in that role by several key officers, including the Deputy Principal, Master of the United College and Quaestor. The principal has responsibility for the overall running of the university and presides over the University Senate.[53]
Rector[edit]
Main article: Rector of the University of St Andrews

In Scotland, the position of rector exists at the four ancient universities (St Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh) – as well as the University of Dundee. The post was made an integral part of these universities by the Universities (Scotland) Act 1889. The Rector of the University of St Andrews chairs meetings of the University Court, the governing body of the university; and is elected by the matriculated student body to ensure that their needs are adequately considered by the university's leadership. Through St Andrews' history a number of notable people have been elected to the post, including the actor John Cleese, industrialist and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie, author and poet Rudyard Kipling and the British Prime Minister Archibald Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery.[54]
Colleges[edit]
The university encompasses three colleges, although their purpose is mainly ceremonial as students are housed in separate residential halls or private accommodations. United College has responsibility for all students in the faculties of arts, sciences and medicine, and is based around St Salvator's Quadrangle;[55] St Mary's College has responsibility for all students studying in the Faculty of Divinity, and has its own dedicated site in St Mary's Quadrangle;[56] and St Leonard's College, in its current incarnation, has responsibility for all postgraduate students.[57]
Faculties and schools[edit]
The four academic faculties collectively encompass 18 schools. A dean is appointed by the Master of the United College to oversee the day-to-day running of each faculty. Students apply to become members of a particular faculty, as opposed to the school within which teaching is based. The faculties and their affiliated schools are:

Faculty of Arts: art history, classics, economics, English, film studies, history, international relations, management, modern languages, philosophy.[58]
Faculty of Divinity: divinity.[59]
Faculty of Medicine: medicine.[60]
Faculty of Science: biology, chemistry, computer science, geography and geosciences, mathematics, physics and astronomy, psychology and neuroscience.[61]

Certain subjects are offered both within the Faculties of Arts and Sciences, the six subjects are: economics, geography, management, mathematics, psychology and sustainable development. The content of the subject is the same regardless of the faculty.[62]
Academics[edit]
Semesters[edit]




The Scores


The academic year at St Andrews is divided into two semesters, Martinmas and Candlemas, named after two of the four Scottish Term and Quarter Days. Martinmas, on 11 November, was originally the feast of Saint Martin of Tours, a 4th-century bishop and hermit. Candlemas originally fell on 2 February, the day of the feast of the Purification, or the Presentation of Christ. Martinmas semester runs from early September until mid-December, with examinations taking place just before the Christmas break. There follows an inter-semester period when Martinmas semester business is concluded and preparations are made for the new Candlemas semester, which starts in January and concludes with examinations at the end of May. Graduation is celebrated at the end of June.[63]
Rankings and reputation[edit]

Rankings

ARWU[64]
(2017, national)
29–34


ARWU[65]
(2017, world)
301–400


QS[66]
(2018, national)
16


QS[67]
(2018, world)
92


THE[68]
(2018, national)
14


THE[69]
(2018, world)
143


CWTS Leiden[70]
(2017, world)
95





Complete[71]
(2018, national)
3


The Guardian[72]
(2018, national)
3


Times/Sunday Times[73]
(2018, national)
3





Teaching Excellence Framework[74]
Gold






View across St Salvator's Quad


In a ranking conducted by The Guardian, St Andrews is placed 5th in the UK for national reputation behind Oxford, Cambridge, Imperial & LSE.[75] When size is taken into account, St Andrews ranks second in the world out of all small to medium-sized fully comprehensive universities (after Brown University) using metrics from the QS Intelligence Unit in 2015.[76] The 2014 Research Excellence Framework ranked St Andrews 14th in the UK, and first in Scotland, amongst multi-faculty institutions for the research quality (GPA) of its output profile.[77] St Andrews was ranked 9th overall in The Sunday Times 10-year (1998–2007) average ranking of British universities based on consistent league table performance,[78] and is a member of the 'Sutton 13' of top ranked Universities in the UK.[79]
Nearly 86% of its graduates obtain a First Class or an Upper Second Class Honours degree.[80] The ancient Scottish universities award Master of Arts degrees (except for science students who are awarded a Bachelor of Science degree) which are classified upon graduation, in contrast to Oxbridge where one becomes a Master of Arts after a certain number of years, and the rest of the UK, where graduates are awarded BAs. These can be awarded with honours; the majority of students graduate with honours.
In 2017, St Andrews was named as the university with the joint second highest graduate employment rate of any UK university (along with Warwick), with 97.7 per cent of its graduates in work or further study three and a half years after graduation.[81] St Andrews is placed 7th in the UK (1st in Scotland) for the employability of its graduates as chosen by recruiters from the UK's major companies[82] with graduates expected to have the best graduate prospects and highest starting salaries in Scotland as ranked by The Times and Sunday Times Good University Guide 2016 and 2017.[83] An independent report conducted by Swedish investment firm, Skandia found that St Andrews is, despite its small undergraduate body, the joint-5th best university in the UK for producing millionaires.[84] A study by High Fliers confirmed this by reporting that the university also features in the top 5 of UK universities for producing self-made millionaires.[85] According to a study by the Institute of Employment Research, St Andrews has produced more directors of FTSE 100 companies in proportion to its size than any other educational institution in Britain.[86]
The Times and Sunday Times Good University Guide 2017 revealed that 24 of the 26 subjects offered by St Andrews ranked within the top 6 nationally with 10 subjects placing within the top 3 including English, Management, Philosophy, International Relations, Italian, Physics and Astronomy and Classics and Ancient History.[87] In the 2018 Complete University Guide, 23 out of the 25 subjects offered by St Andrews rank within the top 10 nationally making St Andrews one of only four multi-faculty universities (along with Cambridge, Oxford and Durham) in the UK to have over 90% of their subjects in the top 10.[88] The Guardian University Guide 2016 ranked Computer Science, Geography, International Relations and Divinity first in the UK. Chemistry, History, Philosophy, History of Art, Physics, English and Earth and Marine Science were ranked within the top three whilst Management, Classics and Mathematics placed within the top five.[89] In the 2015-16 Times Higher Education World University Rankings, St Andrews is ranked 46th in the world for Social Sciences,[16] 50th in the world for Arts and Humanities[17] and 74th in the world for Life Sciences.[90] The 2014 CWTS Leiden rankings, which "aims to provide highly accurate measurements of the scientific impact of universities", placed St Andrews 39th in the world, ranking it 5th domestically.[91] The philosophy department is ranked 14th worldwide (4th in Europe) in the 2015 QS World University Rankings[92] whilst the graduate programme was ranked 17th worldwide (2nd in the UK) by the 2009 Philosophical Gourmet's biennial report on Philosophy programs in the English-speaking world.[93]
Admissions[edit]

UCAS Admission Statistics


2016
2015
2014
2013
2012


Applications[94]
15,770
14,305
14,330
14,735
14,190


Offer Rate (%)[95]
54.7
52.2
53.7
47.7
37.8


Enrols[96]
1,695
1,435
1,960
1,860
1,695


Yield (%)
19.6
19.2
25.5
26.5
31.6


Applicant/Enrolled Ratio
9.30
9.97
7.31
7.92
8.37


Average Entry Tariff[71]
n/a
525
520
516
521


The university receives applications mainly through UCAS and the Common Application with the latest figures showing that there are generally 12 applications per undergraduate place available.[97] Overall, the university is one of the most competitive universities in the UK, with 2016-17 having an acceptance rate of 8.35% and offer rate of 22.5% for Scottish/EU applicants where places are capped by the Scottish Government.[98][99] In 2017, the most competitive courses for Scottish/EU applicants were those within the Schools of International Relations, Management, and Economics and Finance with offer rates of 8.0%, 10.9% and 11.5% respectively.[98][100] The standard offer of a place tends to require five best Highers equivalent to AAAAB, three best A-levels equivalent to AAA or a score of at least 38 points on the International Baccalaureate.[101] Successful entrants have, on average, 525 UCAS points (the equivalent of just above A*A*AA at A Level) ranking it as the 5th highest amongst higher education institutions in the UK for the 2015 admissions cycle[102] with The Telegraph naming it as the hardest university to gain admission into in Scotland.[103]
The university has one of the smallest percentages of students (13%) from lower income backgrounds, out of all higher education institutions in the UK.[104][105] Around 40% of the student body is from independent schools[106] and the university hosts the highest proportion of financially independent students (58%) in the UK.[107] The university participates in widening access schemes such as the Sutton Trust Summer School, First Chances Programme, REACH & SWAP Scotland, and Access for Rural Communities (ARC) in order to promote a more widespread uptake of those traditionally under represented at university.[108] In the seven-year period between 2008 and 2015, the number of pupils engaged with annual outreach programmes at the university has increased by about tenfold whilst the number of students arriving at St Andrews from the most deprived backgrounds has increased by almost 50 per cent in the past year of 2015.[109] The university has a slightly higher proportion of female than male students with a male to female ratio of 44:56 in the undergraduate population.[110]
Lecture series[edit]




The University of St Andrews Classics Building, Swallowgate


To commemorate the university's 600th anniversary the 600th Lecture Series was commissioned in 2011, which brought diverse speakers such as former Prime Minister Gordon Brown, naturalist David Attenborough and linguist Noam Chomsky to St Andrews.[111]
As part of the celebration of the 400th establishment of the King James Library, the King James Library lectures were initiated in 2009 on the subject of 'The Meaning of the Library'.[112]
The Andrew Lang Lecture series was initiated in 1927, and named for alumnus and poet Andrew Lang. The most famous lecture in this series is that given by J. R. R. Tolkien in March 1939, entitled 'Fairy Stories', but published subsequently as 'On Fairy-Stories'.[113]
The computing Distinguished Lecture Series was initiated in 1969 by Jack Cole.[114]
Exchange programmes[edit]




Tower of St Salvator's Chapel


St Andrews has developed student exchange partnerships with universities around the globe, though offerings are largely concentrated in North America, Europe, and Asia. Exchange opportunities vary by School and eligibility requirements are specific to each exchange program.[115]
In North America, the highly competitive Bachelor of Arts International Honours program, run in conjunction with The College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, allows students studying Classical Studies, Film Studies, International Relations, English, History, or Economics to spend two years at each institution and earn a joint degree from both.[116] The Robert T. Jones Memorial Trust funds the Robert T. Jones Jr. Scholarship, which allows select St Andrews students to study, fully funded, for a year at Emory University in Atlanta, and Western University and Queen's University in Canada.[117] The Robert Lincoln McNeil Scholarship allows students to study at the University of Pennsylvania. One of the largest North American exchanges is with the University of California System, in which students can study at Berkeley, Los Angeles (UCLA), Santa Cruz (UCSC) and San Diego (UCSD). Other North American partners offering multiple exchanges include the University of Virginia, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Washington and Lee University, Elon University, and the University of Toronto.[115] Some exchanges are offered within specific research institutes at St Andrews, rather than across entire Schools. For example, the Handa Centre for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence, within the School of International Relations, offers student exchanges in partnership with the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University.[118]
St Andrews participates in the Erasmus Programme and has direct exchanges with universities across Europe.[115] For example, in France exchanges are offered at the Sorbonne, Sciences Po, and University of Paris VI. In the Netherlands students can study at Leiden University and Utrecht University. Narrower exchanges include those with the University of Copenhagen, the University of Oslo, and Trinity College Dublin. Exchanges are also available for postgraduate research students, such as the opportunity for social scientists to study at the European University Institute in Florence, Italy.
More recently, St Andrews has developed exchanges with partners in Asia and Australia.[115] Notable partners include the University of Hong Kong and Renmin University of China, National University of Singapore, and the University of Melbourne in Australia.
Buildings, collections and facilities[edit]




Observatory of the university


The University of St Andrews is situated in the small town of St Andrews in rural Fife, Scotland. The University has teaching facilities, libraries, student housing and other buildings spread throughout the town. Generally, university departments and buildings are concentrated on North Street, South Street, The Scores, and the North Haugh. The university has two major sites within the town. The first is the United College, St Andrews (also known as the Quad or St Salvator's) on North Street, which functions both as a teaching space and venue for student events, incorporating the Departments of Social Anthropology and Modern Languages. The second is St Mary's College, St Andrews, based on South Street, which houses the Schools of Divinity, Psychology and Neuroscience, as well as the King James Library. Several schools are located on The Scores including Classics, English, History, Philosophy, the School of Economics and Finance, and International Relations, as well as the Admissions department, the Museum of the University of St Andrews, and the Principal's residence, University House. North Street is also the site of several departments including, the Principal's Office, The Younger Hall, Department of Film Studies, and the University Library. The North Haugh is principally home to the Natural Sciences such as Chemistry, Physics, Biology, as well as Mathematics, Computer Science, Medicine and the School of Management.
Libraries and museums[edit]




St Andrews University library building


The University of St Andrews maintains one of the most extensive university library collections in the United Kingdom, which includes significant holdings of books, manuscripts, muniments and photographs. The library collection contains over a million volumes and over two hundred thousand rare and antique books.[119]
The university library was founded by King James VI in 1612, with the donation of 350 works from the royal collection, at the urging of George Gledstanes, the then chancellor of St Andrews, although the libraries of the colleges of St Leonard's College, St Salvator's College and St Mary's College had existed prior to this.[120][121] From 1710 to 1837 the library functioned as a legal deposit library, and as a result has an extensive collection of 18th century literature.[122]




King James Library


The library's main building is located on North Street, and houses over 1,000,000 books.[123] The library was designed by the leading firm of architects Faulkner-Brown Hendy Watkinson Stonor led by Harry Faulkner-Brown and based in the North East England at Killingworth.[124] Faulkner-Brown specialised in libraries and leisure facilities and also designed the National Library of Canada in Ottawa and the Robinson Library at Newcastle University [125][126] In 2011 the main library building underwent a £7 million re-development.[127] The historic King James library, built in 1643, houses the university's Divinity and Medieval history collections.[128]
In 2012 the University purchased the vacant Martyrs' Church on North Street, with the purpose of providing reading rooms for the Special Collections department and University research students and staff.[129]




University of St Andrews library from above with West Sands in the background


The University maintains several museums and galleries, open for free to the public.[130] The Museum of the University of St Andrews (MUSA) opened in 2008 and displays some highlights of the university's extensive collection of over 100,000 artefacts.[131] It displays objects relating both to the history of the university, such as its collection of 15th century maces,[132] and also unrelated objects, such as paintings by John Opie, Alberto Morrocco and Charles Sims.[133] Several of the university's collections have been recognised as being of 'national significance for Scotland' by Museums Galleries Scotland.[134]
The Bell Pettigrew Museum houses the University's natural history collections. Founded in 1912, it is housed in the old Bute Medical School Building in St. Mary's Quad. Among its collections are the remains of several extinct species such as the dodo and Tasmanian tiger as well as fossilised fish from the nearby Dura Den, Fife, which when found in 1859 stimulated the debate on evolution.[135]




St Salvator's Chapel


Chapels[edit]




The Wardlaw Wing of University Hall


The University has two collegiate chapels. The chapel of St Salvator's (or "Sallies" as it is affectionately known) was founded in 1450 by Bishop James Kennedy, and today it is a centre of university life.[136] St Salvator's has a full peal of six bells, and is therefore the only university chapel in Scotland suitable for change ringing.[137] The Chapel of St Leonard's is located in the grounds of the nearby St Leonards School. It is the university's oldest building, some parts dating from 1144[138] and is the smaller of the two chapels. St Salvator's and St Leonard's both have their own choirs, whose members are drawn from the student body.
Student halls[edit]
St Andrews is characterised amongst Scottish universities as having a significant number of students who live in university-maintained accommodation. As of 2012, 52% of the student population live in university halls.[139] The halls vary widely in age and character; the oldest, Deans Court dates from the 12th century, and the newest, David Russell Apartments, was built in 2004.[140] They are built in styles from gothic revival to brutalist. All are now co-educational and non-smoking, and several are catered.[141] The University guarantees every first year student a place of accommodation, and many students return to halls in their second, third and final years at St Andrews.[142] From September 2015 onwards, students will have the option of living in alcohol-free flats in David Russell Apartments on the grounds of medical conditions that do not allow drinking or for religious reasons.[143]




St Salvator's Hall


Halls of residence include:


Agnes Blackadder Hall
Albany Park
Andrew Melville Hall
David Russell Apartments
Fife Park Apartments
Gannochy House
Hamilton Hall
John Burnet Hall
McIntosh Hall
St Regulus Hall
St Salvator's Hall
University Hall
Angus and Stanley Smith Houses (Postgraduate only)
Deans Court (Postgraduate only)
St Gregory's (Postgraduate only)


Renewable energy projects[edit]
Since 2013, the university's endowment has been invested under the United Nations Principles of Responsible Investment (UNPRI) initiative with a sustainable ethical policy enforced since 2007.[144] The university has the target of being the UK's first carbon neutral university and has invested in creating two new macro-scale renewable energy sites.
The Guardbridge Biomass Energy Centre will generate power using locally sourced wood-fuelled biomass, hot water will be transported to the university through underground pipes to heat and cool laboratories and student residences.[145] The £25 million project is expected to save 10,000 tonnes of carbon annually and the university aims to establish the site as a knowledge exchange hub which would provide "missing link" facilities to allow research and discoveries made in university labs to be translated to working prototypes. Work began onsite in 2014 and the centre is expected to be operational by December 2015.[146]
In October 2013, the university received permission to build six medium-sized turbines at Kenly Wind Farm, near Boarhills. The wind farms are expected to be operational by 2017 and will bring an estimated £22 million boost to the local and national economy with 19,000 tonnes of carbon saved annually.[147]
Student life[edit]




St Salvator's Chapel viewed from North Street.


Students' association[edit]
The University of St Andrews Students' Association is the organisation which represents the student body of the University of St Andrews.[148] It was founded in 1885 and comprises the Students' Representative Council (SRC)[149] and the Students' Services Council (SSC). The Students' Association has 9 subcommittees: The Entertainments "Ents" Committee, Societies Committee, Charities Campaign, Union Debating Society, STAR (St Andrews Radio), Mermaids Productions, LGBT, Design Team, SVS (Student Voluntary Service). Every matriculated student is automatically a member of each subcommittee.
The Students' Association Building (informally known as the Union) is located on St Mary's Place, St Andrews. Union facilities include a Blackwells bookshop, several bars and the University's Student Support Services. In 2013 the Students' Association Building is scheduled to undergo a £12 million refurbishment.[150] The Students' Association is affiliated to, and a founding member of, the Coalition of Higher Education Students in Scotland but unlike many other students' unions in the UK is not a member of the National Union of Students, having most recently rejected membership in a referendum in November 2012.
Societies[edit]




Music Centre, Younger Hall


St Andrews is home to over 140 student societies which cover a wide range of interests.[151] In 2015, the university ranked top in Scotland and 3rd in the UK for Clubs & Societies by university review platform, StudentCrowd.[152]
All matriculated students are members of the "Union Debating Society", a student debating society that holds weekly public debates in Lower Parliament Hall, often hosts notable speakers, and participates in competitive debating in both national and international competitions. Founded in 1794, it claims to be the oldest continuously-run student debating society in the world.[153]
There is a strong tradition of student media at St Andrews. The university's two newspapers are The Saint, a fortnightly publication and The Stand, an online publication founded in 2011.[154] There is also the Foreign Affairs Review ran by the Foreign Affairs Society.[155] There are also a number of smaller student publications including The Tribe, a student-run magazine[156] and The Regulus, a student magazine focusing on politics and current affairs.[157] In addition to this there are several student-led academic journals, most notably, Stereoscope Magazine which is focused on student photography and raising awareness of the university's historic photographic collection,[158] Ha@sta, an annual journal for those interested in art history,[159] Aporia, the journal of the Philosophy Society,[160] and the Postgraduate Journal of Art History and Museum Studies.[161] The University's radio station is STAR radio, an online station that broadcasts 24/7 during term time.[162] The Sinner is an independent website and discussion forum set up by students of the university.[163]




Quadrangle of St Mary's College


The university's Music Society comprises many student-run musical groups, including the university's flagship symphony orchestra, wind band, and chorus. One of the oldest choirs in the university is the St Andrews University Madrigal Group which performs a concert each term and has an annual summer tour. The A Cappella Society represents all four a cappella groups at St Andrews: The Other Guys, The Alleycats, The Accidentals and The Hummingbirds. From 2009–2011, all four of these groups participated in The Voice Festival UK(VF-UK) competition, and The Other Guys, The Accidentals and The Alleycats all reached the London final.[164] In 2011, The Other Guys released a music video onto YouTube, entitled Royal Romance, a tribute to the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton, which earned them significant recognition in both Scottish and international media.
Student theatre at the University of St Andrews is funded by the Mermaids Performing Arts fund. There are regular dramatic and comedic performances staged at the Barron theatre.[165] Blind Mirth is the university's improvisational theatre troupe, which performs weekly in the town, and annually takes a production to the Edinburgh Fringe Festival.[166]
The Kate Kennedy Club plays a significant role in the life of the university, maintaining university traditions such as the Kate Kennedy Procession, in which students parade through the town dressed as eminent figures from the university's history, and organising social events such as the Opening and May balls. Founded in 1926, the club is composed of around thirty matriculated students, who are selected by the club's members. The club has received criticism from the university's principal, Louise Richardson, and alumna the Duchess of Cambridge Kate Middleton over its previously male-only admission policy.[167][168] In 2012, the club decided to allow female students to join.[169][170]
Sports clubs and the athletic union[edit]
Main article: University of St Andrews Athletic Union




Madras RFC Playing Fields St Andrews


The University of St Andrews Athletic Union is the student representative body for sport. Established in 1901, it is affiliated to BUCS and encompasses around sixty sport clubs,[171] who compete at both a recreational and high-performance level.[172] A notable club is the University of St Andrews Rugby Football Club, which played a pivotal role in shaping the sport and has produced Scottish international players such as J. S. Thomson and Alfred Clunies-Ross.[173] The university is currently undergoing through a £14 million five-phase development of the student sport centre which will include a new 400-seat eight-court sports hall, a new reception area and expanded gym facilities.[174] The Scottish Varsity, also known as the "world's oldest varsity match", is played annually against the University of Edinburgh.[175]
Traditions[edit]




Entrance to St Mary's College


Sponsio Academica[edit]
In order to become a student at the university[176] a person must take an oath in Latin at the point of matriculation, called the Sponsio Academica, although this tradition now has been digitised and is agreed to as part of an online matriculation process.

Nos ingenui adolescentes, nomina subscribentes, sancte pollicemur nos preceptoribus obsequium debitum exhibituros in omnibus rebus ad disciplinam et bonos mores pertinentibus, Senatus Academici autoritati obtemperaturos, et hujus Academiae Andreanae emolumentum et commodum, quantum in nobis sit, procuraturos, ad quemcunque vitae statum pervenerimus. Item agnoscimus si quis nostrum indecore turbulenterve se gesserit vel si parum diligentem in studiis suis se praebuerit neque admonitus se in melius correxerit eum licere Senatui Academico vel poena congruenti adficere vel etiam ex Universitate expellere.

In English:

We students who set down our names hereunder in all good faith make a solemn promise that we shall show due deference to our teachers in all matters relating to order and good conduct, that we shall be subject to the authority of the Senatus Academicus and shall, whatever be the position we attain hereafter, promote, so far as lies in our power, the profit and the interest in our University of St Andrews. Further, we recognise that, if any of us conducts ourselves in an unbecoming or disorderly manner or shows insufficient diligence in their studies and, though admonished, does not improve, it is within the power of the Senatus Academicus to inflict on such students a fitting penalty or even expel them from the University.

Gowns[edit]




St Andrews students in undergraduate gowns


See also: Undergraduate gowns in Scotland
One of the most conspicuous traditions at St Andrews is the wearing of academic dress, particularly the distinctive red undergraduate gown of the United College. Undergraduates in Arts and Science subjects can be seen wearing these garments at the installation of a Rector or Chancellor, at chapel services, on 'Pier Walks', at formal hall dinners, at meetings of the Union Debating Society, giving tours to prospective students and visitors as well as on St Andrews day. Divinity students wear a black undergraduate gown with a purple saltire cross on the left facing. Postgraduates wear the graduate gown or, as members of St Leonard College, may wear a black gown trimmed with burgundy, introduced for graduate students whose original university is without academic dress. (See Academic dress of the University of St Andrews.) St Mary's College Post Graduates, however, wear their graduate gown with a purple saltire cross on the left facing.
Bejant[edit]
Bejant is a term used to refer to first year male students; females being described as Bejantines. Second-year students are known as a Semis, a student in their third year may be referred to as a Tertian, and in their final year as a Magistrand. These terms are thought to be unique to St Andrews. When wearing their traditional red gowns, students in each year may be identified according to the way they wear their gowns. In the first year, the gown is worn on the shoulders, in the second year it is worn slightly off the shoulders. In the third year arts students wear their gowns off their left shoulders, and science students off their right shoulders. Finally, fourth years wear their gowns right down to their elbows, ready to shed their scarlet gowns for the black graduation gown. The gown is never to be joined at the top as this is considered bad luck.
Academic parents[edit]
The students of the University enjoy an unusual family tradition designed to make new students feel at home and build relationships within the student body. Traditionally, a Bejant or Bejantine acquires academic parents who are at least in their third year as students. These older students act as informal mentors in academic and social matters and it is not uncommon for such academic family ties to stretch well beyond student days. Tradition has it that a Bejant may ask a man to be his Senior Man but must be invited by a woman who is prepared to be his Senior Woman. Similarly, a Bejantine may ask a male to be her Senior Man but there is no overt rule regarding how she acquires a Senior Woman. The establishment of these relationships begins at the very start of the first semester – with the aim of being in place ahead of Raisin Weekend.[177]
Raisin Weekend[edit]




St Salvator's Quadrangle during the Raisin Weekend foam fight


Raisin Weekend celebrates the relationship between the Bejants/Bejantines (First-Year students) and their respective Academic Parents who, in St. Andrews' tradition, guide and mentor them in their time at the University. It is traditionally said that students went up to study with a sack of oatmeal and a barrel of salt-herring as staple foods to last them a term and that therefore anything more exotic was seen as a luxury. In return for the guidance from academic parents a further tradition sprang up of rewarding these "parents" with a pound of raisins. Since the 19th century the giving of raisins was steadily transformed into the giving of a more modern alternative – such as a bottle of wine. In return for the raisins or equivalent present the parents give their "children" a formal receipt – the Raisin Receipt – composed in Latin. Over time this receipt progressively became more elaborate and often humorous. The receipt can be written on anything and is to be carried everywhere by the Bejant/Bejantine on the morning of Raisin Monday until midday.[178]
Raisin Weekend is held annually over the last weekend of November. Affairs often begin with a tea party (or similar) thrown by the mother(s) and then a pub-crawl or house party led by the father(s). It is fairly common for several academic families to combine in the latter stages of the revels.[179] At midday all the First-Years gather in Quad of St Salvator's College to compare their receipts and also to be open to challenge from older students who may look for errors in the Latin of the receipt (an almost inevitable occurrence). Upon detection of such error(s) the bearer may be required to sing the Gaudie. In recent years the gathering has culminated in a shaving foam fight.[180] Raisin Weekend has also become synonymous with binge drinking and a certain amount of humiliation of "academic children", commonly involving embarrassing costumes or drinking games. The University Students' Association provides a special First Aid hotline for Raisin Weekend.[181]
Cobblestones[edit]
Situated around the town of St Andrews are cobblestone markings denoting where Protestant martyrs were burnt at the stake. To students, the most notable of these is the cobblestone initials "PH" located outside the main gate of St Salvator's College. These cobblestones denote where Patrick Hamilton was martyred in 1528.[182] According to student tradition, stepping on the "PH" will cause a student to become cursed, with the effect that the offender will fail his or her degree and so students are known to jump over the cobblestones when passing. The 'curse' is said to be lifted by running backwards around St. Salvator's College 8 times while naked, or by participating in the May Dip.[183]




St Andrews May Dip 2013


May Dip[edit]
The May Dip is a student tradition held annually at dawn on May Day. Students usually stay awake until dawn, at which time they collectively run into the North Sea to the sound of madrigals sung by the University Madrigal Group.[184] Students purportedly do so to cleanse themselves of any academic sins (which they may have acquired by stepping on the PH cobblestone) before they sit exams in May.[185] In 2011, the event was 'officially' moved by the Students' Association to East Sands in response to concerns for health and safety in its former location on Castle Sands.
Notable people[edit]
Alumni[edit]
Main article: List of alumni of the University of St Andrews
See also: Category:Alumni of the University of St Andrews







Thomas Chalmers









Edward Jenner









John Knox









John Napier









John Pringle









James Wilson




Notable University of St Andrews alumni include King James II of Scotland; United States Declaration of Independence signatory James Wilson (1761); Governor General of Canada John Campbell; discoverer of logarithms John Napier (1563); founder of the Church of Scotland and leader of the Protestant Reformation John Knox (1531); notable Leader of the Church of Scotland Thomas Chalmers; founder of and the first Chancellor of the University of Glasgow William Turnbull; founder of the University of Edinburgh Robert Reid; founder of the world's first commercial savings bank Henry Duncan (1823); journalist and politician during the French Revolution Jean-Paul Marat (1775 MD); inventor of beta-blockers, H2 receptor antagonists and Nobel Prize in Medicine winner James W. Black (1946 MB ChB); the 'father of military medicine' Sir John Pringle, 1st Baronet; pioneer of the smallpox vaccine Edward Jenner (1792 MD); Prince William, Duke of Cambridge (2005) and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge (2005).




Prince William, Duke of Cambridge and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge graduated together in 2005 with degrees in Geography and History of Art respectively.


Alumni in the fields of academia and education have gone on to found the University of Melbourne Medical School (Anthony Brownless) and the Scottish Church College in Calcutta (Alexander Duff was also the first Scottish missionary to India), become the first Regent and first Principal of the University of Edinburgh (Robert Rollock), Dean of Harvard Divinity School (David Hempton), the Vice Chancellors of Aberdeen University (Ian Diamond), Nottingham University (Shearer West), Open University (Walter Perry was also the first Vice-Chancellor) and Sydney University (Gavin Brown), Chancellor of the University of Maine system (James H. Page), provost of Eton College (Eric Anderson), discoverer of the Berry Phase (Sir Michael Berry) and inventor of the Leslie cube John Leslie.
In business and finance, St Andrews graduates have become the CEOs of multinational companies including the Bank of Scotland (Peter Burt was also the Chairman of ITV plc), BHP Billiton (Andrew Mackenzie), BP (Robert Horton), FanDuel (Nigel Eccles co-founded the company with fellow St Andrews graduate, Lesley Eccles),[186] Rolls-Royce Holdings (John Rose), Royal Dutch Shell (Robert Paul Reid), Tate & Lyle (Iain Ferguson) and The Royal Bank of Scotland Group (George Mathewson). Other notable businesspeople include Banker Olivier Sarkozy, Director of the Edinburgh Festival Fringe Alistair Moffat and the CEO of Scottish Rugby Union and ATP World Tour Finals Phil Anderton.




Alex Salmond was the First Minister of Scotland and leader of the SNP during the Scottish Independence Referendum in 2014.


Former St Andrews students active in politics and national intelligence include former Deputy Director of the Secret Intelligence Service (MI6) George Kennedy Young, Chief of MI6 John Sawers, Secretary of State for Scotland Michael Forsyth (Forsyth also former Deputy Chairman of JP Morgan), former First Minister of Scotland and leader of the SNP for over 20 years Alex Salmond, current Permanent Secretary of the UK Home Office Mark Sedwill, current Secretary of State for Defence Michael Fallon, Deputy Leader of the Liberal Democrats Malcolm Bruce and leader of the Christian Party James George Hargreaves. Outside of the UK, alumni include the Financial Secretary of Hong Kong credited with laying the foundations for Hong Kong's economic success John James Cowperthwaite and the first female cabinet minister in Egypt Hikmat Abu Zayd. Alumni have also gone on to serve as diplomats including Barbara Woodward (China), Anne Pringle (Russia) and Thomas Bruce who is known for the removal of the Elgin Marbles from the Parthenon.
Alumni from the media and the arts include founder of Forbes magazine B. C. Forbes, founder of The Week Jolyon Connell, current Downing Street Director of Communications and former Controller of BBC World News Craig Oliver, Political Editor of BBC Scotland Brian Taylor, BBC News Presenter Louise Minchin, BBC Sport TV Presenter Hazel Irvine, Primetime Emmy Award winning screenwriter David Butler, Pulitzer Prize winning author James Michener, feminist writer Fay Weldon, musician The Pictish Trail and actors Siobhan Redmond, Crispin Bonham-Carter, Ian McDiarmid and Jonathan Taylor Thomas.
Other notable alumni include 'father of the poll tax' Douglas Mason, founders of the Adam Smith Institute, Madsen Pirie and Eamonn Butler, former Lord Justice General Lord Cullen, two currently sitting members of the Inner House, Lord Eassie and Baroness Clark of Calton, one of the leading figures in the formation of the United States Golf Association Charles B. Macdonald and captain of Tottenham Hotspur F.C. during its double-winning season Danny Blanchflower.
The university also boasts of a rich roll of honorary graduates whose members vary from Benjamin Franklin to Hillary Clinton, from Bob Dylan to Arvo Pärt, from Maggy Smith to Sean Connery, from Nora K. Chadwick to Noam Chomsky, from Joseph Stevenson to Lisa Jardine, from Seamus Heaney to Bahram Beyzai, from Georg Cantor to David Attenborough.[187]
Academics[edit]
See also: Category:Academics of the University of St Andrews
Notable University of St Andrews faculty include Nobel Prize in Medicine winner Maurice Wilkins (Lecturer in Physics 1945-46) and discoverer of herring bodies Percy Theodore Herring (Chandos Chair of Medicine and Anatomy 1908-1948). The Morris water navigation task was developed by Richard Morris at the university's Gatty Marine Laboratory.

Anthropology

Paloma Gay y Blasco
Ladislav Holý
Peter Gow
Joanna Overing
Nigel Rapport


Biology

Struther Arnott
Patrick Geddes
Adrian Horridge

Business and Management

Meaghan Delahunt
Robert Gray

Chemistry

Peter Bruce
Norman Haworth
James Irvine
Russell E Morris
James H Naismith
Catherine Steele

Classics

Walter Burkert
Lewis Campbell
Chris Carey
John Craig
James Donaldson
Stephen Halliwell
Wallace Lindsay
William Lorimer

Computer Science

Jack Cole
Ian Gent

Divinity

John Adamson
Mario Aguilar
Robert Arnot
Donald Macpherson Baillie
Robert Baron
Richard Bauckham
Matthew Black
Ian Bradley
David Brown
Thomas Chalmers
Nicol Dalgleish
Ivor Davidson
George Duncan
Philip Esler
Timothy Gorringe
James Haldenston
Robert Halliday
Daphne Hampson
Alexander Henderson
George Hill
Nicholas Thomas Wright

Economics

Ralph Harris, Baron Harris of High Cross

Engineering

Angus Robertson Fulton

English, Literature, and Poetry

Michael J. Alexander
Meg Bateman
John Burnside
Robert Crawford
Douglas Dunn
Roger Lancelyn Green
Robert Irwin
Kathleen Jamie
John Johnston
A. L. Kennedy
William Angus Knight
Don Paterson

Languages and Linguistics

Peter Branscombe
George Hadow

Geology

Christopher Hawkesworth

History and Art History

G.W.S. Barrow
Robert Bartlett
Paul Bibire
Michael Brown
George Buchanan
Nora K. Chadwick
Barrie Dobson
Norman Gash
John Guy
Robert Kerr Hannay
John Hudson
Martin Kemp
John Philipps Kenyon
Alex Woolf

International Relations and Politics

Ali Ansari
Richard English
Bruce Hoffman
John Horgan
Rohan Gunaratna
John Lindsay of Balcarres, Lord Menmuir
Magnus Ranstorp
Louise Richardson
Alex P. Schmid
Hew Strachan
Max Taylor
David Veness
Paul Wilkinson

Mathematics and Astronomy

John Couch Adams
Rosemary A. Bailey
Kenneth Falconer
Eric Priest
James Gregory
John Mackintosh Howie
Douglas Samuel Jones
Peter Cameron

Media and Film Studies

Dina Iordanova

Medicine and Physiology

John Adamson
Oswald Taylor Brown
George Edward Day
Margaret Fairlie
John Forfar
Percy Theodore Herring
Robert Hunter
Joseph Fairweather Lamb

Philosophy and Logic

Thomas Spencer Baynes
Piers Benn
C. D. Broad
Herman Cappelen
Gershom Carmichael
Laurence Jonathan Cohen
James Main Dixon
James Drever
James Frederick Ferrier
John Joseph Haldane
Bob Hale
Geoffrey Hunter
Carrie Ichikawa Jenkins
Malcolm Knox
Crispin Wright

Physics and Astronomy

H. Stanley Allen
John F. Allen
Adam Anderson
Sir Michael Berry
David Brewster
Charles Coulson
Dirk ter Haar
Emilios T. Harlaftis
Alan Hood
Thomas F Krauss
Johannes Kuenen
Andrew P. Mackenzie FRS

Psychology

William Fitch
Kay Redfield Jamison
Malcolm Jeeves

Zoology

Ian L. Boyd
H. G. Callan
William Thomas Calman


In popular culture[edit]
The University of St Andrews has appeared in or been referenced by a number of popular media works, in film and literature.




View of St Andrews from the West Sands.


Film[edit]

West Sands Beach in St Andrews was used as a location for the film Chariots of Fire (1981), the scene, in which several of the main characters run along the beach, has become widely recognised and one of the most famous scenes in British film history.[188][189]
The student hall, Andrew Melville Hall, was used for location shooting of the 2010 film adaptation of Kazuo Ishiguro's novel, Never Let Me Go starring Keira Knightley.[190]

Literature[edit]

In Enid Blyton's Malory Towers novel series, the main heroine Darrell Rivers plans to attend the University of St Andrews after Sixth Form with some of her fellow characters.[191]
St Andrews appeared in Samuel Johnson's travel narrative A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland (1775), in which he visited the University.[192]
Bruce Marshall's romance novel, Girl in May (1956), is set in St Andrews.[193]

See also[edit]


Scotland portal
University portal




Category:Academics of the University of St Andrews
Chancellor of the University of St Andrews
St Andrews Cathedral
List of medieval universities
Gaudy
Town and gown


References[edit]


^ "University coat of arms". Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2013. 
^ "History of the University". Archived from the original on 11 September 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2013. 
^ a b c d "Reports and Financial Statements of the University Court for the year to 31 July 2017" (PDF). University of St Andrews. Retrieved 3 January 2018. 
^ a b c "2015/16 Students by HE provider, level, mode and domicile" (XLSX). Higher Education Statistics Agency. Retrieved 17 February 2017. [permanent dead link]
^ "University of St Andrews: Governance". University of St Andrews. Retrieved 10 August 2014. 
^ "The University today". Archived from the original on 1 June 2007. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ a b "International". Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ @univofstandrews (24 January 2017). "We proudly do our part to bring the world to Scotland" (Tweet) – via Twitter. 
^ "Saint Sport". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "The low-down on our traditions". Archived from the original on 2 February 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "THE 'Table of Tables' 2016: University of Cambridge top for fifth year running". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 15 October 2015. 
^ a b "The Guardian University League Tables 2016". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 September 2015. 
^ "The Times and Sunday Times University League Tables 2015". The Times and Sunday Times. Retrieved 10 September 2014. 
^ Andrews, Julian. "Top by subject: The best universities in 67 subjects areas". The Sunday Times. The Times. Retrieved 25 September 2016. 
^ "University of St Andrews". Complete University Guide. Retrieved 1 May 2015. 
^ a b "Top 100 universities for Social Sciences 2015–16". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 4 November 2015. 
^ a b "Top 100 universities for Arts and Humanities 2015–16". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 21 October 2015. 
^ "National Student Survey". Retrieved 11 August 2014. 
^ a b "Meadieval university" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ Great Britain. Commission for Visiting the Universities and Colleges of Scotland (1837). University of St. Andrews. W. Clowes and Sons. pp. 173–. 
^ "A brief history of the University". University of St Andrews. Retrieved 9 January 2016. 
^ Lyon, C.J. (1843). "History of St. Andrews, episcopal, monastic, academic, and civil ..., Volume 2". Tait. pp. 230–34. Retrieved 9 January 2016. King James I of Scotland confirmed the charter of the university in 1432....There are four ....confirmations by James V; in the year 1532... 
^ "Lindores, Lawrence of, ? 1372–1437, Rector, University of St Andrews, Scotland". Gashe.ac.uk. 15 August 2002. Retrieved 17 April 2011. 
^ "Kennedy, James, ? 1406–1465, Bishop of St Andrews". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Beaton, James, d 1539, Archbishop of St Andrews". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "A Journey to the Western Isles of Scotland". Gutenberg.org. 20 April 2005. Retrieved 17 April 2011. 
^ "Discovery in archives sheds new light on Jex-Blake's campaign for medical education for women". 
^ "Ladies Literate in Arts". Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Universities (Scotland) Act 1889". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Who was the first female graduate of the University of St Andrews?". Archived from the original on 10 January 2013. Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Literate Ladies – A fifty year experiment" (PDF). Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "St leonards college". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Citizen Jones". Retrieved 11 August 2014. 
^ "The Catholic coup at St Andrews". The Independent. London. 14 April 2009. Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Vice-Chancellor - University of Oxford". www.ox.ac.uk. 
^ "How Scotland's University of St. Andrews Became a Top American School". Town & Country. Retrieved 24 July 2017. 
^ "University of St Andrews - International". Complete University Guide. Retrieved 1 May 2015. 
^ Kemp, Jackie (20 May 2008). "Americans at St Andrews". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "US undergraduates choosing UK for their studies". The British Council. London. 27 January 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014. 
^ "Will and Kate (and Uncle Sam) Studied Here". Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Lewin, Tamar (30 November 2008). "Going Off to College for Less (Passport Required)". The New York Times. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Royal College Bargain". Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Who Needs Harvard Or Yale?". Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "St Andrews named Best Buy". University of St Andrews. 
^ "Trinity College Dublin a 'Best Buy' in Fiske Guide to Colleges 2016". Trinity College Dublin. 
^ "US Alumni". Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "NY Alumni Club". Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Parker, Lynda Hamilton (24 November 2016). "Angel investment group launches in NYC to facilitate Scottish deals". Scotland B2B Magazine. Retrieved 6 December 2016. 
^ "Algonquin Club". Retrieved 24 January 2013. 
^ "Princeton club – St Andrews". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Hillary Rodham Clinton to address academic leaders in St Andrews". Retrieved 13 August 2014. 
^ "Graduation address - Secretary Hillary Rodham Clinton". Retrieved 13 August 2014. 
^ "Office of the Principal". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "The rector of the university". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "United College". Archived from the original on 9 February 2013. Retrieved 15 February 2013. 
^ "St Marys college". Retrieved 15 February 2013. 
^ "St Leonards College". Retrieved 15 February 2013. 
^ "Faculty of Arts". Retrieved 13 August 2014. 
^ "Faculty of Divinity". Retrieved 13 August 2014. 
^ "Faculty of Medicine". Retrieved 13 August 2014. 
^ "Faculty of Science". Retrieved 13 August 2014. 
^ "Faculties". Retrieved 13 August 2014. 
^ "Semester dates &". University of St Andrews. August 2014. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017 - UK". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved 15 August 2017. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved 15 August 2017. 
^ "QS World University Rankings 2018 - United Kingdom". Quacquarelli Symonds Ltd. Retrieved 8 June 2017. 
^ "QS World University Rankings 2018". Quacquarelli Symonds Ltd. Retrieved 8 June 2017. 
^ "World University Rankings 2018 - United Kingdom". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 5 September 2017. 
^ "World University Rankings 2018". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 5 September 2017. 
^ "CWTS Leiden Ranking 2017 - PP top 10%". CWTS Leiden Ranking 2017. Retrieved 19 May 2017. 
^ a b "University League Table 2018". The Complete University Guide. Retrieved 26 April 2017. 
^ "University league tables 2018". The Guardian. 16 May 2017. Retrieved 16 May 2017. 
^ "The Times and Sunday Times University Good University Guide 2018". Times Newspapers. Retrieved 24 September 2017. 
^ "Teaching Excellence Framework outcomes". Higher Education Funding Council for England. Retrieved 22 June 2017. 
^ "University UK Reputation Index" (PDF). The Guardian. London. 
^ "QS World University Rankings: World Map Results (Filter by Institution Profile)". Quacquarelli Symonds Intelligence Unit. Retrieved 30 December 2015. 
^ Jump, Paul (18 December 2014). "REF 2014 results: Ranking of institutions by GPA of their output profiles". Times Higher Education. London. 
^ "University ranking based on performance over 10 years" (PDF). The Times. London. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 April 2008. Retrieved 28 April 2008. 
^ "Old school 'key to student place'". BBC. 20 September 2007. Retrieved 31 January 2009. 
^ "Top UK University League Tables and Rankings 2010–2011". Complete University Guide. Retrieved 17 April 2011. 
^ Grove, Jack. "Russell Group dominates UK's graduate employment charts". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 11 August 2017. 
^ "The best UK universities chosen by major employers". Times Higher Education. London. 12 November 2015. 
^ "The Times and Sunday Times Good University Guide 2017: Highest graduate salaries". Retrieved 30 October 2016. 
^ "Top universities for producing Millionaires". The Telegraph. London. 21 March 2012. 
^ "Good News for Graduates". Retrieved 24 June 2013. 
^ "Royal university's graduate roll call". The BBC. London. 
^ "Times and Sunday Times League Table Summary" (PDF). Retrieved 25 September 2016. 
^ "Who's in the Top Ten for their Subjects 2018". Retrieved 28 April 2017. 
^ "St Andrews academic schools ranked top in the UK". Retrieved 26 May 2015. 
^ "Top 100 universities for Life Sciences 2015–16". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 28 October 2015. 
^ "Leiden Rankings". Retrieved 29 July 2014. 
^ "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2015 - Philosophy". Retrieved 5 November 2015. 
^ The Philosophical Gourmet Report Archived 19 May 2016 at the Library of Congress accessed 15 August 2010.
^ "End of Cycle 2016 Data Resources DR4_001_03 Applications by provider". UCAS. UCAS. 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2017. 
^ "Sex, area background and ethnic group: S36 University of St Andrews". UCAS. UCAS. 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2017. 
^ "End of Cycle 2016 Data Resources DR4_001_02 Main scheme acceptances by provider". UCAS. UCAS. 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2017. 
^ "Scottish universities see a rise in applications from the rest of the UK". The Courier. 31 January 2013. Retrieved 19 May 2014. 
^ a b "University of St Andrews Entry UCAS Home Application Summary". theuniversitybuzz.blogspot.co.uk. 
^ "St Andrews University hits out at claims it "prefers" fee-paying students from England over Scots". The Herald. 11 July 2016. 
^ "St Andrews 600 Quick Facts" (PDF). University of St Andrews. Retrieved 31 July 2010. 
^ "Top UK University League Tables and Rankings 2013". Complete University Guide. Retrieved 6 June 2012. 
^ "University League Table 2018". Complete University Guide. Retrieved 27 April 2017. 
^ "The 10 hardest universities to get into". The Telegraph. 9 May 2016. Retrieved 23 May 2016. 
^ "Most middle class" (PDF). The Times. Retrieved 6 June 2012. 
^ "Access agenda is now back on track". The Times. UK. Retrieved 25 November 2008. 
^ "Lowest state school intake" (PDF). The Times. 22 May 2012. Retrieved 6 June 2012. 
^ "Universities with The Richest Students or Parents". The Telegraph. Retrieved 11 October 2011. 
^ https://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/study/access/school-college-projects/
^ "Raising aspirations and attainment". Retrieved 17 June 2015. 
^ "THE World University Rankings 2015–2016: University of St Andrews". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 1 October 2015. 
^ "600th Lecture series". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "King James Library lectures". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Andrew Lang lecture". Retrieved 24 January 2013. 
^ "Distinguished Lecture Series". University of St Andrews. Retrieved 12 March 2012. 
^ a b c d "Where Can I Go?". University of St Andrews. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "William & Mary – St Andrews William & Mary Joint Degree Programme". The College of William & Mary. Retrieved 17 April 2011. 
^ "Scholarships for Study Abroad". Retrieved 19 January 2013. 
^ "Georgetown Exchange Programme - Georgetown". 12 January 2013. Archived from the original on 12 January 2013. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "University of St Andrews Library". Retrieved 1 January 2013. 
^ "A note on the early history of St Andrews University Library, by R.V. Pringle". Rvpmp.talktalk.net. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "St Andrews University Library, Sources for Library History, 1 : A revised transcript of the 'Foundation List' of 1612–13, by R.V. Pringle". Rvpmp.talktalk.net. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Rare books". Retrieved 1 January 2013. 
^ "Library". University of St Andrews. University of St Andrews. Retrieved 20 July 2014. 
^ "DSA Building/Design Report University Library, St Andrews". Dictionary of Scottish Architects. Retrieved 26 May 2014. 
^ Compson, Helen (28 February 2008). "Arnhem hero and respected architect dies". Hexham Courant. Retrieved 26 May 2014. 
^ "Grand designers". Living North. Retrieved 26 May 2014. 
^ "Renovated Library reopens its doors". Retrieved 1 January 2013. 
^ "King James Library – A Short History". King James Library – A Short History. Retrieved 1 January 2013. 
^ "University to develop new library facility in iconic St Andrews church". Retrieved 1 January 2013. 
^ "Museums About us". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Welcoming new stores for the University's museum collections". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "st salvators mace". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "MUSA blog". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Collections of national significance". Retrieved 29 January 2013. 
^ "What is there to see? Highlights of the Collection". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "St salvators chapel". Archived from the original on 6 January 2013. Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ Peebles, Cheryl (9 September 2010). "St Salvator's Chapel set to ring in changes". The Courier. Retrieved 22 January 2012. 
^ "St leonards chapel". Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "University guide 2013: University of St Andrews". The Guardian. London. 10 May 2009. Retrieved 6 January 2013. 
^ "DRA". Retrieved 4 January 2013. 
^ "St andrews accommodation". 
^ "St Andrews Accommodation guarantee". Retrieved 30 December 2012. 
^ "Students offered alcohol-free flats at St Andrews University". BBC News. 10 February 2015. Retrieved 19 May 2015. 
^ "St Andrews Sustainable Investment Policy" (PDF). University of St Andrews. Retrieved 31 January 2014. 
^ "St Andrews University plans a £25m energy centre". BBC News. 20 December 2013. Retrieved 19 May 2015. 
^ "St Andrews University plan for paper mill given green light". The Courier. 17 October 2014. Retrieved 19 May 2015. 
^ "Developer wanted for St Andrews University's windfarm". Fife Today. 5 September 2014. Retrieved 19 May 2015. 
^ "Publication Scheme – Category 13 – Class: Relationship with Students' Association" (Press release). University of St Andrews. 24 January 2006. Retrieved 23 July 2007. 
^ "Ministry of Justice – Universities (Scotland) Act 1889". 
^ "Union redevelopment given green light". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Societies list". Retrieved 4 January 2013. 
^ "St Andrews ranked top for student clubs". 11 August 2015. 
^ "Union debating about us". Archived from the original on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Stand News". Retrieved 4 January 2013. 
^ "Foreign Affairs Review". Retrieved 22 August 2013. 
^ "The Tribe, about". Retrieved 4 January 2013. 
^ "About – The Regulus". Retrieved 4 January 2013. 
^ "Stereoscope". University of St Andrews. Retrieved 5 June 2012. 
^ "Haasta". University of St Andrews. 27 November 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2011. 
^ "Aporia". Retrieved 4 January 2013. 
^ "Journal of Art History & Museum and Gallery Studies". University of St Andrews. 10 January 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2011. 
^ "STAR radio". Retrieved 4 January 2013. 
^ "The sinner". Archived from the original on 13 January 2013. Retrieved 4 January 2013. 
^ McCaffery, Martin. "St Andrews Students' Union- The home for University of St Andrews students". Yourunion.net. Retrieved 6 June 2012. 
^ "Mermaids about us". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Blind Mirth". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "What next for the Kate Kennedy tradition in St Andrews?". Retrieved 5 January 2013. 
^ Ward, Victoria; Bolton, Olivia (22 February 2012). "University club splinters". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 5 January 2013. 
^ "Breaking News: Kate Kennedy Club votes to admit women". Retrieved 5 January 2013. 
^ "Kate Kennedy Club to admit women". The Stand. 22 March 2012. Retrieved 24 May 2013. 
^ "All Sports Clubs". University of St Andrews. Archived from the original on 9 June 2013. Retrieved 20 September 2013. 
^ "Saint Sport". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "Club History". Retrieved 2 January 2013. 
^ "St Andrews principal kicks off latest stage of £14m sports redevelopment". Fife Today. 6 February 2015. Retrieved 19 May 2015. 
^ "World's oldest varsity match returns to Scotland". Herald Scotland. 19 May 2015. 
^ "Student Conduct". University of St Andrews. Retrieved 15 April 2011. 
^ "St Andrews Fresher A guide to academic families". Retrieved 31 December 2012. 
^ BAM Agency Ltd. "St Andrews Students' Association – The Home for St Andrews University Students". Yourunion.net. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Raisin Weekend". St. Andrews Freshers. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Raisin Weekend: Foam, Fondling and Malfeasance at St. Andrews". Spiegel.de. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Raisin Weekend 2012 – University of St Andrews". YouTube. 31 March 2012. Retrieved 4 November 2012. 
^ "Reformation History". reformationhistory.org. 
^ [1] Archived 9 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "2011 | University of St Andrews". University of St Andrews. 5 May 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2012. 
^ "The May Dip". Visit St Andrews. 
^ "FanDuel: Tyrone man Nigel Eccles will soon be Northern Ireland's newest billionaire". The Belfast Telegraph. 22 July 2015. 
^ "Honorary graduates - University of St Andrews". www.st-andrews.ac.uk. 
^ "Chariots of Fire Trivia". Retrieved 1 January 2013. 
^ "Chariots of fire beach". Retrieved 29 January 2013. 
^ "Film + St. Andrews, Scotland « MUSEYON GUIDES". Museyon.com. Retrieved 3 January 2013. 
^ "Last term at Malory Towers". Retrieved 17 January 2013. 
^ "Journey to west gutenberg". Retrieved 29 January 2013. 
^ "Girl in May". Retrieved 17 January 2013. 


Sources[edit]

R.G. Cant The University of St Andrews, A Short History (Oliver and Boyd Ltd. 1946)

External links[edit]

Find more aboutUniversity of St Andrewsat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource



Official website
University of St Andrews Students' Association Website
Research@StAndrews:FullText, the university's digital repository of research output
BBC Your Paintings, Public Catalogue Foundation







v
t
e


University of St Andrews



Governance



Chancellor: Menzies Campbell
Rector: Srđa Popović
Principal: Sally Mapstone


Governance
General Council
University Court
Senatus Academicus
Master of the United College
Quaestor








History



History
Academic dress
Andrew Lang Lecture
Edinburgh and St Andrews Universities Parliamentary Constituency
Combined Scottish Universities Parliamentary Constituency
Lady Literate in Arts (LLA)
Museum of the University of St Andrews
University College/Queen's College, Dundee





Colleges



St John's College
St Salvator's College
St Leonard's College
St Mary's College
United College





Schools and institutes



Centre for the Study of Terrorism and Political Violence
James Gregory Observatory
School of Medicine
Scottish Oceans Institute
Sea Mammal Research Unit





Halls of Residence



Agnes Blackadder Hall
Andrew Melville Hall
Deans Court
Hamilton Hall (former)
John Burnet Hall
St Regulus Hall
St Salvator's Hall
University Hall





Student life



Students' Association
Athletic Union

Boat Club
Canoe Club
Football Club
Rugby Club
Shinty Club


Debating Society
The Lafayette Club
The Saint
A Cappella

The Other Guys
The Alleycats


East of Scotland Universities Air Squadron
Tayforth UOTC





Miscellaneous



Byre Theatre
St Salvator's Chapel
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive
Universal Short Title Catalogue
Catholic Chaplaincy
St Andrews Prize for the Environment
The Scottish Varsity





Categories



Clubs and Societies
People

Chancellors
Rectors
Principals
Academics
Alumni










 Category
 Commons










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Topics on St Andrews



Entertainment



Barron Theatre
Byre Theatre
New Picture House








Golf



Ladies' Golf Union
Links
Old Course

Swilken Bridge


The Royal and Ancient
Strathtyrum





Monuments



St Andrews Sarcophagus





Museums



British Golf Museum
Museum of the University of St Andrews
St Andrews Castle
St Andrews Cathedral
St Andrews Museum





Religious houses,
past and present



All Saints
Blackfriars
Greyfriars
Holy Trinity Church
Hospital of St Leonard
Hospital of St Nicholas
St Andrews Cathedral Priory
St Leonard's Chapel
St Mary's Collegiate Church
St Salvator's Chapel





Schools



Madras College
St Leonards School
New Park School





University colleges,
past and present



St Leonard's College
St Mary's College
The Pedagogy
St Salvator's College
United College





Miscellaneous



East Sands
Kinness burn
West Sands
Siege of St Andrews Castle












v
t
e


Universities in Scotland



History



Medieval
Early modern
Eighteenth century
Nineteenth century
Twentieth century








Ancient (pre-1600)



University of St Andrews
University of Glasgow
University of Aberdeen
University of Edinburgh





Red brick (pre-1890)



University of Dundee





Plate-glass (1960s)



Heriot-Watt University
University of Stirling
University of Strathclyde





Modern (1992 on)



Robert Gordon University
Glasgow Caledonian University
Edinburgh Napier University
Abertay University
University of the West of Scotland
Queen Margaret University
University of the Highlands and Islands





Distance learning



The Open University in Scotland





Other institutions
of higher education



Glasgow School of Art
Royal Conservatoire of Scotland
Scotland's Rural College





Related bodies



Scottish Funding Council
Student Awards Agency for Scotland
Universities Scotland
Universities UK








 Category












v
t
e


 Universities in the United Kingdom



England




East Anglia



Anglia Ruskin
BPP
Cambridge
East Anglia
Norwich University of the Arts
Suffolk





London




University
of London



Birkbeck
City
Courtauld
Goldsmiths
Heythrop
Institute of Cancer Research
KCL
London Business School
LSE
LSHTM
Queen Mary
Royal Academy of Music
RCSSD
Royal Holloway
Royal Veterinary College
St George's
SOAS
UCL





Other



BPP
Brunel
East London
Greenwich
Imperial
Kingston
Law
London Met
London South Bank
Middlesex
Regent's University London
Richmond, The American International University in London
Royal College of Art
Royal College of Music
Roehampton
St Mary's
University of the Arts London
Westminster
West London








Midlands



Aston
BPP
Birmingham
Birmingham City
Bishop Grosseteste
Coventry
De Montfort
Derby
Harper Adams
Keele
Law
Leicester
Lincoln
Loughborough
Newman
Northampton
Nottingham
Nottingham Trent
Staffordshire
University College Birmingham
Warwick
Wolverhampton
Worcester





North



Bolton
BPP
Bradford
Central Lancashire
Chester
Cumbria
Durham
Edge Hill
Huddersfield
Hull
Lancaster
Law
Leeds
Leeds Beckett
Leeds Trinity
Liverpool
Liverpool Hope
Liverpool John Moores
LSTM
Manchester
Manchester Metropolitan
Newcastle
Northumbria
Salford
Sheffield
Sheffield Hallam
Sunderland
Teesside
York
York St. John





South



Arts University Bournemouth
Ashridge
Bath
Bath Spa
Bedfordshire
Bournemouth
BPP
Brighton
Bristol
Buckingham
Buckinghamshire New
Canterbury Christ Church
Chichester
Cranfield
Creative Arts
Essex
Exeter
Falmouth
Gloucestershire
Hertfordshire
Kent
Law
Oxford
Oxford Brookes
Plymouth
Portsmouth
Reading
Royal Agricultural University
St Mark & St John
Southampton
Southampton Solent
Surrey
Sussex
UWE
Winchester








Northern Ireland



Queen's
Ulster





Scotland



Aberdeen
Abertay Dundee
Dundee
Edinburgh
Edinburgh Napier
Glasgow
Glasgow Caledonian
Heriot-Watt
Highlands and Islands
Queen Margaret
Robert Gordon
Royal Conservatoire of Scotland
St Andrews
Stirling
Strathclyde
West of Scotland





Wales



Aberystwyth
Bangor
Cardiff
Cardiff Metropolitan
South Wales
Swansea
Swansea Metropolitan
UW Trinity Saint David
Wrexham Glyndŵr





Overseas territories



Bermuda College
Cayman Islands Law School
International College of the Cayman Islands
Saint James School of Medicine
St. Matthew's University
University of Gibraltar
University College of the Cayman Islands
University of Science, Arts and Technology
University of the West Indies





Crown dependencies



University of the Channel Islands in Guernsey





Non−geographic



Lambeth degrees
Open University
University of London International Programmes





Related



List by date of foundation (Third-oldest in England)
List by endowment
List by enrollment
Colleges within universities
Degree abbreviations
National Union of Students
Rankings
Undergraduate degree classification
UCAS
HEFCE
Scottish Funding Council








 Category
 Commons
 List












v
t
e


Europaeum






Barcelona (Pompeu Fabra)
Geneva (IHEID)
Helsinki
Kraków (Jagiellonian)
Leiden
Luxembourg
Madrid (Complutense)
Munich (LMU)
Oxford
Paris I
Prague
St Andrews
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_St_Andrews&oldid=818512222"					Categories: University of St Andrews1413 establishments in ScotlandEducation in FifeEducational institutions established in the 15th centuryUniversities in Scotland15th-century establishments in ScotlandHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template other archivesCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWebarchive template wayback linksUse British English from January 2013Articles containing Latin-language textInstances of Infobox university using image sizeAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2016All articles needing style editingWikipedia articles needing style editing from August 2016Use dmy dates from July 2017