"UBC" redirects here. For other uses, see UBC (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 49°15′40″N 123°15′11″W﻿ / ﻿49.26111°N 123.25306°W﻿ / 49.26111; -123.25306

University of British Columbia


University of British Columbia coat of arms



Motto
Latin: Tuum Est



Motto in English

It is yours
It is up to you


Established
1908


Endowment
USD$1.142 billion (2016)[1]


Budget
CAD$2.1 billion[2]


Chancellor
Lindsay Gordon


President
Santa J. Ono


Provost
Andrew Szeri (Vancouver) and Cynthia Mathieson (Okanagan)


Elders in Residence
sɁəyeɬəq (Larry Grant) (xʷməθkʷǝy̓əm)



Academic staff

5,003 (Vancouver)
471 (Okanagan)[3]



Administrative staff

9,550 (Vancouver)
636 (Okanagan)[3]


Students
62,923


Undergraduates
44,565 (Vancouver)
7,899 (Okanagan)[3]


Postgraduates
9,671 (Vancouver)
788 (Okanagan)[3]


Location
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
• UBC Point Grey
• UBC Robson Square
• UBC-VGH Medical Campus
• UBC-Great Northern Way (Centre for Digital Media)
Kelowna, British Columbia, Canada
• UBC Okanagan


Campus
Vancouver: 4.02 km2 (993 acres)
Okanagan: 2.086 km2 (515 acres)


Language
English


Newspaper
The Ubyssey


Colours
          Blue and Gold[4]


Athletics
U Sports CWUAA NWAIA


Nickname
Thunderbird (Vancouver)
Heat (Okanagan)


Affiliations
APLU, APRU, ASAIHL, AUCC, U15, Universitas 21.


Website
ubc.ca









The University of British Columbia (UBC) is a public research university with campuses and facilities in British Columbia, Canada. Founded in 1908 as the McGill University College of British Columbia, the university became independent and adopted its current name in 1915. It is British Columbia's oldest institution of higher learning and has over 60,000 students at its Vancouver and Okanagan Valley campuses.[5] Most students are enrolled in five larger faculties: Arts, Science, Applied Science, UBC Faculty of Medicine and the Sauder School of Business.[6] UBC's 4.02 km2 (993-acre) Vancouver campus is within the University Endowment Lands, about 10 km (6 mi) west of Downtown Vancouver.[7] The 2.09 km2 (516-acre) Okanagan campus, acquired in 2005, is in Kelowna.
According to the annual rankings compiled by Maclean's and U.S. News and World Report, the university consistently ranks among the top three research universities nationwide.[8] In 2015, U.S. News and World Report and Times Higher Education ranked UBC among the 20 best public universities worldwide.[9][10] With an annual research budget valued at $600 million, UBC funds 8,442 projects as of 2014.[3] Faculty, alumni and researchers have received seven Nobel Prizes, 70 Rhodes Scholarships, 65 Olympic medals, 8 memberships in the American Academy of Arts & Sciences and 208 fellowships to the Royal Society of Canada.[3] The university has also educated three Canadian prime ministers, most recently Justin Trudeau, the current prime minister.[11]
One of the largest research libraries in Canada, the UBC Library system has over 9.9 million volumes among its 21 branches.[12][13] UBC offers several scholarships, notably the 7 Scholarship for STEM fields, the Donald A. Wehrung International Student Award for scholars from war-torn countries and the International Leader of Tomorrow Award for scholars worldwide.[14][15][16] Since 1968, UBC is home to TRIUMF, Canada's national laboratory for particle and nuclear physics which houses the world's largest cyclotron. Other facilities include the Chan Centre for the Performing Arts, the Beaty Biodiversity Museum, which has more than 2 million items in its collection, the UBC Botanical Garden and Centre for Plant Research, the Nitobe Memorial Garden, the UBC Farm and the Museum of Anthropology, which houses more than 535,000 artifacts.[17][18]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Foundation and early years
1.2 Move to Point Grey
1.3 Postwar years
1.4 Recent history


2 Campuses

2.1 Vancouver
2.2 Okanagan
2.3 Libraries, archives and galleries


3 Governance and academics

3.1 Faculties and schools
3.2 Enrollment
3.3 Rankings and reputation
3.4 Research
3.5 Sustainability
3.6 Aboriginal


4 Finances

4.1 Tuition

4.1.1 Undergraduate tuition
4.1.2 Graduate tuition




5 Student life

5.1 Student representation
5.2 Student facilities
5.3 Greek organizations
5.4 Residences
5.5 Athletics

5.5.1 Marching band
5.5.2 Fight song


5.6 Campus events

5.6.1 Rape chant controversy
5.6.2 Model United Nations




6 Notable people
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History[edit]
Foundation and early years[edit]


“
The University shall... provide for: Such instruction in all branches of liberal education as may enable students to become proficient in... science, commerce, arts, literature, law, medicine, and all other branches of knowledge
”


— An Act to Establish and Incorporate a University for the Province of British Columbia, Acts of 1908, Chapter 53[19]






View of the UBC Fairview campus from the roof of King Edward High School (c. 1917) (Vancouver, British Columbia) (photo by Canadian Photo Co.)






Original 1914 plan of the UBC campus, by architects Sharp and Thompson


In 1877, only six years after British Columbia joined Canada, Superintendent of Education John Jessop submitted a proposal for the formation of a provincial university. The provincial legislature passed An Act Respecting the University of British Columbia in 1890, but disagreements arose over whether to build the university on Vancouver Island or the mainland.
The British Columbia University Act of 1908 formally called a provincial university into being, although its location was not specified.[20] The governance was modelled on the provincial University of Toronto Act of 1906 which created a bicameral system of university government consisting of a senate (faculty), responsible for academic policy, and a board of governors (citizens) exercising exclusive control over financial policy and having formal authority in all other matters. The president, appointed by the board, was to provide a link between the two bodies and to perform institutional leadership.[20] The Act constituted a twenty-one member senate with Francis Carter-Cotton of Vancouver as Chancellor.[21]
Before the University Act, there had been several attempts at creating a degree-granting university with help from the Universities of Toronto and McGill. Columbian College in New Westminster, through its affiliation with Victoria College of the University of Toronto, began to offer university-level credit at the turn-of-the-century, but McGill came to dominate higher education in the early 1900s.
Building on a successful affiliation between Vancouver and Victoria high schools with McGill University, Henry Marshall Tory[22] helped establish the McGill University College of British Columbia. From 1906 to 1915, McGill BC (as it was called) operated as a private institution providing the first few years toward a degree at McGill University or elsewhere. The Henry Marshall Tory Medal was established in 1941 by Tory, founding President of the University of Alberta and of the National Research Council of Canada, and a co-founder of Carleton University.




Henry Marshall Tory


In the meantime, appeals were made to the government to revive the earlier legislation for a provincial institution, leading to the University Endowment Act in 1907, and the University Act in 1908. In 1910 the Point Grey site was chosen, and the government appointed Dr. Frank Fairchild Wesbrook as President in 1913, and Leonard Klinck as Dean of Agriculture in 1914. A declining economy and the outbreak of war in August 1914 compelled the University to postpone plans for building at Point Grey, and instead the former McGill University College site at Fairview became home to the University until 1925. On the first day of lectures was September 30, 1915, the new independent university absorbed McGill University College. The University of British Columbia awarded its first degrees in 1916,[20] and Klinck became the second President in 1919, serving until 1940.
Move to Point Grey[edit]
World War I dominated campus life, and the student body was "decimated" by enlistments for active service, with three hundred UBC students in Company "D" alone. By the war's end, 697 members of the University had enlisted. 109 students graduated in the three war-time congregations, all but one in the Faculty of Arts and Science.
By 1920, the university had only three faculties: Arts, Applied Science, and Agriculture (with Departments of Agronomy, Animal Husbandry, Dairying, Horticulture and Poultry). It only awarded the degrees of Bachelor of Arts (BA), Bachelor of Applied Science (BASc), and Bachelor of Science in Agriculture (BSA).[23] There were 576 male students and 386 female students in the 1920–21 winter session, but only 64 academic staff, including 6 women.[24]
In the early part of the 20th century, professional education expanded beyond the traditional fields of theology, law and medicine. Though UBC did not offer degrees in these fields, it began to offer degrees in new professional areas such as engineering, agriculture, nursing and school teaching. It also introduced graduate training based on the German-inspired American model of specialized course work and the completion of a research thesis, with students completing M.A. degrees in natural sciences, social sciences and humanities.[20]




Students march down Granville street during the Great Trek


In 1922, the twelve-hundred-strong student body embarked on a "Build the University" campaign. Students marched through the streets of Vancouver to draw attention to their plight, enlist popular support, and embarrass the government. Fifty-six thousand signatures were presented at legislature in support of the campaign, which was ultimately successful. On September 22, 1925, lectures began at the new Point Grey campus. Except for the Library, Science and Power House buildings, all the campus buildings were temporary constructions. Students built two playing fields, but the University had no dormitories and no social centre. Still, the University continued to grow steadily.
Soon, however, the effects of the depression began to be felt. The provincial government, upon which the University depended heavily, cut the annual grant severely. In 1932–33, salaries were cut by up to 23%. Posts remained vacant, and a few faculty lost their jobs. Most graduate courses were dropped. In 1935, the University established the Department of Extension. Just as things began to improve, World War II began and Canada declared war on September 10, 1939. Soon afterwards, University President Klinck wrote:

From the day of the declaration of war, the University has been prepared to put at the disposal of the Government all possible assistance by way of laboratories, equipment and trained personnel, insofar as such action is consistent with the maintenance of reasonably efficient instructional standards. To do less would be unthinkable.

Heavy rains and melting snowfall eroded a deep ravine across the north end of the campus, in the Grand Campus Washout of 1935. The campus did not have storm drains, and surface runoff went down a ravine to the beach. When the University carved a ditch to drain flooding on University Avenue, the rush of water steepened the ravine and eroded it back as fast as 10 feet (3.0 m) per hour. The resulting gully eventually consumed 100,000 cubic yards (76,455 m3), two bridges, and buildings near Graham House. The university was closed for 4 and a half days. Afterwards, the gully was filled with debris from a nearby landslide, and only traces are visible today.[25]
Military training on the campus became popular, then mandatory. WWII marked the first provision of money from the federal government to the University for research purposes. This laid a foundation for future research grants from the federal government of Canada.
Postwar years[edit]
By the end of World War II, Point Grey's facilities could not meet the influx of veterans returning to their studies. The university needed new staff, courses, faculties, and buildings for teaching and accommodation. The student population rose from 2,974 in 1944–45 to 9,374 in 1947–48. Surplus Army and Air Force camps were used for both classrooms and accommodation. The university took over fifteen complete camps during the 1945–46 session alone, with a sixteenth camp on Little Mountain in Vancouver, converted into suites for married students. Most of the camps were dismantled and carried by barge or truck to the University where the huts were scattered across the campus.
Student numbers hit 9,374 in 1948; more than 53% of the students were war veterans in 1947–67. Between 1947 and 1951, the university built twenty new permanent buildings, including the War Memorial Gym, built with money raised primarily by the students, was dedicated on October 26, 1951.[26]




Bill Reid's Raven and The First Men at the UBC Museum of Anthropology


The single-university policy in the West was changed as existing colleges of the provincial universities gained autonomy as universities – the University of Victoria was established in 1963.[20]
On February 10, 1964 Harvey Reginald MacMillan donated $8.2 million for postgraduate education to the university.[27]
Recent history[edit]
Prime Minister Trudeau announced the Museum of Anthropology at UBC on July 1, 1971. At a construction cost of $2.5 million, the museum building designed by Arthur Erickson opened in 1976.[27] That same year, the university launched a normal school program under the direction of Sally Rogow to train educators methods to teach students who had multiple disabilities or were visually impaired.[28]
UBC's 15th president is Professor Santa J. Ono. He assumed the presidency on August 15, 2016. He served previously as the 28th President of The University of Cincinnati. Dr. Martha Piper, served as Interim President starting September 1, 2015, following the resignation of Dr. Arvind Gupta.
Campuses[edit]




Aerial view of the Vancouver Campus






The Irving K. Barber Library and Ladner Clock Tower


Vancouver[edit]
The main campus is at Point Grey, a twenty-minute drive from downtown Vancouver. It is near several beaches and has views of the North Shore mountains. The 7.63 km² Pacific Spirit Regional Park serves as a green-belt between the campus and the city. Buildings on the Vancouver campus occupy 1,091,997 m² gross on 1.7 km² of maintained land. The campus street plan is mostly in a grid of malls (for driving and pedestrian-only). Lower Mall and West Mall are in the southwestern part of the peninsula, with Main, East, and Wesbrook Malls northeast of them.
The campus itself is situated on the unceded and traditional territory of three First Nations: the xʷməθkʷəy̓əm Nation, Sḵwx̱wú7mesh Úxwumixw and Səl̓ilw̓ətaɁɬ Nation. UBC has an active partnership with xʷməθkʷəy̓əm from hən̓q̓əmin̓əm̓-language programming to a number of other classes and programmes.
The University Endowment Lands are not within Vancouver's city limits, and therefore UBC is policed by the RCMP rather than the Vancouver Police Department. However, the Vancouver Fire Department provides service to UBC under a contract. In addition to UBC RCMP, there is also the UBC Campus Security that patrols the campus. Postage sent to any building on campus includes Vancouver in the address.
UBC Vancouver also has two satellite campuses within the City of Vancouver: a campus at Vancouver General Hospital for the medical sciences, and UBC Robson Square in downtown for part-time credit and non-credit programmes. UBC is also a partner in the consortium backing Great Northern Way Campus Ltd, and is affiliated with a group of adjacent theological colleges, which include the Vancouver School of Theology, Regent College, Carey Theological College and Corpus Christi College.
The campus is home to numerous gardens. The UBC Botanical Garden and Centre for Plant Research, the first UBC department, holds a collection of over 8000 different kinds of plants used for research, conservation and education. The UBC botanical garden's original site was at the "Old Arboretum". All that remains of it today are trees planted in 1916 by John Davidson. The old arboretum is now home to many buildings including the First Nations House of Learning. The Nitobe Memorial Garden, built to honour Japanese scholar Inazo Nitobe, the garden has been the subject of more than fifteen years' study by a UBC professor,[who?] who believes its construction hides a number of impressive features, including references to Japanese philosophy and mythology, shadow bridges visible only at certain times of year, and positioning of a lantern filled with light at the exact date and time of Nitobe's death each year. The garden is behind the university's Asian Centre, which was built using steel girders from Japan's exhibit at Osaka Expo.[29]




The UBC Vancouver School of Theology building, recently acquired by the Vancouver School of Economics, built in 1927


The campus also features the Chan Centre for the Performing Arts: a performing arts centre containing the Chan Shun Concert Hall, Telus Studio Theatre and the Royal Bank Cinema. It is often the site of convocation ceremonies and the filming location for the 4400 Center on the television show The 4400,[30] as well as the Madacorp entrance set on Kyle XY.[31] It has also been featured as the Cloud 9 Ballroom in the re-imagined Battlestar Galactica (Season 1, Episode 11: Colonial Day).[32]
See also: Architecture of Greater Vancouver
Okanagan[edit]




The Engineering(EME) Complex at UBC Okanagan


Main article: University of British Columbia Okanagan
The Okanagan Campus is a complete transformation of the site of what was once the North Kelowna Campus of Okanagan University College, next to Kelowna International Airport on the north-east side of Kelowna, British Columbia.[33] Its placement puts it in the Okanagan Nation whose lands have not been ceded to the British Columbia or Canadian governments.
The campus offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in Arts, Science, Engineering, Nursing, Education, and Management. The Okanagan campus experienced a $450 million CDN expansion with construction of several residential, teaching and research buildings in 2011. The expansion features the Charles Fipke Centre for Innovative Research, the Engineering Management and Education building, the Arts and Science building, and the Health Science Centre. Plans to double the academic and research space are in place for the next two decades.
In 2010, UBC Okanagan campus grew from 105 ha. to 208.6 ha.[34] Like the Point Grey campus, the Okanagan campus attracts Canadian and international students.
The UBC Okanagan campus is rapidly expanding in the past decades both in student body and in research intensity and capability, and is one of the fastest growing campus among Canadian universities.
Libraries, archives and galleries[edit]
Main article: University of British Columbia Library
The UBC Library, which has 7.8 million volumes, 2.1 million e-books, more than 370,000 e-journals, and more than 700,000 items in locally produced digital collections, is Canada's second largest academic library.[35] From 2014-2015, there were more than 3.8 million on-campus visits and over 9.5 million visits to its website.[36]
The Library has fifteen branches and divisions across the UBC Vancouver and UBC Okanagan campuses.[35]
The former Main Library underwent construction and was renamed the Irving K. Barber Learning Centre. Opened in April 2008, the Learning Centre incorporates the centre heritage block of the old Main Library with two new expansion wings and features an automated storage and retrieval system (ASRS), the first of its kind in Canada.[37]
UBC has a number of different collections that have been donated and acquired. Major General Victor Odlum CB, CMG, DSO, VD donated his library of 10,000 books, which has been housed in "the Rockwoods Centre Library" of the UBC Library since 1963. After Videomatica's 2011 closure, UBC and SFU acquired their $1.7-million collection. UBC received about 28,000 movie DVDs, 4,000 VHS titles and 900 Blu-ray discs which are housed at UBC Library’s Koerner branch on the Vancouver campus.[38] In 2014, renowned art collector and antiques specialist, Uno Langmann, donated the Uno Langmann Family Collection of B.C. Photographs,[39] which consists of more than 18,000 rare and unique early photographs from the 1850s to the 1970s. It is considered the premiere private collection of early provincial photos, and an important illustrated history of early photographic methods. In 2016, the Library acquired one of the world's most rare and extraordinary books, the Kelmscott Chaucer from 1896. The book was printed in a limited edition of only 438 copies, but there are only 48 copies in the world with this particular type of binding.[40]
The Morris and Helen Belkin Art Gallery at the UBC houses the university's collection of three archives and fine art; 1,000 works, mainly Canadian contemporary pieces 1960 to the present. The Gallery houses exhibitions, publications, acquisitions, archival projects, lectures and symposia on art history, criticism, and curating.[41]
Governance and academics[edit]




The Walter C. Koerner Library and president's office, designed by UBC alumnus Arthur Erickson


UBC's administration, as mandated by the University Act, is composed of a chancellor, convocation, board, senate, and faculties of the university.[42] The Board of Governors manages property and revenue, while the Senate manages the university's academic operation. Both are composed of faculty and students who are elected to the position. Degrees and diplomas are conferred by the convocation, which is composed of alumni, administrators, and faculty, with a quorum of twenty members. UBC also has a President, who is the university's chief executive officer and a member of the Senate, Board of Governors, Convocation, and also serves as Vice Chancellor. The President of the University is responsible for managing the academic operation of the university, including recommending appointments, calling meetings of faculties, and establishing committees.
Faculties and schools[edit]
Main article: Faculties and Schools of the University of British Columbia




Aerial view of the UBC Faculty of Law building


UBC's academic activity is organized into "faculties" and "schools".[43] UBC has twelve faculties at its Vancouver campus and seven at its Okanagan campus.[7] UBC Vancouver has two academic colleges: Interdisciplinary Studies and Health Disciplines, while UBC Okanagan has a College of Graduate Studies. At the Vancouver campus, the Faculty of Arts, which dates back to the 1915 Fairview Campus, is the largest faculty with twenty departments and schools. With the split of the Faculty of Arts and Science in 1964, the Faculty of Science is the second largest faculty with nine departments. The Sauder School of Business is UBC's Faculty of Commerce and Business Administration. The School of Architecture offers a program accredited by the Canadian Architectural Certification Board at the bachelor level (B.Arch.) and the master's level (M.Arch.).[44] As of December 2012, a new school was created: UBC Vancouver School of Economics in conjunction with the Sauder School of Business.[45][46][47]
In 2014, UBC created a new "International Programs" designation separate from the traditional definition of a Faculty. To accompany this designation, the university created Vantage College to allow international students who do not meet the English language requirements for general admission to enter the university's transition program.[48]

Dual undergraduate degree with Sciences Po

The Dual degree Program is a highly selective program in which undergraduate students earn two Bachelor of Arts degrees from both Sciences Po and UBC, or one Bachelor of Arts and one Bachelor of Commerce (Sauder School of Business) in four years. Students spend two years at one of three Sciences Po campuses in France (Le Havre, Menton, or Reims), each of which is devoted to a particular region of the world. After two years, students matriculate at UBC. Graduates are guaranteed admission to a Sciences Po graduate program. High school students may apply.[49]
Enrollment[edit]
The mean admission average in 2013 for domestic first-year students was 89.5 percent.[50] The acceptance rate for domestic applications in 2013 was 50.4 percent, of which 57.1 percent enrolled.[51] In 2014/15, UBC employed 3,270 full-time Faculty members, 10,942 non-faculty members, and 8,031 students. It reported 871 unpaid employees. It had over fifty-one thousand students (41,365 undergraduate students and 10,076 graduate students).[52]
Rankings and reputation[edit]


University rankings


Global rankings


ARWU World[53]
31


QS World[54]
51


Times World[55]
34


Times Reputation[56]
40


Times Employability[57]
45


U.S News & World Report Global[58]
27


Canadian rankings


ARWU National[53]
2


QS National[54]
3


Times National[55]
2


U.S News & World Report National[58]
2


Maclean's Medical/Doctoral[59]
3


Maclean's Reputation[60]
2


UBC has the second highest average entering grade among Canadian universities, with an average undergraduate entrance grade of 89.6%, only behind McGill University with 90.3%.[8] UBC was ranked 3rd in Canada among all its major/research universities in the Maclean's 24th annual rankings.[61] UBC was ranked 3rd in Canada, 21st in North America and 50th among world universities in the 2015-2016 QS World University Rankings.[62] In the 2014-2015 U.S. News and World Report ranking of world universities UBC placed second in Canada, 24th in North America and 30th overall.[63] In the 2014–2015 Times Higher Education World University Rankings UBC was ranked second in Canada, 24th in North America and 32nd overall.[64] The 2014 Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked the university second in Canada, 29th in North America and 37th overall.[65] Also, the 2014 CWUR ranking ranked UBC 3rd in Canada, 41st among North American colleges and universities and 61st worldwide.[66] In Newsweek's 2011 global university rankings, the university was ranked eighth among institutions outside the United States, and second in Canada.[67] As of September 2013, according to the University Ranking by Academic Performance (URAP),[68] UBC was ranked second in Canada, 16th in North America and 21st in the world.
The 2016 QS World University Rankings ranked UBC 5th worldwide in geography, 9th in education, 15th in agriculture and forestry, 17th in psychology, 20th in nursing, 24th in mathematics, 26th in English literature, 28th in both economics and medicine, 36th in sociology, 37th in political science and 39th in accounting and finance.[69] The 2014–2015 Times Higher Education World University Rankings ranked UBC 20th (1st in Canada) in life sciences, 21st (2nd in Canada) in social sciences, 35th (2nd in Canada) in physical sciences and 43rd (2nd in Canada) in engineering and technology.[70] The 2014 Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked UBC 28th in social sciences, 38th in economics and business, 41st in computer science and 51–75 overall in science.[71] The university's law faculty was ranked fifth in Maclean's 2012 rankings of Canadian common law schools, and 22nd in the world and third in Canada in the 2012 QS World University Rankings by Subject: Law.[72][73] The Sauder School of Business has also received national and international accolades. The business school appeared on the 2013 Financial Times global MBA rankings, placing 57th in the world,[74] and fourth in Canada. The business school was also ranked in QS's 2012 North American MBA rankings, placing 18th in North America, and third in Canada.[75]
Research[edit]




The Chan Centre for the Performing Arts, designed by Bing Thom, B.Arch '66


The University of British Columbia is a member of Universitas 21, an international association of research-led institutions and the only Canadian member of the Association of Pacific Rim Universities, a consortium of 42 leading research universities in the Pacific Rim.[76][77] With a sponsored research income of $575.155 million, the university manages the second-largest research budget of any university in Canada. With an average research income of $245,200 CAD per full-time faculty member, the university is also the country's second most research intensive full-service university.[78]
In terms of research performance, High Impact Universities 2010 ranked the university 30th out of 500 universities, and second in Canada.[79] The Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan (HEEACT), an organization which also evaluates universities based on their scientific paper's performances, ranked the university 29th in the world and second in Canada.[80]
The university operates and manages a number of research centres:

In 1972, a consortium of the University of British Columbia and four other universities from Alberta and British Columbia established the Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre. Located on Vancouver Island, the centre provides year-round research facilities and technical assistance for biologists, ecologists and oceanographers.[81]
The Peter Wall Institute for Advanced Studies is an interdisciplinary research institute for fundamental research in the Sciences, Social Sciences, and Humanities.
The UBC Farm is a 24 hectare learning and research farm in UBC's South Campus area. It features Saturday Farm Markets from early June until early October, selling organic produce and eggs to the community.
TRIUMF, a laboratory specializing in particle and nuclear physics is also at the university. The name was formerly an acronym for TRI-University Meson Facility, but TRIUMF is now owned and operated by a consortium of eleven Canadian universities. The consortium runs TRIUMF through a contribution of funds from the National Research Council of Canada, and makes TRIUMF's facilities available to Canadian scientists and to scientists from around the world.[82]

Sustainability[edit]
UBC has been ranked in the Corporate Knights school rankings, which ranks universities based on how well they integrate sustainability into the learning experience. The rankings adopt a broad definition of sustainability which encompasses both environmental and social concerns. In the 2011 rankings, UBC was ranked 2nd in the category: top 5 teaching programs.[83] UBC's law school ranked fifth among Canadian law schools.[83] The Sauder School of Business' MBA programs were ranked fourth in Canada. The same rankings placed the business school 11th in Canada for its undergraduate business program.[83]
The university strives to be a world leader in sustainability and sustainable development, aiming to meet the needs of the growing student and faculty population while preserving the environment. The Center for Interactive Research on Sustainability (CIRS) building, a recent addition to the Vancouver campus, exemplifies the University's sustainable practices. Developed to create the most sustainable society at UBC, it has been called North America's most sustainable, innovative, and high performance building.[84]
The CIRS building was first thought of in 2000[85] and was the brainchild of John Robinson, a sustainable development research initiative professor. Robinson worked with faculty members from Emily Carr, Simon Fraser University, and British Columbia Institute of Technology as well as head architect Peter Busby to design the building.[86] It cost 23 million dollars to complete the 65,000 square foot building.[87]
The CIRS building exhibits regenerative sustainability, which means the building improves the surrounding environment.[88] For example, it uses energy it obtains from the neighbouring Earth and Ocean Sciences (EOSC) Building to heat itself. The EOSC building uses roughly 1600 megawatts of heat energy and goes through ten air changes every hour, which wastes around 900 megawatts of energy.[85] The engineers who built the CIRS building saw this as an opportunity; the building takes the heat the EOSC building expels and uses 300 megawatts to heat itself before returning 600 megawatts to the EOSC building. In this way, the CIRS building restores its surrounding environment.
The CIRS building is designed to be net positive in four ways environmentally, meaning the processes or products that leave the building are more environmentally friendly than those that go into it.[84] The best example of the building's net positivity is the building's wood holds nearly 600 tons of carbon – more carbon than the building's construction and maintenance created.[89] Other sustainable features of the CIRS building include:

A water supply obtained entirely from rainwater
An on-site sewage treatment facility that converts all waste created in the building to reusable water and compost
The building's wood comes from trees killed by the pine beetle, thus, little logging was needed for construction
Relies on mainly solar energy for electricity
All areas of the building use natural lighting during the day.[84]

The building integrates 'green' sustainable and humane features, i.e. not only does it have a small ecological footprint, it also serves as an environment for occupants to be happy, healthy, and productive.[86] This is the direction the University of British Columbia is moving towards to continue their ideas of sustainable development.
Following the success of the CIRS, UBC's new Student Union Building, which opened in summer 2015, was also designed to adhere to the most stringent sustainability requirements. It achieves the LEED Platinum standard – with features that include triple glazing, solar-powered cooling, solar water heaters, radiant heating and cooling in floors, green roof technology, water efficient landscaping that uses greywater, natural air ventilation, and a composting facility that processes up to 30 tonnes of organic waste each year.[90]
Aboriginal[edit]
UBC's Longhouse is the University's centre for Aboriginal activities. The university has an Associate Dean of Indigenous Education, and has developed governing board and senate policies as well as Aboriginal governed councils within the university structure.[91] UBC offers degrees in First Nations and Indigenous Studies[92] through a program in the Arts Faculty, and a Chinook Diploma Program in the Sauder School of Business; it also runs the Chinook Summer Biz Camp, to foster entrepreneurship among First Nations and Métis high school students. It hosts a Bridge Through Sport Program, Summer Science Program, Native Youth Program, and Cedar Day Camp and Afterschool Program. Its First Nations Forestry Initiatives were developed in partnership with specific Aboriginal communities to meet needs in their more remote areas.[citation needed]
Finances[edit]
In 2012-13, UBC's budget exceeded $2 billion, and the University posted balanced financial results for the fourth consecutive year through strategic revenue diversification, careful management of assets, and a continued focus on fundraising for projects across the university. The share of the University budget coming from the Government grant has been reduced to 45% of total revenues. On the other hand, annual fundraising has nearly doubled in 5 years to reach $213 million.
Tuition[edit]
Tuition fees vary significantly between Canadian citizens (and permanent residents) and international students. In addition, for both undergraduate and graduate programs, tuition rates vary among the university's faculties. Students must also pay for various living expenses such as housing, food and health care. As of the 2012–2013 school year, these expenses were estimated at around $13,000 CAD per academic year.[93][94][95]
Undergraduate tuition[edit]
UBC tuition for 2012 was $4,700 before adding other mandatory administrative fees for a Canadian student in a basic 30-unit program, though various programs cost from $3,406 to $9,640. Tuition for international students is significantly higher (2.3–4.6 times higher than domestic students). In 2012, tuition for international students ranged from $16,245 CAD to $25,721 CAD.[96]
In 2001–02, UBC had one of the lowest undergraduate tuition rates in Canada, at an average of $2,181 CAD per year for a full-time programme due to a government-instituted tuition freeze.
In 2001, the BC Liberal party defeated the NDP in British Columbia and lifted the tuition freeze. In 2002–03 undergraduate and graduate tuition rose by an average of 30%, and up to 40% in some faculties. This has led to better facilities, but also to student unrest and contributed to a teaching assistant union strike.
UBC again increased tuition by 30% in the 2003–04 year, again by approximately 15% in the 2004–05 season, and 2% in the 2005–06 and 2006–07 years. Increases were lower than expected because, in the 2005 Speech from the Throne, the government announced tuition increases would be capped to inflation.[97] In 2006–07, the Canadian average undergraduate tuition fee was $4,347 and the BC average was $4,960.[98] In 2014, the Board of Governor passed a one-time 10% tuition increase for all new incoming International students.[99] In December 2015, UBC's Board of Governors passed a motion increasing international tuition by more than 46.8% for the academic years 2016-17, 2017–18, 2018-2019. This announcement was met with indignation by many of the University's students as this was the second major increase in international tuition in less than a year, taking total international student tuition fee increases to above 60% within 4 years (minimum international tuition will be benchmarked at $35,071 CAD in the year 2018-19).[100]
Graduate tuition[edit]
In the academic year 2011/2012 most research-based graduate programs assess tuition of $4,263.87 per semester for Canadian students and permanent residents or $7,490.88 for international students.[101][102] International students without external funding that meet the general eligibility criteria will be supported with guaranteed funding of up to $3,200 per year.[103] Tuition for professional Master's programs varies.
Student life[edit]
Student representation[edit]
The Alma Mater Society of the University of British Columbia, or AMS, represents UBC undergraduate students within the Vancouver campus. The society's mandate is to improve the quality of educational, social, and personal lives of UBC students. The AMS lobbies the UBC administration on behalf of the student body, provides services such as the AMS/GSS Health and Dental Plan, supports and administers student clubs, and maintains the Student Union Building (aka SUB) and the services it houses. A Constituency (undergraduate society) exists within each schools and faculties of the university and act as the subsidiary of the AMS within those schools and faculties.
The Graduate Student Society (GSS), which operates as an independent entity, represents graduate students. A council representing each graduate program and an executive elected by graduate students as a whole governs the GSS.[104]
The university also allows elected student representatives to sit as voting members in the Board of Governors (3 student representatives) and the Academic Senate. Although the university is the official body that elects the students, the university delegates these representative elections to the AMS.
Student facilities[edit]




The new Student Union Building, which opened in 2015.






The interior of the new Student Union Building contains a "bird's nest" where students may relax and study.


The heart of student activity at UBC Vancouver is the centrally located Student Union Building (SUB), which houses offices of many AMS student clubs, over a dozen restaurants and cafés, a pub ("The Gallery"), a nightclub ("The Pit"), the 425-seat Norman Bouchard Memorial Theatre ("The Norm Theatre"), several shops, and a post office. The AMS runs the majority of the SUB's outlets and shops; however, UBC Food Services' recent addition of major corporate outlets has generated controversy. The SUB Art Gallery contains mostly students' works. An underground bus loop to replace the "Grassy Knoll" beside the SUB did not receive funding by Translink.[105] As a result, the administration has cancelled the bus loop project, although the rest of the renovations of the University Boulevard Neighbourhood are still under consideration.
In June 2015, the new Student Union Building opened to students, largely replacing and extending the old SUB in functionality.[90] The new SUB, built for $107 million, is much larger than its predecessor, and has numerous amenities including a performance centre, an art exhibition space, a large ballroom, a three-storey climbing wall, radio broadcast facilities, a daycare, and a 10,740 square foot rooftop garden and public space with a water feature and outdoor seating. Many of the restaurants as well as the Pit Pub have moved to the new SUB under their original name or with new names.[90]




Exterior of the main UBC Bookstore.


Other student facilities on campus include the Ladha Science Student Centre (funded through a donation from Abdul Ladha, a levy on Science undergraduate students, the VP Students, and the Dean of Science) and the Meekison Arts Student Space in the Faculty of Art's Buchanan D building. The UBC Bookstore's locations on the Vancouver campus: the main store at 6200 University Boulevard and a store at Sauder School of Business join the stores at the Okanagan and Robson Square Campuses in offering a variety of products and services. The bookstores return a dividend to UBC each year, which is re-invested in the campus or in student and community organizations.[106]
Greek organizations[edit]
While UBC's Greek system is somewhat smaller than its counterparts in the United States, UBC's 18 Greek organizations make up Canada's largest and most active Greek system. The Alma Mater Society recognizes an InterFraternal Council (IFC) as a club, and weekly meetings of the fraternities under IFC take place at their respective fraternity houses. Greek life has its own division within UBC REC[107] and intense competition between the nine Fraternities for the title of top Athletic Fraternity occur.
There are ten international fraternities on campus, the first of which was Zeta Psi, in January 1926. Although its disputed, Alpha Delta Phi soon came to campus and chartered 3 months later. However, Zeta Psi and Alpha Delta Phi were preceded by several local fraternities on campus. Other fraternities include Alpha Epsilon Pi, Delta Kappa Epsilon, Psi Upsilon, Sigma Chi,[108] Beta Theta Pi,[109] Phi Delta Theta, Phi Gamma Delta, Kappa Sigma, and Zeta Psi, which re-chartered at UBC in 2013.
The National Panhellenic Conference (NPC) member organizations (sororities) on campus are overseen by the Panhellenic Council.[110] All sororities have a chapter room in the Panhellenic House on Wesbrook Mall; the building also offers housing for 72 college women, with preference given to sorority members.
The eight sororities on the Vancouver campus include Alpha Delta Pi, Alpha Gamma Delta, Alpha Omicron Pi, Alpha Phi, Delta Gamma, Gamma Phi Beta, Kappa Alpha Theta, and Kappa Kappa Gamma. The current Panhellenic total is 81. Chapter meetings are held in the chapter's respective rooms each week or in classrooms and Greek-wide or campus-wide events are attended by members of all the sororities and fraternities. Formal recruitment for the sororities begin during the second week of September and is a 4-day process consisting of: Tours (first 2 days), Invitationals and Preference.
Phrateres has traditionally been affiliated with the Greek system since its installation at UBC in 1935. Historical records indicate that for many years, members identified themselves, and were recognized as Greek. Members interacted with fraternities on a similar basis as the sororities, and participated in many Greek events, such as Songfest and exchanges. However, they presently operate as a self-governing organization under the Alma Mater Society with the closure of their international headquarters in 2001.
Both campuses also have chapters of Sigma Phi Delta[111] and Alpha Omega Epsilon,[112] a professional engineering fraternity and sorority respectively. None of the four chapters are affiliated with the other Greek organizations on campus.
Alpha Kappa Psi (professional business fraternity) too has an active chapter at UBC since 2009.[113] It consists of students from all faculty. They do not have a house and are not affiliated with any other Greek organization on campus.[114]
Alpha Phi Omega (Community service fraternity) founded its first chapter in Canada at UBC in 2015.
Moreover, UBC was ranked among Canada's top party schools by the website Ask Men. In the latest ranking, UBC was ranked 7th, ahead of Queen's University and below Concordia University.[115]
Residences[edit]




Gage Towers






Totem Park, Dene House






Marine Drive


The UBC Point Grey campus has a resident population of about 10,041 students [116] who live in an unincorporated area, outside the City of Vancouver known as Electoral Area A within and partly administered by Metro Vancouver.[117] Neighbouring the University Endowment Lands, on-campus residential services are provided by the Province of BC and by UBC. Emergency Planning is administered by Metro Vancouver. Because UBC is not in a municipality, there is no mayor, council, or other democratic municipal representation for on-campus residents, although residents can vote for the Director of Electoral Area A.[118] British Columbia's Residential Tenancy Act does not protect UBC residents because university accommodations for students and employees are exempt.[119]
UBC has forecast the need for 6,400 new on-campus beds between 2008 and 2028 "to maintain the current availability of student housing choices in the face of on-going pressures in the Vancouver rental market".[120] From 2009 to 2014, UBC added 1,471 beds for student residents.[121][122] In 2015, UBC plans to increase the cost of on-campus student housing by 20%, with the exception of year-round residences.[123]
As of the 2017–2018 school year, there are three dormitory style residences on campus, primarily for first and second-year students: Totem Park, Place Vanier, and Orchard Commons.[124]
Totem Park, housing about 2129 students, consists of nine dormitory buildings (Nootka, Dene, Haida, Salish, Kwakiutl, Shuswap, Həm'ləsəm', Q'ələχən, Building 7), and a Commons Block (Coquihalla). All houses, except Shuswap and Building 7, are co-ed, with alternating men's and women's floors; Shuswap house and Building 7 has co-ed floors. Həm'ləsəm' and Q'ələχən houses were opened to Totem Park residents in September 2011 and have single rooms with semi-private or private washrooms in contrast to the other houses' communal floor washrooms.[125] Building 7 was opened to Totem Park residents in September 2017 and has single rooms with communal bathrooms.
Place Vanier, housing 1370 people, consists of 12 blocks constructed in 1959 (Robson House), 1960 (Okanagan, Sherwood Lett, Mackenzie, Ross, Hamber and Mawdsley Houses), 1961 (Kootenay House), 1968 (Cariboo and Tweedsmuir Houses), 2002 (Korea-UBC House) and 2003 (Tec de Monterrey-UBC House). The buildings vary from male and female only, to alternating gender floors, as well as fully mixed floors. The residences have single and double rooms, and each floor has a lounge and communal bathrooms.
Orchard commons consists of two apartment style buildings and a common dining hall and reception area.
Students nineteen and older have suite-style residence options on the Point Grey campus. The Gage Towers consist of three 17-floor towers (North, South and East) primarily for second, third, and fourth-year undergraduate students. It consists of three interconnected towers (North, South, and East) as well as single student housing (both studio, and apartment) in a building. The towers are composed of "quads": four separate pods, each consisting of six individual bedrooms, a bathroom and a kitchen-dining area.[126]
Acadia Park and University Apartments are for student families and couples (where one is a UBC student) and are administered on a year-round basis.[127]
Next to the Acadia Park residence area on the east part of campus is Fairview Crescent, a residence primarily for second- and third-year undergraduate students and many graduate students. The residence consists of an L-shaped pedestrian-only street lined with 4, 5 and six-student (a mix of single-sex and co-ed) townhouses. The Beanery coffee shop is in the middle of the residence. Within a 5-minute walk from Fairview Crescent is the Fraser Hall residence which houses approximately 200 students. Fairview Crescent and Fraser Hall are both governed by the Fairview and Fraser Residence Association.
The Thunderbird residences are primarily for graduate students and fourth-year undergraduate students; they are at the academic core campus' southern edge. The Ritsumeikan-UBC House is a residence with a Japanese cultural setting, named for Ritsumeikan University. It houses Japanese exchange students and Canadian students, who participate in unique inter-cultural programmes. UBC's Urasenke Japanese tea ceremony club uses the residence's tatami room for practice sessions. Two Canadian students are typically paired with two Japanese exchange students.
Marine Drive Residence is on the west side of campus, slightly south of Place Vanier. The first phase, consisting of Building 1 (an 18-floor tower) and Building 2 (a five-floor building commonly called the "Podium") opened in fall 2005. In February 2006, the Board of Governors approved plans for Marine Drive's second phase, putting an end to the debacle caused by concerns over the view of Wreck beach (Phase I's Building 1 was reduced from 20 floors to 18). Additionally, building 1 contains the Simon K.Y. Lee Global Lounge and Resource Centre. Phase II consists of Buildings 4 through 6 (two towers and another "Podium", respectively), and also the Commonsblock. Buildings 4 through 6 were all open to students as of September 2008. A separate Commonsblock was completed in summer 2009, and has similar services to the Commonsblock of other residences, such as exercise, game, and study rooms. Construction at Marine Drive was completed in February 2010, with the opening of The Point Grill restaurant in Building 4.




Ponderosa Commons, Oak House






Orchard Commons, Braeburn House


The newest additions to UBC Vancouver's student housing are the Ponderosa Commons and Orchard Commons residences, completed in 2016, and Brock Commons, opened in the Summer of 2017.
The university has two colleges to accommodate graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and visiting scholars: St. John's College[128] and Green College.[129]
Brock Commons will be opening in 2017, it will be the tallest mass wood building in the World.[130]
Athletics[edit]




UBC's Doug Mitchell Thunderbird Sports Centre during the 2010 Winter Olympics


The University of British Columbia's sports teams are called the Thunderbirds. The Thunderbirds participate in the U Sports Canada West Universities Athletic Association for most varsity sports. However, several varsity teams at UBC compete in the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics. UBC is considering joining the NCAA Division II.[131][132] With a long history of competing in sports, the Thunderbirds have garnered a number of championships. In particular, the women swimmers who had represented UBC had brought back 22 conference championships and 16 national championships.[133]




Indoor climbing at the Student Union Building.


The University of British Columbia has a number of athletic facilities open to both their varsity teams as well as to their students. The stadium with the largest seating capacity at UBC is the Doug Mitchell Thunderbird Sports Centre. The Doug Mitchell Thunderbird Sports Centre is home to the varsity ice hockey teams and was also used as a venue for the 2010 Winter Olympics.[134] Other facilities at UBC includes Thunderbird Stadium, home to the university's football and soccer varsity teams, UBC Aquatic Centre, home to the university's swimming teams, the War Memorial Gymnasium, home to the university's basketball and volleyball varsity teams and Thunderbird Park, home to the university's many other outdoor varsity teams.[135]
The university has also had a long history of sending a number of students to represent their countries at the Olympics. Since having its first athlete sent to the Olympics in 1928, a total of 231 individuals from UBC have represented their respective countries at the Olympics. The total number of individual medals athletes from UBC had won was 61, with 19 gold, 21 silver and 24 bronze. The majority of these medals won had come from the sport of rowing.[136]
Marching band[edit]
UBC's marching band, the Thunderbird Marching Band, was founded in September 2012 and is entirely student-run. The band performs at various Thunderbirds football, basketball, rugby, and hockey games, as well as other campus events. It is the only university-level marching band in Western Canada.[137]
Fight song[edit]
Notable among a number of songs commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement and convocation, and athletic games are: "Hail, U.B.C" with words and music by Harold King and "High on Olympus" with words by D.C. Morton and music by J.C.F. Haeffner.[138]
Campus events[edit]




UBC Rose Garden.


A small number of large-scale, campus-wide events occur annually at UBC which are organized by university institutions, the AMS, and student constituencies of various faculties and departments. Additionally, a number of unofficial traditions exist at UBC: jumping from the Aquatic Centre's 10-metre diving board late at night and repainting the Engineering cairn so as to advertise other clubs.




The UBC Engineering Cairn, a chamfered tetrahedral concrete block with a large red "E" on each of its three sides, shown here in its unvandalised state. Painting the cairn is a favourite hobby of student clubs and rival faculties.


Several group athletic events take place at UBC every year. Storm the Wall is an intramural relay race put on by UBC Recreation in April, culminating in the climbing of a 12-foot (3.7 m) wall. Day of the Longboat is an intramural event put on at the end of September/early October by UBC Recreation. It is a major voyageur canoe race with teams competing in a 2 km paddle around the waters of Jericho Sailing Centre. The program is operated by over 120 volunteer students and staff who are responsible for operating every aspect of this program. UBC Recreation's student administrators fill various roles including event planning, sport officiating, public relations and building supervision.
Faculty constituencies, such as the Arts Undergraduate Society (AUS) and Science Undergraduate Society (SUS), hold events annually. Many of the major constituencies, such as for Arts, Science, and Engineering, hold their own faculty weeks to celebrate their faculties. The events may include keynote speeches, merchandise sales, and dances. Arts County Fair was an annual concert and party on the last day of classes in April, put on by the AUS and occurring at Thunderbird Stadium. Past headliners have included Sam Roberts, The New Pornographers, and Metric. Due to increasing financial difficulties (mostly resulting from mounting security and related costs) the AUS announced they would not continue the event in 2008. In its place, the Alma Mater Society of UBC hosted the AMS Block Party to celebrate the end of classes.
During the Spring exam season, the Ski & Board Club organizes the Undie Run, a charity event that encourages people to donate their clothes to the Big Brothers & Sisters organization in Vancouver. Students meet at the Student Union Building, remove the clothes they are going to donate, and then run around campus in their underwear. Students run through places like the Irvin K. Barber Centre and Place Vanier Residence before ending at the Martha Piper Plaza fountain.
To celebrate the beginning of classes, UBC Orientations organizes several events for first-year students, such as Imagine UBC, GALA, and UBC Jump Start. Imagine UBC is an orientation day and pep rally for first-year undergraduate students that replaces the first day of class after Labour Day at UBC Vancouver.[139]
Rape chant controversy[edit]
During the 2013 Imagine day, a post on Twitter showed first year students in the Sauder School of Business singing a chant that bragged about rape. The chant, dating back to at least 1993, had already created controversy at Saint Mary's University days earlier.[140] The Commerce Undergraduate Society stated that it had been trying to scale back the cheer by using it in buses but not outside. Four CUS leaders resigned over the incident and 81 others were required to perform an unspecified amount of community service by the UBC President, Stephen Toope.[141]
Model United Nations[edit]
In March 2012, UBC was the partner Host University of the Harvard World Model United Nations Conference (WorldMUN 2012 Vancouver). As the world's largest student-organized Model UN conference, this was also the largest student conference to have ever been organized by UBC and the largest student conference on Canadian soil.[142][143] There were 2,200 student delegates and nearly 200 faculty advisors from 270 universities from over 60 countries. The organizing committee amassed over 500 student volunteers from across the UBC campus and the local student community to execute the week-long event.
Notable people[edit]
Main article: List of University of British Columbia people
See also: List of Chancellors of the University of British Columbia and List of Presidents of the University of British Columbia







Justin Trudeau PC MP, BEd. 1998, Canada's 23rd and current Prime Minister of Canada









Kim Campbell PC CC OBC QC, BA 1969, Canada's 19th Prime Minister, and the first female to serve in the office









Robert Mundell CC, BA 1953, Nobel Laureate in Economics. Involved in the creation of the Euro









Bertram Brockhouse CC FRSC FRS, BA 1947, Nobel Laureate in Physics









George Volkoff OC MBE FRSC, MA 1936, predicted existence of neutron stars and collaborator of J. Robert Oppenheimer









William Gibson, BA 1977, author of Neuromancer, important figure in the Cyberpunk literary movement









Jeff Wall OC FRSC, MA 1970, prominent Canadian artist, and most prominent figure of the Vancouver School









David Suzuki CC OBC , Professor Emeritus of Genetics. Influential academic, broadcaster, and environmentalist.









Beverley McLachlin PC, 17th and current Chief Justice of Canada.









Bjarni Tryggvason B.ASc 1972, Icelandic-Canadian astronaut and academic who participated in NASA mission STS-85.




Throughout UBC's history, faculty, alumni, and former students have played prominent roles in many different fields. Many UBC alumni and faculty have gone on to win awards including seven Nobel Prizes and 67 Rhodes Scholarships.[7][144]
Former alumni have won Nobel Prizes: Robert Mundell (Economic Sciences) who graduated from the UBC Department of Economics and Bertram Brockhouse (Physics).[145][146] Five former faculty members of the UBC have also received a Nobel Prize: Michael Smith (Chemistry), Har Gobind Khorana (Physiology or Medicine), Daniel Kahneman (Economics), Hans G. Dehmelt (Physics), and Carl Wieman (Physics).[147][148][149][150]
Many former students have gained local and national prominence in government. The university has produced three Canadian Prime Ministers: Kim Campbell, Justin Trudeau and John Turner.[151][152] The leader of the Liberal Party of Canada, Member of Parliament and the 23rd Prime Minister of Canada Justin Trudeau completed his BEd. at UBC in 1998.[153] Canadian Prime Minister Joe Clark briefly attended UBC law.[154] George Stanley, the Lieutenant Governor of New Brunswick and creator of the Canadian flag had also served as faculty.[155] Alumni Mike Harcourt, Glen Clark and Ujjal Dosanjh have been Premiers of British Columbia:,[156][157][158] People of UBC Law have also served on the Supreme Court of Canada: former faculty member Beverley McLachlin and alumnus Frank Iacobucci.[159][160] Other examples are

Canadian academic, science broadcaster and environmental activist David Suzuki was a professor in UBC's genetics department from 1963 until his retirement in 2001.
Joel Bakan, author of The Corporation: The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and Power is a professor at the faculty of law.
Psychologist Albert Bandura is an alumnus of UBC.
Actress Evangeline Lilly attended UBC and earned her degree in International Relations.
Singer/songwriter Dan Mangan attended UBC, earning a BA in English Literature.[161]
Author and historian Pierre Berton majored in history at UBC.
Man-in-Motion Rick Hansen was the first student with a physical disability to graduate in physical education from UBC.
Opera singers Judith Forst, Ben Heppner and Lance Ryan studied music at UBC.
David Cheriton, who graduated from UBC in 1973 is a Google founding investor and computer science professor at Stanford University.[162]
Science fiction writer William Gibson, who coined the term "cyberspace", earned his bachelor's degree in English at UBC.[163]

UBC alumni have also held important positions in the academia. Notable examples are:

Indira Samarasekera, twelfth president of the University of Alberta;[164]
Amit Chakma, president of the University of Western Ontario;[165]
Muriel Kennett Wales, believed to have been the first Irish-born woman to earn a PhD in pure mathematics.
John H. McArthur, dean emeritus of the Harvard Business School;[166]
Thomas Franck (lawyer), who was the Murry and Ida Becker Professor of Law at New York University and former Editor-in-Chief of the American Journal of International Law;[167]
David H. Turpin, sixth president of the University of Victoria and thirteenth president of the University of Alberta;[168]
Nemkumar Banthia, a fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and CEO of IC-IMPACTS.[169]
Michiel Horn, member of the Royal Society of Canada and professor emeritus of history at York University;[170]
Monica Lam, a computer science professor at Stanford University and founder of Moka5;[171]
Frank Iacobucci, a Puisne Justice on the Supreme Court of Canada

See also[edit]


British Columbia portal
University portal
Vancouver portal



CITR
UBC Botanical Garden and Centre for Plant Research
UBC Library
UBC Okanagan
List of Canadian universities by endowment


References[edit]


^ "U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2016 Endowment Market Value and Change* in Endowment Market Value from FY2015 to FY2016" (PDF). NACUBO.org. Retrieved 25 March 2017. 
^ "UBC Facts and Figures". UBC News. Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ a b c d e f "UBC Overview and Facts". Retrieved 10 August 2017. 
^ "UBC's Colours: Blue & Gold". University of British Columbia. Retrieved November 17, 2012. 
^ UBC Facts and Figures Archived April 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. Publicaffairs.ubc.ca. Retrieved on 2014-07-14.
^ [1][permanent dead link]
^ a b c "UBC Facts & Figures (2009/2010)". University of British Columbia. Retrieved 18 April 2012. 
^ a b Dehaas, Josh. "Average entering grade now 85%". Macleans.ca. Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-08-04. Retrieved 2016-02-17. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-10-31. Retrieved 2016-02-17. 
^ "UBC alumnus Justin Trudeau sworn in as Canada's 23rd prime minister". UBC News. Retrieved 14 Dec 2015. 
^ "Library Facts and Figures". UBC library. Retrieved 14 December 2015. 
^ "UBC Library hits all-time high in ARL rankings". UBC library. Retrieved 14 December 2015. 
^ "Schulich Leader Scholarships". Undergraduate Programs and Admissions. Retrieved 14 December 2015. 
^ "International Leader of Tomorrow Award". Undergraduate Programs and Admissions. Retrieved 14 December 2015. 
^ "Donald A. Wehrung International Student Award". Undergraduate Programs and Admissions. Retrieved 14 December 2015. 
^ "THE COLLECTIONS". MOA Press Office. Retrieved 14 December 2015. 
^ "THE COLLECTIONS". Beaty Biodiversity Museum. Retrieved 14 December 2015. 
^ "University Act of 1908" (PDF). Retrieved January 20, 2013. 
^ a b c d e "The Canadian Encyclopedia". Thecanadianencyclopedia.com. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ Boyles, C.H. (April 1913). "New University Buildings, Province of British Columbia". Construction. Toronto. 6 (4): 105–9. 
^ "Henry Marshall Tory, A Biography", originally published 1954, current edition January 1992, E.A. Corbett, Toronto: Ryerson Press, ISBN 0-88864-250-4
^ Faculty of Land and Food Systems Historical Overview Archived August 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "University of British Columbia Library - University Archives". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ Williams, M. Y. (Winter 1966). "The Grand Campus Washout" (PDF). UBC Alumni Chronicle. 20 (4): 9–11.  Includes several contemporary photos of the Washout.
^ War Memorial gymnasium Archived May 14, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b Pound, Richard W. (2005). Fitzhenry and Whiteside Book of Canadian Facts and Dates. Fitzhenry & Whiteside. 
^ Tuttle, Dean; Tuttle, Naomi (2011). "Sally Rogow". APH. Louisville, Kentucky: American Printing House for the Blind. Archived from the original on 21 August 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2017. 
^ "UBC Library History". University of British Columbia. July 26, 2005. Retrieved January 25, 2009. 
^ The 4440, locations Archived January 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., IMDb
^ Kyle XY filming locations — Movie Maps Archived September 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. Moviemaps.org. Retrieved on 2014-04-12.
^ Colonial Day, locations Archived March 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., IMDb
^ "UBC Okanagan campus website". 
^ The University of British Columbia. "Page cannot be found (Error 404)". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ a b "UBC Library 2014-2015 Report to Senate". UBC Library. Retrieved September 16, 2016. 
^ "2014-2015 Report of UBC Library to the Senate". University of British Columbia Library. 2015. Retrieved September 16, 2016. 
^ "UBC Opens $79.7M Irving K. Barber Learning Centre" (Press release). UBC Public Affairs. April 11, 2008. Retrieved January 19, 2014. 
^ "Iconic Videomatica film collection available at UBC and SFU" (Press release). UBC Public Affairs. January 27, 2014. Retrieved May 18, 2015. 
^ "Uno Langmann Collection - UBC Library Collections". collections.library.ubc.ca. 
^ "UBC Library acquires a copy of the Kelmscott Chaucer". About UBC Library. 2016-08-23. Retrieved 2016-09-16. 
^ Morris and Helen Belkin Art Gallery[permanent dead link]
^ "University Act". Laws of British Columbia. Queen's Printer. August 5, 2009. Retrieved August 18, 2009. 
^ "Faculties & Schools". University of British Columbia. Retrieved October 20, 2009. 
^ "Education". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ "UBC 10 Year Finance Plan" (PDF). VP Finance, University of British Columbia. September 2011. Retrieved 28 February 2015. 
^ Last Words: November 14, 2011 edition | The Ubyssey | The Ubyssey, UBC's official student newspaper Archived March 30, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. Ubyssey.ca (2011-11-15). Retrieved on 2014-04-12.
^ "ECONomics update" (PDF). Vancouver School of Economics at University of British Columbia. 2011. Retrieved 28 February 2015. 
^ "UBC Vantage College website". 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-04-17. Retrieved 2015-11-18. 
^ Farrar, David H. "2013 Annual Report on Enrolment: Vancouver Campus" (PDF). UBC Planning and Institutional Research. UBC Vancouver. Retrieved 16 February 2015. 
^ Wong, Jennifer A. (25 November 2013). "University of British Columbia Credit Analysis" (PDF). Moody's Investment Service. Retrieved 15 February 2015. 
^ "UBC Vancouver Campus Fact Sheet" (PDF). UBC Planning and Institutional Research. UBC Vancouver. Retrieved 16 February 2015. 
^ a b "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017 - Canada". ShanghaiRanking Consultancy. 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. 
^ a b "QS World University Rankings - 2018". QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. 
^ a b "World University Rankings 2018". Times Higher Education. 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2017. 
^ "Top Universities by Reputation 2016". Times Higher Education. 2016. Retrieved 30 September 2015. 
^ "The Global University Employability Ranking 2017". Times Higher Education. 2017. Retrieved 21 November 2017. 
^ a b "Best Global Universities in Canada". www.usnews.com. U.S. News & World Report. October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. 
^ "University Rankings 2018: Canada's top Medical/Doctoral schools". Maclean's. 11 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. 
^ "Canada's Top School by Reputation 2018: University of Toronto". Maclean's. 11 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. 
^ "Introducing the 2015 Maclean's University Rankings". Oncampus.macleans.ca. 2014-10-30. Retrieved 2014-10-31. 
^ "QS World University Rankings® 2014/15". Top Universities. 2014-09-11. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "Top World University Rankings". US News. 2014-10-28. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "World University Rankings 2014-15: North America". Times Higher Education. 2015. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2016 - Canada". ShanghaiRanking Consultancy. 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2016. 
^ "CWUR 2014 - Top Universities in Canada". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ "College Rankings". Newsweek. 2011. Archived from the original on October 12, 2011. 
^ "URAP - University Ranking by Academic Performance". Urapcenter.org. Retrieved 2013-09-05. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-10-19. Retrieved 2016-03-22. 
^ "Subject Ranking 2014-15: Social Sciences". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ "University of British Columbia - Academic Ranking of World Universities - 2014 - Shanghai Ranking - 2014". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ "The 2012 Maclean's Law School Rankings". Maclean's. Rogers Publishing Limited. 7 September 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2012. 
^ "University Rankings". Top Universities. 2012. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "Business School Rankings University of British Columbia". The Financial Times Ltd. Retrieved 25 September 2013. 
^ "North America MBA rating". QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2012. 
^ "Universitas 21 Member List". Universitas 21. Retrieved February 2, 2010. 
^ "Association of Pacific Rim Universities Member List". Association of Pacific Rim Universities. Retrieved June 10, 2011. 
^ "Canada's Top 50 Research Universities 2012" (PDF). Research Infosource. 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2013. 
^ "2010 World University Rankings". High Impact Universities. 2010. Archived from the original on 11 July 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2012. 
^ "Canada". Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan. Archived from the original on 14 July 2012. Retrieved 27 October 2011. 
^ "Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre". University of British Columbia. Retrieved 18 April 2012. 
^ "TRIUMF". University of British Columbia. Retrieved 18 April 2012. 
^ a b c "8th Annual Knight Schools Results". Corporate Knights Inc. 27 September 2011. Retrieved 19 April 2012. 
^ a b c "Learning teaching in the sustainability classroom". Ecological Economics. Elsevier. 64: 521–533. 23 October 2007. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2007.09.007. 
^ a b "The Building". Retrieved 2 February 2013. 
^ a b "The Evolution of Sustainable Development in Canada An Assessment of Three Federal Natural Resource Management Agencies" (PDF). Wiley Interscience. 20 September 2006. Retrieved 5 February 2013. 
^ "The building that's beyond green". The Globe and Mail. 20 April 2012. Retrieved 5 February 2012. 
^ "CIRS Overview with Dr. John Robinson". 8 November 2010. Retrieved 6 February 2013. 
^ "David Suzuki at UBC Celebrating CIRS". 1 December 2011. Retrieved 6 February 2013. 
^ a b c "UBC Student Nest: 27 New Photos of the new AMS Student Union Building". Vancity Buzz. June 3, 2015. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ ". The University of Winnipeg" (PDF). Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "First Nations and Indigenous Studies". 
^ "UBC: What It Costs". You.ubc.ca. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "Tuition and fees". UBC Student Services. Archived from the original on 2013-05-21. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ [2] Archived August 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Tuition fees - Courses & Registration". 24 May 2010. Archived from the original on 24 May 2010. 
^ Premier of British Columbia (February 8, 2005). "British Columbia to limit tuition increases". Retrieved September 3, 2007. 
^ Stats Canada (September 1, 2006). "The Daily". Archived from the original on August 23, 2007. Retrieved September 3, 2007. 
^ "Board of Governor passes 10% increase to international tuition". 
^ "International tuition increases of 46.8% over the next three years announced". 
^ Master's tuition fee[permanent dead link]
^ Doctoral tuition fee[permanent dead link]
^ "International Tuition Award". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ [3] Archived May 24, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Open Letter to the UBC Vancouver Community". Office of the Associate Vice President, University of British Columbia Campus and Community Planning. October 28, 2009. Retrieved January 26, 2010. 
^ The University of British Columbia. UBC Bookstore: About Us Archived April 28, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved on: December 9, 2011.
^ "Unit Awards By Division". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ "Sigma Chi UBC". 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2015. 
^ "Home – Gamma Omicron Chapter of Beta Theta Pi". Betaubc.ca. Retrieved October 13, 2008. 
^ "Get involved". UBC Sororities. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "Sigma Phi Delta - Active Chapters". Retrieved 24 April 2015. 
^ "Alpha Omega Epsilon Chapters & Colonies". Retrieved 24 April 2015. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-10-05. Retrieved 2016-07-19. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2016-08-22. Retrieved 2016-07-19. 
^ "Top 10". AskMen. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "UBC 2013-14 Financial Summary". UBC 2013-14 Annual Report. University of British Columbia. Retrieved 7 November 2014. 
^ "Electoral Area A - Metro Vancouver". Metro Vancouver. Retrieved 24 October 2014. 
^ "Information for Voters". Maria Harris, Director of Electoral Area A. Retrieved 24 October 2014. 
^ "Residential Tenancy Act, Section 4(b)". BC Laws. Retrieved 24 October 2014. 
^ "UBC 2009 Housing Study" (PDF). UBC Planning. Retrieved 24 October 2014. 
^ "Financial Results Summary". UBC 2013-14 Annual Report. University of British Columbia. Retrieved 7 November 2014. 
^ "5 Year Student Bed Averages" (PDF). UBC 2012-13 Annual Report. University of British Columbia. Retrieved 7 November 2014. 
^ McDonald, Will. "Student residence costs to increase by 20 per cent in 2015". The Ubyssey. The Ubyssey. Retrieved 24 October 2014. 
^ [4] Archived April 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "həm'ləsəm'". Housing.ubc.ca. Retrieved 2012-06-18. 
^ [5] Archived May 17, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "UBC Student Family Residence". UBC Housing. Retrieved 24 October 2014. 
^ Stacy. "St. John's College UBC". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ "Graduate Residential College - Green College UBC". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 
^ Chan, Kenneth (February 18, 2016). "Design revealed: 18-storey UBC residence to be world's tallest wooden building". Van City Buzz. Retrieved 12 June 2016. 
^ "UBC expects visit by NCAA". Canada.com. Retrieved October 6, 2008. 
^ "NCAA Division II Consultation". University of British Columbia. Retrieved October 19, 2008. 
^ "Championships". UBC Thunderbirds. University of British Columbia. Retrieved April 14, 2011. 
^ "Doug Mitchell Thunderbird Sports Centre". UBC Thunderbirds. University of British Columbia. Retrieved April 14, 2011. 
^ "Varsity Sports Venues". UBC Thunderbirds. University of British Columbia. Retrieved April 14, 2011. 
^ "Olympic Athletes". UBC Thunderbirds. University of British Columbia. Retrieved April 14, 2011. 
^ "About Us". Thunderbird Marching Band. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "Fight Songs". The Canadian Encyclopedia. Retrieved October 20, 2009. [dead link]
^ "Orient yourself to campus life". UBC Student Services. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "UBC Frosh Students Sing Pro-Rape Chant". The Huffington Post. 2013-09-07. Retrieved 2014-09-03. 
^ "UBC promises 'lasting change' following rape chant". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 2013-09-18. Retrieved 2014-09-03. 
^ "Vancouver, Canada - Proud Host City of WorldMUN 2012". Vancouver2012.org. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "Vancouver, Canada - Proud Host City of WorldMUN 2012 - About Worldmun". Vancouver2012.org. Retrieved 2015-02-28. 
^ "UBC's two new Rhodes Scholars to focus on global water crisis, health care". The University of British Columbia. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "SIPA Faculty Member – Robert Alexander Murdell". Columbia University. 2005. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "Bertram N. Brockhouse – Autobiography". Nobel Media AB. 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "Michael Smith – Autobiography". Nobel Media AB. 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "H. Gobind Khorana – Autobiography". Nobel Media AB. 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "Hans G. Dehmelt – Autobiography". Nobelprize.org. Retrieved 2012-06-18. 
^ "Carl Wieman Science Education Initiative". The University of British Columbia. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "John Turner". UBC Sports Hall of Fame. University of British Columbia. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved February 21, 2011. 
^ Campbell, Kim (1996). "Time And Chance": 17–23. 
^ "Justin Trudeau". The Canadian Encyclopedia. Historica Foundation. April 23, 2013. Retrieved December 17, 2014. 
^ "Biography". Library and Archives Canada. Library and Archives Canada. January 29, 2002. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ Boswell, Randy (September 14, 2002). "Maple Leaf flag creator George Stanley dies". The Ottawa Citizen. Postmedia Network Inc. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "Alumni Achievement Awards – 2008 Recipients". UBC Alumni Affairs. University of British Columbia. 2009. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "36th Parliament Members at dissolution on April 18, 2001". Legislative Assembly of British Columbia. October 31, 2002. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "Ujjal Dosanjh, QC". International Legal Aid Conference. June 11, 1999. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "The Right Honourable Beverley McLachlin, P.C., Chief Justice of Canada". Supreme Court of Canada. January 18, 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "Frank Iacobucci, BCom '61, LLB '62, LLD '69". 2009. Retrieved April 30, 2011. 
^ "LISTEN: Dan Mangan's eight-song mixtape for ArtistMixtapes.com | Chart Attack". Chart Attack. 2011-11-30. Retrieved 2017-01-07. 
^ "David Cheriton". Forbes Magazine. December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. 
^ "UBC Alumni: The First Cyberpunk". UBC Reports. March 4, 2004. Retrieved April 25, 2015. 
^ "President Biography: Indira V. Samarasekera". 
^ "President's Biography: Amit Chakma, President & Vice-Chancellor". 
^ "John H. McArthur". 
^ "Thomas Franck, Who Advised Countries on Law, Dies at 77". 
^ "President-Elect Biography: David H. Turpin". 
^ 5, Media Release | November; 2011 (2011-11-05). "UBC faculty elected Royal Society of Canada Fellows". UBC News. Retrieved 2017-07-20. 
^ "Michiel Horn". 
^ "Monica S. Lam". 


Further reading[edit]

William A. Bruneau, A Matter of Identities: A History of the UBC Faculty Association, 1920–1990. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Faculty Association, 1990.
Bruneau, William A. (1994). "Toward a New Collective Biography: The University of British Columbia Professoriate, 1915–1945". Canadian Journal of Education. 19 (1): 65–79. JSTOR 1495307. 
Eric Damer and Herbert Rosengarten. "UBC: The First 100 Years." Vancouver: Friesens, 2009.
Michiel Horn."Under the Gaze of George Vancouver: The University of British Columbia and the Provincial Government, 1913–1939." BC Studies 83 (Autumn 1989).
William C. Gibson Wesbrook & His University (Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press)
H.T. Logan, Tuum Est: A History of the University of British Columbia. Vancouver: University of British Columbia, 1958.
Wayne Skene. "UBC: a Portrait." Vancouver: Tribute Books, 2003.
Lee Stewart. "It's Up to You": Women at UBC in the Early Years. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1990.
George Woodcock & Tim Fitzharris. The University of British Columbia – A Souvenir. (Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1986).

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to University of British Columbia.



Official website
UBC Photograph Collection – A visual record of UBC’s growth and development, from UBC Library Digital Collections







v
t
e


University of British Columbia



Campuses



Point Grey
Okanagan
Robson Square





Academics



Faculties and Schools
Law
Interdisciplinary Studies
Liu Institute for Global Issues
Medicine
UBC Sauder School of Business
School of Library, Archival and Information Studies
Green College
St. John's College
Vantage College
Peter Wall Institute for Advanced Studies
Faculty of Land and Food Systems
University of British Columbia Press
Institute of Asian Research
Vancouver School of Economics





Libraries



Library
Asian Centre
Irving K. Barber Learning Centre
Walter C. Koerner Library
Xwi7xwa Library





Student life



Alma Mater Society
Engineering Undergraduate Society
CITR-FM Radio
UBC Thunderbirds
UBC Okanagan Heat
Shrum Bowl
The Ubyssey





Affiliated



Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre
British Columbia's Children's Hospital
Carey Theological College
Corpus Christi College (Vancouver)
UBC Farm
UBC Fisheries Centre
Kelowna General Hospital
Providence Health Care
Regent College
Royal Columbian Hospital
St. Mark's College
St. Paul's Hospital
Surrey Memorial Hospital
UBC Press
TRIUMF
GNWC
Vancouver General Hospital
Vancouver Hospital and Health Sciences Centre
Vancouver School of Theology





Museums and attractions



Museum of Anthropology
Nitobe Memorial Garden
Botanical Garden
Chan Centre for the Performing Arts
Morris and Helen Belkin Art Gallery





Facilities



UBC War Memorial Gymnasium
Alex Fraser Research Forest
Doug Mitchell Thunderbird Sports Centre
Malcolm Knapp Research Forest





People



UBC people
UBC Chancellors
UBC Presidents












v
t
e


Regent College



Presidents



James M. Houston
Carl E. Armerding
Walter Wright, Jr
Rod Wilson
Jeffrey P. Greenman





Faculty




Founding









Former



Gordon D. Fee
Maxine Hancock
J. I. Packer
Eugene Peterson
Charles R. Ringma
Dal Schindell
Sven K. Soderlund
R. Paul Stevens
John B. Toews
Bruce Waltke
Loren Wilkinson





Present



Hans Boersma
Ross Hastings
Bruce Hindmarsh
Donald M. Lewis
V. Philips Long
Iain Provan
Paul Spilsbury
Rikk Watts








Publications



Crux





Related




Institution



University of British Columbia





Seminary



Vancouver School of Theology















v
t
e


Universities and Colleges in British Columbia



Public universities



British Columbia
Capilano
Emily Carr of Art and Design
Fraser Valley
Kwantlen Polytechnic
Northern British Columbia
Royal Roads
Simon Fraser
Thompson Rivers
Vancouver Island
Victoria








Private universities



Adler
Canada West
Fairleigh Dickinson
Quest
Trinity Western





Public colleges



Camosun
Douglas
Educacentre
Langara
New Caledonia
Northwest Community
North Island
Northern Lights
Okanagan
Rockies
Selkirk
Vancouver Community





Private colleges



Canadian
Columbia
Columbia Bible
Coquitlam
Hanson International
Native Education
Sprott-Shaw Community
Summit Pacific
The War





Institutes



British Columbia Institute of Technology
Justice Institute of British Columbia
Nicola Valley Institute of Technology












v
t
e


U15 universities






Alberta
UBC
Calgary
Dalhousie
Laval
Manitoba
McGill
McMaster
Montréal
Ottawa
Queen's
Saskatchewan
Toronto
Waterloo
Western Ontario












v
t
e


Association of Pacific Rim Universities






Australia
Australian National
Melbourne
Sydney
UNSW
Canada
British Columbia
Chile
Chile
China
Fudan
Nanjing
Peking
Tsinghua
USTC
Zhejiang
Hong Kong
HKU
HKUST
Indonesia
Indonesia
Japan
Keio
Kyoto
Osaka
Tohoku
Tokyo
Waseda
Malaysia
Malaya
Mexico
Monterrey Institute of Technology
UNAM
New Zealand
Auckland
Philippines
Philippines

Baguio
Cebu
Diliman
Los Baños
Manila
Mindanao
Open University
Visayas




Russia
Far Eastern Federal (FEFU)
Singapore
NUS
South Korea
Seoul National
Korea
Yonsei
Taiwan
National Taiwan
Thailand
Chulalongkorn
USA
Caltech
Stanford
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Oregon
USC
Washington












v
t
e


Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning








Southeast Asia







Brunei



Universiti Brunei Darussalam





Cambodia



Build Bright University, Phnom Penh
International University, Cambodia





Indonesia



Airlangga University
Andalas University
Bandung Institute of Technology
Bogor Agricultural University
University of Brawijaya
Cenderawasih University
Diponegoro University
Gadjah Mada University
Hasanuddin University
Indonesia University of Education
IKIP Padang
Syarif Hidayatullah State Islamic University Jakarta
Jember University
Lampung University
Manado State University
Muhammadiyah University of Magelang
Padjadjaran University
Riau University
Sebelas Maret University
Sriwijaya University
State Institute for Islamic Studies North Sumatera
State University of Semarang
STIE Perbanas Surabaya
Surabaya State University
Tadulako University
Tanjungpura University
Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology
Udayana University
Universitas Islam Negeri Alauddin Makassar
Universitas Merdeka Malang
Yogyakarta State University
University of Bengkulu
University of Indonesia
University of North Sumatra





Malaysia



INTI International University
International Islamic University Malaysia
Multimedia University
National University of Malaysia
Taylor's University
Universiti Malaysia Perlis
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak
Universiti Malaysia Sabah
Universiti Malaysia Terengganu
Universiti Putra Malaysia
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
Universiti Teknologi Petronas
Universiti Tenaga Nasional
Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka
Universiti Utara Malaysia
Universiti Tun Abdul Razak
University of Malaya





Myanmar



University of Yangon





Philippines



Adamson University
Baliuag University
Benguet State University
Bicol University
Central Colleges of the Philippines
Centro Escolar University
De La Salle University
De La Salle University – Dasmariñas
Emilio Aguinaldo College
Eulogio "Amang" Rodriguez Institute of Science and Technology
Far Eastern University
José Rizal University
La Consolacion College Manila
La Consolacion College–Bacolod
La Consolacion University Philippines
Lyceum of the Philippines University
Mindanao State University
National University
Philippine Normal University
Philippine Women's University
Polytechnic University of the Philippines
Rizal Technological University
Saint Louis University
Saint Mary's College of Quezon City
St. Paul University Quezon City
St. Scholastica's College, Manila
San Beda College
San Sebastian College – Recoletos de Manila
Technological Institute of the Philippines
Technological University of the Philippines
University of Batangas
University of Iloilo
University of Manila
University of Perpetual Help System DALTA
University of Santo Tomas
University of the City of Manila
University of the East
University of the Philippines





Singapore



Nanyang Technological University
National University of Singapore





Thailand



Asian Institute of Technology
Assumption University
Bangkok University
Burapha University
Chiang Mai University
Chulalongkorn University
Dhurakij Pundit University
Hatyai University
Kasem Bundit University
Kasetsart University
Khon Kaen University
King Mongkut's University of Technology North Bangkok
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi
Maejo University
Mahasarakham University
Mahidol University
Mae Fah Luang University
Naresuan University
Nakhon Phanom University
National Institute of Development Administration
Payap University
Prince of Songkla University
Ramkhamhaeng University
Rangsit University
Siam University
Silpakorn University
Srinakharinwirot University
Sripatum University
Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University
Suranaree University of Technology
Thaksin University
Thammasat University
University of the Thai Chamber of Commerce
Ubon Ratchathani University
Walailak University





Vietnam



Vietnam National University, Hanoi
















South Asia







India



Karnatak Lingayat Education Society





Iran



Islamic Azad University





Sri Lanka



University of Colombo
University of Kelaniya
















East Asia







Hong Kong



Chinese University of Hong Kong
City University of Hong Kong
Lingnan University
Hong Kong Baptist University
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong Shue Yan University
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
University of Hong Kong





Japan



Keio University
Kyoto University
Sōka University
University of the Ryukyus





Republic of China
(Taiwan)



National Taiwan University
















Oceania







Australia



Australian National University
Curtin University
Deakin University
Edith Cowan University
Griffith University
Macquarie University
Monash University
RMIT University
Swinburne University of Technology
University of Western Australia
University of Adelaide
University of Canberra
University of Queensland
University of Southern Queensland
University of Sydney
University of Tasmania
University of Technology, Sydney
University of Wollongong





New Zealand



Auckland University of Technology
Lincoln University
Massey University
University of Otago
University of Waikato
















Europe







Belgium



Groep T





France



Montpellier 2 University





Sweden



Lund University
















North America







Canada



Carleton University
University of British Columbia





United States



Baylor University
California State University, Long Beach
Kansas State University
Keuka College
Pittsburg State University
University of Hawaii at Manoa
University of Maryland University College


















v
t
e


Universitas 21



Asia



Delhi
Fudan
Hong Kong (HKU)
Korea
NUS
Shanghai Jiao Tong
Waseda





Europe



Amsterdam
Birmingham
Dublin (UCD)
Edinburgh
Glasgow
Lund
Nottingham





North America



British Columbia
Connecticut
Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education
Maryland
McGill
Ohio State
Virginia





Oceania



Auckland
Melbourne
New South Wales (UNSW)
Queensland





South America



Pontifical Catholic University of Chile





Africa



Johannesburg












v
t
e


Shad Valley host campuses



Current



British Columbia
Calgary
Carleton
Dalhousie
Lakehead
Laval
McMaster
Memorial
New Brunswick
Queen's
Saskatchewan
Waterloo





Former



Acadia
Bark Lake/Trent
Manitoba
Queen's ISC
St. Andrew's
Sherbrooke
Strathclyde
Trent












v
t
e


Port-City University League






Brazil
USP
Canada
UBC
China
DUT
SJTU
Egypt
Alexandria
India
IIT Madras
Japan
YCU
YNU
Portugal
ULisboa
Saudi Arabia
KAU
South Korea
INU
PNU
Turkey
ITU
United Kingdom
Southampton
Vietnam
HCMUT










Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 134507210
ISNI: 0000 0001 2288 9830
GND: 1010835-X
SUDOC: 028326792
BNF: cb120185348 (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_British_Columbia&oldid=818491415"					Categories: 1890 establishments in British ColumbiaEducational institutions established in 1890Educational institutions established in 1915Gothic Revival architecture in VancouverUniversities and colleges in British ColumbiaUniversities in British ColumbiaUniversity of British ColumbiaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2017Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing Latin-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxInstances of Infobox university using image sizeAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2016Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers