

Universal Declaration of Human Rights




Eleanor Roosevelt with the Spanish language version of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.




Created
1948


Ratified
10 December 1948


Location
Palais de Chaillot, Paris


Author(s)
Draft Committee[a]


Purpose
Human rights




Poster



The human rights adopted by the United Nations General Assembly of its 183rd meeting, held in Paris on 10 December, 1948





Rights


Theoretical distinctions





Claim rights and liberty rights
Individual and group rights
Natural and legal rights
Negative and positive rights





Human rights





Civil and political
Economic, social and cultural
Three generations





Rights by beneficiary





Animals
Authors
Children
Consumers
Creditors
Elders
Fathers
Fetuses
Gun owners
Humans
Natives
Intersex
Kings
LGBT
Men
Minorities
Mothers
Patients
Plants
Prisoners
Students
Victims
Women
Workers
Youth
Disabled persons





Other groups of rights





Civil liberties
Digital
Linguistic
Property
Reproductive
Self-determination of people
Water and sanitation








v
t
e





The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is an historic document that was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its third session on 10 December 1948 as Resolution 217 at the Palais de Chaillot in Paris, France. Of the then 58 members of the United Nations, 48 voted in favor, none against, eight abstained, and two did not vote.
The Declaration consists of 30 articles affirming an individual's rights which, although not legally binding in themselves, have been elaborated in subsequent international treaties, economic transfers, regional human rights instruments, national constitutions, and other laws. The Declaration was the first step in the process of formulating the International Bill of Human Rights, which was completed in 1966, and came into force in 1976, after a sufficient number of countries had ratified them.
Some legal scholars have argued that because countries have constantly invoked the Declaration over more than 50 years, it has become binding as a part of customary international law.[1][2] However, in the United States, the Supreme Court in Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain (2004), concluded that the Declaration "does not of its own force impose obligations as a matter of international law."[3] Courts of other countries have also concluded that the Declaration is not in itself part of domestic law.



Contents


1 Structure and content
2 History

2.1 Background
2.2 Creation and drafting
2.3 Adoption


3 International Human Rights Day
4 Significance and legal effect

4.1 Significance
4.2 Legal effect


5 Reaction

5.1 Praise
5.2 Criticism

5.2.1 Islamic countries
5.2.2 "The Right to Refuse to Kill"
5.2.3 American Anthropological Association
5.2.4 Bangkok Declaration




6 Organizations promoting the UDHR

6.1 International Federation for Human Rights
6.2 Amnesty International
6.3 Unitarian Universalist Service Committee
6.4 Quaker United Nations Office and American Friends Service Committee
6.5 American Library Association
6.6 Youth for Human Rights International


7 See also
8 Notes
9 References

9.1 Citations
9.2 Sources


10 Further reading
11 External links

11.1 Audiovisual materials





Structure and content[edit]
The underlying structure of the Universal Declaration was introduced in its second draft, which was prepared by René Cassin. Cassin worked from a first draft, which was prepared by John Peters Humphrey. The structure was influenced by the Code Napoléon, including a preamble and introductory general principles.[4] Cassin compared the Declaration to the portico of a Greek temple, with a foundation, steps, four columns, and a pediment.



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Universal Declaration of Human Rights



The Declaration consists of a preamble and thirty articles:

The preamble sets out the historical and social causes that led to the necessity of drafting the Declaration.
Articles 1—2 established the basic concepts of dignity, liberty, equality, and brotherhood.
Articles 3—11 established other individual rights, such as the right to life and the prohibition of slavery.
Articles 6—11 refer to the fundamental legality of human rights with specific remedies cited for their defence when violated.
Articles 12–17 established the rights of the individual towards the community (including such things as freedom of movement).
Articles 18–21 sanctioned the so-called "constitutional liberties", and with spiritual, public, and political freedoms, such as freedom of thought, opinion, religion and conscience, word, and peaceful association of the individual.
Articles 22–27 sanctioned an individual's economic, social and cultural rights, including healthcare. Article 25 states: "Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services." It also makes additional accommodations for security in case of physical debilitation or disability, and makes special mention of care given to those in motherhood or childhood.[5]
Articles 28—30 established the general ways of using these rights, the areas in which these rights of the individual can not be applied, and that they can not be overcome against the individual.

These articles are concerned with the duty of the individual to society and the prohibition of use of rights in contravention of the purposes of the United Nations Organisation.[6]
History[edit]
Background[edit]





State of the Union (Four Freedoms) (6 January 1941)





Franklin Delano Roosevelt's 6 January 1941 State of the Union address introducing the theme of the Four Freedoms (starting at 32:02)






Problems playing this file? See media help.


Main article: History of human rights
During World War II, the Allies adopted the Four Freedoms—freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom from fear, and freedom from want—as their basic war aims. The United Nations Charter "reaffirmed faith in fundamental human rights, and dignity and worth of the human person" and committed all member states to promote "universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion".[7]
When the racist atrocities committed by Nazi Germany became fully apparent after World War II, the consensus within the world community was that the United Nations Charter did not sufficiently define the rights to which it referred.[8][9] A universal declaration that specified the rights of individuals was necessary to give effect to the Charter's provisions on human rights.[10]
Creation and drafting[edit]
Main article: Drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
In June 1946, the UN Economic and Social Council established the Commission on Human Rights, comprising 18 members from various nationalities and political backgrounds. The Commission, a standing body of the United Nations, was constituted to undertake the work of preparing what was initially conceived as an International Bill of Rights.[11]
The Commission established a special Universal Declaration of Human Rights Drafting Committee, chaired by Eleanor Roosevelt, to write the articles of the Declaration. The Committee met in two sessions over the course of two years.
Canadian John Peters Humphrey, Director of the Division of Human Rights within the United Nations Secretariat, was called upon by the United Nations Secretary-General to work on the project and became the Declaration's principal drafter.[12] At the time, Humphrey was newly appointed as Director of the Division of Human Rights within the United Nations Secretariat.[13]
Other well-known members of the drafting committee included René Cassin of France, Charles Malik of Lebanon, P. C. Chang of the Republic of China (Taiwan).[14] Humphrey provided the initial draft which became the working text of the Commission.
According to Allan Carlson, the Declaration's pro-family phrases were the result of the Christian Democratic movement's influence on Cassin and Malik.[15]
Once the Committee finished its work in May 1948, the draft was further discussed by the Commission on Human Rights, the Economic and Social Council, the Third Committee of the General Assembly before being put to vote in December 1948. During these discussions many amendments and propositions were made by UN Member States.[16]
British representatives were extremely frustrated that the proposal had moral but no legal obligation.[17] (It was not until 1976 that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights came into force, giving a legal status to most of the Declaration.)
Adoption[edit]
The Universal Declaration was adopted by the General Assembly as Resolution 217 on 10 December 1948. Of the then 58 members of the United Nations, 48 voted in favor, none against, eight abstained[18][19] and Honduras and Yemen failed to vote or abstain.[20]
The meeting record[21] provides first hand insight of the debate. South Africa's position can be seen as an attempt to protect its system of apartheid, which clearly violated any number of articles in the Declaration.[18] The Saudi Arabian delegation's abstention was prompted primarily by two of the Declaration's articles: Article 18, which states that everyone has the right "to change his religion or belief"; and Article 16, on equal marriage rights.[18] The six communist countries abstentions centred around the view that the Declaration did not go far enough in condemning fascism and Nazism.[22] Eleanor Roosevelt attributed the abstention of Soviet bloc countries to Article 13, which provided the right of citizens to leave their countries.[23]
The 48 countries which voted in favour of the Declaration are:[24]




Voters and abstainers in the Plenary session.
In green countries that voted in favour, in orange those who abstained.
In black, countries which failed to abstain or vote.
In grey, countries which were not part of the UN at the time of voting




 Afghanistan
 Argentina
 Australia
 Belgium
 Bolivia
 Brazil
 Burma
 Canada[a]
 Chile
 China
 Colombia
 Costa Rica
 Cuba
 Denmark
 Dominican Republic
 Ecuador
 Egypt
 El Salvador
 Ethiopia
 France
 Greece
 Guatemala
 Haiti
 Iceland
 India
 Iran
 Iraq
 Lebanon
 Liberia
 Luxembourg
 Mexico
 Netherlands
 New Zealand
 Nicaragua
 Norway
 Pakistan
 Panama
 Paraguay
 Peru
 Philippines
 Thailand
 Sweden
 Syria
 Turkey
 United Kingdom
 United States
 Uruguay
 Venezuela



a. ^ Despite the central role played by the Canadian John Peters Humphrey, the Canadian Government at first abstained from voting on the Declaration's draft, but later voted in favor of the final draft in the General Assembly.[25]

8 countries abstained:[24]


 Byelorussian SSR (Byelorussia)
 Czechoslovakia
 Poland
 Saudi Arabia
 Soviet Union
 Ukrainian SSR (Ukraine)
 Union of South Africa
 Yugoslavia


Other countries only gained sovereignty and joined the United Nations later,[26] which explains the relatively small number of states entitled to the historical vote and in no way reflects opposition to the universal principles.
International Human Rights Day[edit]
Main article: Human Rights Day
The Declaration is commemorated each year on 10 December, the anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration, and is known as Human Rights Day or International Human Rights Day. The commemoration is observed by individuals, community and religious groups, human rights organizations, parliaments, governments, and the United Nations. Decadal commemorations are often accompanied by campaigns to promote awareness of the Declaration and human rights. 2008 marked the 60th anniversary of the Declaration, and was accompanied by year-long activities around the theme "Dignity and justice for all of us".[27]
Significance and legal effect[edit]
Significance[edit]
In 1948, the UN Resolution A/RES/217(III)[A] adopted the Declaration on a bilingual document in English and French, and official translations in Chinese, Russian and Spanish.[28] In 2009, the Guinness Book of Records described the Declaration as the world's "Most Translated Document" (370 different languages and dialects).[29][30] The Unicode Consortium stores 431[31] of the 503[32] official translations available at the OHCHR (as of June 2017[update]).
In its preamble, governments commit themselves and their people to progressive measures which secure the universal and effective recognition and observance of the human rights set out in the Declaration. Eleanor Roosevelt supported the adoption of the Declaration as a declaration rather than as a treaty because she believed that it would have the same kind of influence on global society as the United States Declaration of Independence had within the United States.[citation needed] In this, she proved to be correct. Even though it is not legally binding, the Declaration has been adopted in or has influenced most national constitutions since 1948. It has also served as the foundation for a growing number of national laws, international laws, and treaties, as well as for a growing number of regional, sub national, and national institutions protecting and promoting human rights.
For the first time in international law, the term “the rule of law” was used in the preamble of the Declaration. The third paragraph of the preamble of the Declaration reads as follows: "Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law."[33]
Legal effect[edit]
While not a treaty itself, the Declaration was explicitly adopted for the purpose of defining the meaning of the words "fundamental freedoms" and "human rights" appearing in the United Nations Charter, which is binding on all member states. For this reason, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a fundamental constitutive document of the United Nations. In addition, many international lawyers[34] believe that the Declaration forms part of customary international law[35] and is a powerful tool in applying diplomatic and moral pressure to governments that violate any of its articles. The 1968 United Nations International Conference on Human Rights advised that the Declaration "constitutes an obligation for the members of the international community" to all persons. The Declaration has served as the foundation for two binding UN human rights covenants: the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The principles of the Declaration are elaborated in international treaties such as the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United Nations Convention Against Torture, and many more. The Declaration continues to be widely cited by governments, academics, advocates, and constitutional courts, and by individuals who appeal to its principles for the protection of their recognised human rights.
Reaction[edit]
Praise[edit]
The Universal Declaration has received praise from a number of notable people. The Lebanese philosopher and diplomat Charles Malik called it "an international document of the first order of importance",[36] while Eleanor Roosevelt—first chairwoman of the Commission on Human Rights (CHR) that drafted the Declaration—stated that it "may well become the international Magna Carta of all men everywhere."[37] In a speech on 5 October 1995, Pope John Paul II called the Declaration "one of the highest expressions of the human conscience of our time" but the Vatican never adopted the Declaration.[38] In a statement on 10 December 2003 on behalf of the European Union, Marcello Spatafora said that the Declaration "placed human rights at the centre of the framework of principles and obligations shaping relations within the international community."[citation needed]
Criticism[edit]
Islamic countries[edit]
Turkey— which was a secular state with an overwhelmingly Muslim population—signed the Declaration in 1948.[39] However, the same year, Saudi Arabia abstained from the ratification vote on the Declaration, claiming that it violated Sharia law.[40] Pakistan—which had signed the declaration—disagreed and critiqued the Saudi position.[41] Pakistani minister Muhammad Zafarullah Khan strongly argued in favor of including freedom of religion.[42] In 1982, the Iranian representative to the United Nations, Said Rajaie-Khorassani, said that the Declaration was "a secular understanding of the Judeo-Christian tradition" which could not be implemented by Muslims without conflict with Sharia.[43] On 30 June 2000, members of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation) officially resolved to support the Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam,[44] an alternative document that says people have "freedom and right to a dignified life in accordance with the Islamic Shari'ah", without any discrimination on grounds of "race, colour, language, sex, religious belief, political affiliation, social status or other considerations".
Some Muslim diplomats would go on later to help draft other UN human rights treaties. For example, Iraqi diplomat Bedia Afnan's insistence on wording that recognized gender equality resulted in Article 3 within the ICCPR and ICESCR. Pakistani diplomat Shaista Suhrawardy Ikramullah also spoke in favor of recognizing women's rights.[42]
A number of scholars in different fields have expressed concerns with the Declaration's alleged Western bias. These include Irene Oh, Abdulaziz Sachedina, Riffat Hassan, and Faisal Kutty. Hassan has argued:

What needs to be pointed out to those who uphold the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to be the highest, or sole, model, of a charter of equality and liberty for all human beings, is that given the Western origin and orientation of this Declaration, the "universality" of the assumptions on which it is based is – at the very least – problematic and subject to questioning. Furthermore, the alleged incompatibility between the concept of human rights and religion in general, or particular religions such as Islam, needs to be examined in an unbiased way.[45]

Irene Oh argues that one solution is to approach the issue from the perspective of comparative (descriptive) ethics.[46]
Kutty writes: "A strong argument can be made that the current formulation of international human rights constitutes a cultural structure in which western society finds itself easily at home ... It is important to acknowledge and appreciate that other societies may have equally valid alternative conceptions of human rights."[47]
Ironically, a number of Islamic countries that as of 2014[update] are among the most resistant to UN intervention in domestic affairs, played an invaluable role in the creation of the Declaration, with countries such as Syria and Egypt having been strong proponents of the universality of human rights and the right of countries to self-determination.[48]
"The Right to Refuse to Kill"[edit]
Groups such as Amnesty International[49] and War Resisters International[50] have advocated for "The Right to Refuse to Kill" to be added to the Universal Declaration. War Resisters International has stated that the right to conscientious objection to military service is primarily derived from—but not yet explicit in—Article 18 of the UDHR: the right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion.[50]
Steps have been taken within the United Nations to make this right more explicit, but —to date (2017)—[update] those steps have been limited to less significant United Nations documents. Sean MacBride—Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations and Nobel Peace Prize laureate—has said: "To the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights one more might, with relevance, be added. It is 'The Right to Refuse to Kill'."[51]
American Anthropological Association[edit]
The American Anthropological Association criticized the UDHR while it was in its drafting process. The AAA warned that the document would be defining universal rights from a Western paradigm which would be unfair to countries outside of that scope. They further argued that the West's history of colonialism and evangelism made them a problematic moral representative for the rest of the world. They proposed three notes for consideration with underlying themes of cultural relativism: "1. The individual realizes his personality through his culture, hence respect for individual differences entails a respect for cultural differences", "2. Respect for differences between cultures is validated by the scientific fact that no technique of qualitatively evaluating cultures has been discovered", and "3. Standards and values are relative to the culture from which they derive so that any attempt to formulate postulates that grow out of the beliefs or moral codes of one culture must to that extent detract from the applicability of any Declaration of Human Rights to mankind as a whole."[52]
Bangkok Declaration[edit]
During the lead up to the World Conference on Human Rights held in 1993, ministers from Asian states adopted the Bangkok Declaration, reaffirming their governments' commitment to the principles of the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. They stated their view of the interdependence and indivisibility of human rights and stressed the need for universality, objectivity, and non-selectivity of human rights. However, at the same time, they emphasized the principles of sovereignty and non-interference, calling for greater emphasis on economic, social, and cultural rights—in particular, the right to economic development over civil and political rights. The Bangkok Declaration is considered to be a landmark expression of the Asian values perspective, which offers an extended critique of human rights universalism.[53]
Organizations promoting the UDHR[edit]






This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a specific audience. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



International Federation for Human Rights[edit]
The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) is nonpartisan, nonsectarian, and independent of any government, and its core mandate is to promote respect for all the rights set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.[54][55]
Amnesty International[edit]
In 1988, director Stephen R. Johnson and 41 international animators, musicians, and producers created a 20-minute video for Amnesty International to celebrate the 40th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration. The video was to bring to life the Declaration's 30 articles.[56]
Amnesty International celebrated Human Rights Day and the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration all over the world by organizing the "Fire Up!" event.[57]
Unitarian Universalist Service Committee[edit]
The Unitarian Universalist Service Committee (UUSC) is a non-profit, nonsectarian organization whose work around the world is guided by the values of Unitarian Universalism and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It works to provide disaster relief and promote human rights and social justice around the world.
Quaker United Nations Office and American Friends Service Committee[edit]
The Quaker United Nations Office and the American Friends Service Committee work on many human rights issues, including improving education on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. They have developed a Curriculum to help introduce High School students to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.[58][59]
American Library Association[edit]
In 1997, the council of the American Library Association (ALA) endorsed Article 19 from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.[60] Along with Article 19, Article 18 and 20 are also fundamentally tied to the ALA Universal Right to Free Expression and the Library Bill of Rights.[61] Censorship, the invasion of privacy, and interference of opinions are human rights violations according to the ALA.
Youth for Human Rights International[edit]
Youth for Human Rights International (YHRI) is a non-profit organization founded in 2001 by Mary Shuttleworth, an educator born and raised in apartheid South Africa, where she witnessed firsthand the devastating effects of discrimination and the lack of basic human rights. The purpose of YHRI is to teach youth about human rights, specifically the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and inspire them to become advocates for tolerance and peace. YHRI has now grown into a global movement, including hundreds of groups, clubs and chapters around the world.[62]
See also[edit]


Human rights portal
United Nations portal
Freedom of speech portal



Human rights


History of human rights



Timeline of young people's rights in the United Kingdom
in the United States





Non-binding agreements


Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam (1990)
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (1993)
United Nations Millennium Declaration (2000)


International human rights law


Fourth Geneva Convention (1949)
European Convention on Human Rights (1952)
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (1954)
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (1969)
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1976)
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1976)
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (1981)
Convention on the Rights of the Child (1990)
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2000)
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2007)


Thinkers influencing the Declaration


Charles Malik
Jacques Maritain
John Peters Humphrey
Tommy Douglas
John Sankey, 1st Viscount Sankey
Wu Teh Yao
Peng Chun Chang


Other





Slavery in the United States
in Russia



Slavery in international law
Slave Trade Acts
Human rights in China (PRC)
Command responsibility
Moral universalism
Declaration on Great Apes, an as-yet unsuccessful effort to extend some human rights to other great apes.
"Consent of the governed"
Racial equality proposal (1919)
The Farewell Sermon (632 CE)
Youth for Human Rights International
List of literary works by number of translations

Notes[edit]



^ Included John Peters Humphrey (Canada), René Cassin (France), P. C. Chang (Republic of China), Charles Malik (Lebanon), Hansa Mehta (India) and Eleanor Roosevelt (United States); see Creation and drafting section above.



References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ Henry J Steiner and Philip Alston, International Human Rights in Context: Law, Politics, Morals, (2nd ed), Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000.
^ Hurst Hannum, The UDHR in National and International Law, p.145
^ Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, 542 U.S. 692, 734 (2004).
^ Glendon 2002, pp. 62–64.
^ Universal Declaration of Human Rights, United Nations, 1948 
^ Glendon 2002, Chapter 10.
^ "United Nations Charter, preamble and article 55". United Nations. Retrieved 2013-04-20. 
^ Cataclysm and World Response in Drafting and Adoption : The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, udhr.org.
^ "UDHR50: Didn't Nazi tyranny end all hope for protecting human rights in the modern world?". Udhr.org. 1998-08-28. Retrieved 2012-07-07. 
^ "UDHR – History of human rights". Universalrights.net. Retrieved 2012-07-07. 
^ Morsink 1999, p. 4
^ Morsink 1999, p. 5
^ Morsink 1999, p. 133
^ The Declaration was drafted during the Chinese Civil War. P.C. Chang was appointed as a representative by the Republic of China, then the recognised government of China, but which was driven from mainland China and now administers only Taiwan and nearby islands (history.com).
^ Carlson, Allan: Globalizing Family Values, 12 January 2004.
^ "Drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights". Research Guides. United Nations. Dag Hammarskjöld Library. Retrieved 2015-04-17. 
^ Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Final authorized text. The British Library. September 1952. Retrieved 16 August 2015. 
^ a b c CCNMTL. "default". Center for New Media Teaching and Learning (CCNMTL). Columbia University. Retrieved 2013-07-12. 
^ UNAC. "Questions and answers about the Universal Declaration of Human Rights". United Nations Association in Canada (UNAC). p. "Who are the signatories of the Declaration?". Archived from the original on 2012-09-12. 
^ Jost Müller-Neuhof (2008-12-10). "Menschenrechte: Die mächtigste Idee der Welt". Der Tagesspiegel (in German). Retrieved 2013-07-12. 
^ United Nations. "default". Retrieved 2017-08-30. 
^ Peter Danchin. "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Drafting History - 10. Plenary Session of the Third General Assembly Session". Retrieved 2015-02-25. 
^ Glendon 2002, pp. 169–70
^ a b "Yearbook of the United Nations 1948–1949 p 535" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 27, 2013. Retrieved 24 July 2014. 
^ Schabas, William (1998). "Canada and the Adoption of Universal Declaration of Human Rights" (PDF). McGill Law Journal. 43: 403. 
^ "OHCHR - Human Rights in the World". www.ohchr.org. 
^ "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: 1948–2008". United Nations. Retrieved 15 February 2011. 
^ "A/RES/217(III)". UNBISNET. Retrieved 13 Jun 2017. 
^ "Most translated document". 
^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 
^ "UDHR in Unicode - Translations", Unicode, retrieved 8-6-2017
^ "Search by Translation", UDHR Translation Project, United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, retrieved 13-8-2017.
^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". www.un.org. Retrieved 2017-12-07. 
^ Humphrey JP, "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Its History, Impact and Juridical Character", in Ramcharan BG (ed), Human Rights: Thirty Years After the Universal Declaration (1979) pp. 2l, 37; Sohn 1, "The Human Rights Law of the Charter" (1977) 12 Texas Int LJ 129, 133; McDougal MS, Lasswell H and Chen I, Human Rights and World Public Order (1980) pp. 273–274, 325–327; D'Amato A, International Law: Process and Prospect( 1986) pp. 123–147.
^ Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. "Digital record of the UDHR". United Nations. 
^ "Statement by Charles Malik as Representative of Lebanon to the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly on the Universal Declaration". 6 November 1948. Archived from the original on 28 September 2008. 
^ Michael E. Eidenmuller (1948-12-09). "Eleanor Roosevelt: Address to the United Nations General Assembly". Americanrhetoric.com. Retrieved 2012-07-07. 
^ "John Paul II, Address to the U.N., October 2, 1979 and October 5, 1995". Vatican.va. Retrieved 2012-07-07. 
^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". Retrieved 2015-10-30. 
^ Nisrine Abiad (2008). Sharia, Muslim states and international human rights treaty obligations: a comparative study. BIICL. pp. 60–65. ISBN 978-1-905221-41-7. 
^ Price 1999, p. 163
^ a b Hashemi, Nader and Emran Qureshi. "Human Rights." In The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World. Oxford Islamic Studies Online.
^ Littman, D (February–March 1999). "Universal Human Rights and Human Rights in Islam". Midstream. Archived from the original on 2006-05-01. 
^ "Resolution No 60/27-P". Organisation of the Islamic Conference. 2000-06-27. Retrieved 2011-06-02. 
^ "Are Human Rights Compatible with Islam?". religiousconsultation.org. Retrieved 2012-11-12. 
^ "The Rights of God". Georgetown University Press, 2007. 
^ "Non-Western Societies Have Influenced Human Rights". in Jacqueline Langwith (ed.), Opposing Viewpoints: Human Rights, Gale/Greenhaven Press: Chicago, 2007. 
^ Professor Susan Waltz: Universal Rights Group, Syria calls for greater UN intervention in domestic human rights situations....
^ Out of the margins: the right to conscientious objection to military service in Europe: An announcement of Amnesty International's forthcoming campaign and briefing for the UN Commission on Human Rights, 31 March 1997. Amnesty International.
^ a b A Conscientious Objector's Guide to the UN Human Rights System, Parts 1, 2 & 3, Background Information on International Law for COs, Standards which recognise the right to conscientious objection, War Resisters' International.
^ Sean MacBride, The Imperatives of Survival, Nobel Lecture, 12 December 1974, The Nobel Foundation – Official website of the Nobel Foundation. (English index page; hyperlink to Swedish site.) From Nobel Lectures in Peace 1971–1980.
^ "Statement on Human Rights" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-10-30. 
^ "Final Declaration Of The Regional Meeting For Asia Of The World Conference On Human Rights". Law.hku.hk. Retrieved 2012-07-07. 
^ Contribution to the EU Multi-stakeholder Forum on CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility), 10 February 2009; accessed on 9 November 2009
^ Information Partners, web site of the UNHCR, last updated 25 February 2010, 16:08 GMT (web retrieval 25 February 2010, 18:11 GMT)
^ "UDHR film". Amnesty International. Retrieved 2013-07-19. 
^ "Fire Up!". Amnesty International. Retrieved 2013-07-19. 
^ "UNHCR Partners". UNHCR. Retrieved 11 November 2014. 
^ "AFSC Universal Declaration of Human Rights web page". American Friends Service Committee. Retrieved 11 November 2014. 
^ "Resolution on IFLA, Human Rights and Freedom of Expression". ala.org. 
^ "The Universal Right to Free Expression:". ala.org. 
^ "Youth for Human Rights". Youth for Human Rights. Retrieved 13 November 2016. 


Sources[edit]


Brown, Gordon (2016). The Universal Declaration of Human Rights in the 21st Century: A Living Document in a Changing World. Open Book Publishers. ISBN 978-1-783-74218-9. 
Glendon, Mary Ann (2002). A world made new: Eleanor Roosevelt and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-76046-4. 
Hashmi, Sohail H. (2002). Islamic political ethics: civil society, pluralism, and conflict. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-11310-4. 
Morsink, Johannes (1999). The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: origins, drafting, and intent. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-1747-6. 
Price, Daniel E. (1999). Islamic political culture, democracy, and human rights: a comparative study. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-96187-9. 
Williams, Paul (1981). The International bill of human rights. United Nations General Assembly. Entwhistle Books. ISBN 978-0-934558-07-5. 


Further reading[edit]


Feldman, Jean-Philippe. "Hayek's Critique Of The Universal Declaration Of Human Rights". Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines, Volume 9, Issue 4 (December 1999): 1145-6396.
Nurser, John. "For All Peoples and All Nations. Christian Churches and Human Rights.". (Geneva: WCC Publications, 2005).
Universal Declaration of Human Rights pages at Columbia University (Centre for the Study of Human Rights), including article by article commentary, video interviews, discussion of meaning, drafting and history.
Introductory note by Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade and procedural history on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law


External links[edit]






This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Wikiquote has quotations related to: Universal Declaration of Human Rights





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Universal Declaration of Human Rights.





Wikiversity has learning resources about Assessing Human Rights



UN Member States
Text of the UDHR
Official translations of the UDHR
Resource Guide on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights at the UN Library, Geneva.
Drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights - documents and meetings records — United Nations Dag Hammarskjöld Library
Questions and answers about the Universal Declaration
Text, Audio, and Video excerpt of Eleanor Roosevelt's Address to the United Nations on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
UDHR – Education
UDHR in Unicode
Revista Envío – A Declaration of Human Rights For the 21st Century
Introductory note by Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade and procedural history note on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law
DHpedia: Universal Declaration of Human Rights
The Laws of Burgos: 500 Years of Human Rights from the Law Library of Congress blog.

Audiovisual materials[edit]

UDHR Audio/Video Project (recordings in 500+ languages by native speakers)
Librivox: Human-read audio recordings in several Languages
Text, Audio, and Video excerpt of Eleanor Roosevelt's Address to the United Nations on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Animated presentation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by Amnesty International on YouTube (in English duration 20 minutes and 23 seconds).
Audio: Statement by Charles Malik as Representative of Lebanon to the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly on the Universal Declaration, 6 November 1948
UN Department of Public Information introduction to the drafters of the Declaration
Audiovisual material on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law







v
t
e


Human rights






Children's
Intersex
Men's
Women's






Fundamental concepts
and philosophies








Natural law
Positive law
Sovereignty
Universal jurisdiction





Distinctions



Claim rights and liberty rights
Individual and group rights
Natural and legal rights
Negative and positive rights





Aspects



Corporal punishment








Organizations



List of human rights organisations
of national human rights institutions





By continent







Africa

Asia
Europe
North America
Oceania
South America











 Category:Rights
 Portal:Human rights












v
t
e


International human rights instruments








Declarations






Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Cairo Declaration of Human Rights
Declaration of the Rights of the Child
Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man
Paris Principles













International law






United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV) Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
UN Convention Against Torture
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
Convention on the Political Rights of Women
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Convention on the Rights of the Child
United Nations Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights













Regional law






African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
European

Convention on Human Rights
Convention for the Prevention of Torture
European Convention on Nationality
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
Social Charter


American Convention on Human Rights
Inter-American Convention

to Prevent and Punish Torture
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Persons with Disabilities















International humanitarian law






Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees
Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness
Geneva Conventions
Hague Conventions
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court















v
t
e


Eleanor Roosevelt






Chairwoman, Presidential Commission on the Status of Women (1961–1962)
34th First Lady of the United States (1933–1945)





United Nations



United States delegate, United Nations General Assembly (1946–1952)
United Nations Commission on Human Rights (1947–1953, Chairperson 1946–1951)
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Human Rights Day





First Lady of
the United States



"My Day" daily newspaper column, 1935–1962
Co-Chair, Office of Civilian Defense
Marian Anderson Lincoln Memorial Concert
Tuskegee Airmen flight
Arthurdale and Eleanor, West Virginia
American Youth Congress

National Youth Administration


Black Cabinet
1940 Democratic National Convention speech
Women in Defense
Freedom House





Other events



First Lady of New York
Presidential Commission on the Status of Women

National Organization for Women


Encampment for Citizenship





Life and homes



Val-Kill National Historic Site

Val-Kill Industries


Campobello home

Franklin D. Roosevelt's paralytic illness


Hyde Park home and gravesite





Legacy



Roosevelt Institute

Roosevelt Institute Campus Network


Roosevelt Study Center
Eleanor Roosevelt Monument
Eleanor Roosevelt Award for Human Rights
Statue at the Franklin Roosevelt Memorial
Eleanor Roosevelt College
Marian Anderson: the Lincoln Memorial Concert (1939 film)
Sunrise at Campobello (1958 play, 1960 film)
The Eleanor Roosevelt Story (1965 film)
Eleanor and Franklin (1976 film)
Eleanor and Franklin: The White House Years (1977 film)
The Roosevelts (2014 documentary)





Related



United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights
International Bill of Human Rights

International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights


Morgenthau Plan





Roosevelt family



Franklin D. Roosevelt (husband
presidency)
Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (daughter)
James Roosevelt II (son)
Elliott Roosevelt (son)
Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr. (son)
John Roosevelt II (son)
Eleanor Roosevelt Seagraves (granddaughter)
Curtis Roosevelt (grandson)
Sara Delano Roosevelt (granddaughter)
Franklin Delano Roosevelt III (grandson)
John Roosevelt Boettiger (grandson)
James Roosevelt III (grandson)
Elliott Bulloch Roosevelt (father)
Anna Hall Roosevelt (mother)
Hall Roosevelt (brother)
Theodore Roosevelt Sr. (grandfather)
Martha Stewart Bulloch (grandmother)
Theodore Roosevelt (uncle
presidency)
Bamie Roosevelt (aunt)
Fala (family dog)












v
t
e


 United Nations






António Guterres, Secretary-General
Amina J. Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General
Peter Thomson, General Assembly President





United Nations System




United Nations Charter



Preamble





Principal organs



General Assembly

President


Security Council

Members


Economic and Social Council
Secretariat

Secretary-General
Deputy Secretary-General
Under-Secretary-General


International Court of Justice

statute


Trusteeship Council





Secretariat Offices
and Departments



Headquarters
Envoy on Youth
Spokesperson for the Secretary-General
Geneva
Palace of Nations
Nairobi
Vienna
Economic and Social Affairs
Political Affairs
Public Information

Dag Hammarskjöld Library


Safety and Security
Palestinian Rights
Peacekeeping Operations
Internal Oversight
Legal Affairs
Developing Countries
Sport for Development and Peace
Disarmament Affairs
Outer Space Affairs
Partnerships
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UN organizations by location
United Nations Office for Developing Countries






Programmes and
specialized agencies




FAO
ICAO
IFAD
ILO
IMO
ITC
IPCC
IAEA
MINURSO
UNIDO
ITU
UNAIDS
SCSL
UNCTAD
UNCITRAL
UNCDF
UNDG
UNDP
UNDPI
UNDPKO

peacekeeping


UNEP

OzonAction
UNEP/GRID-Arendal
UNEP-WCMC


UNESCO
UNFIP
UNFPA
UN-HABITAT
OHCHR
UNHCR
UNHRC
UNICEF
UNICRI
UNIDIR
UNITAR
UN-Oceans
UNODC
UNOPS
UNOSAT
UNRISD
UNRWA
UNSSC
UNU

UNU-OP
UNU-CRIS


UNV
UN Women
UNWTO
UPU
WFP
WHO
WIPO
WMO








Members / observers



Full members
Founding members

UNSC Permanent members


Observers

European Union







History



League of Nations
Four Policemen
Declaration by United Nations
Peacekeeping missions

history
timeline


Enlargement





Resolutions



Security Council vetoes
General Assembly

66th
67th


Security Council

Cyprus
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Lebanon
Nagorno-Karabakh
North Korea
Palestine
Syria
Western Sahara







Elections



Secretary-General (2006
2016)
International Court of Justice 2011
General Assembly President (2012
2016)
Security Council (2015
2016)





Related



Bretton Woods system
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Criticism
Delivering as One
Flag

Honour Flag


Four Nations Initiative
Genocide Convention
UN Global Compact
ICC
International Years
UN laissez-passer
Military Staff Committee
Official languages
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Peacekeeping
Treaty Series
UN Day
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Millennium Declaration

Summit
Development Goals


Security Council veto power
UN reform

Security Council reform


UN Art Collection
UN Memorial Cemetery Korea





Other



Outline
UN television film series (1964–1966)
In popular culture









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 183452328
LCCN: n81139937
GND: 4225431-0
SUDOC: 144630036
NDL: 00570555











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Universal_Declaration_of_Human_Rights&oldid=818434733"					Categories: Country data templates of Iran1948 in lawHumanismHuman rights instrumentsUnited Nations General Assembly resolutionsHistory of human rightsGlobal ethics1948 in the United Nations1948 documentsHidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)Use British English Oxford spelling from August 2017Articles which use infobox templates with no data rowsArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing potentially dated statements from June 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from December 2008Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017Wikipedia articles needing style editing from November 2017All articles needing style editingWikipedia external links cleanup from November 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from November 2015Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers