This article is about the University of South Carolina's flagship campus in Columbia. For other campuses in South Carolina's state university system, see University of South Carolina System.

University of South Carolina





Former name

South Carolina College


Motto
Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros (Latin)



Motto in English

Learning humanizes character and does not permit it to be cruel


Type
Public university
Flagship state university
Sea-grant university


Established
1801



Parent institution

University of South Carolina System


Endowment
$655,469,462[1]


President
Harris Pastides


Provost
Joan T. Gabel



Academic staff

1,604


Students
34,099 (Columbia)
50,099 (System-wide)[2]


Location
Columbia, South Carolina, U.S.


Campus
Urban, 359 acres (145 ha)


Colors
Garnet and Black[3]
         


Athletics
NCAA Division I – SEC


Nickname
Gamecocks


Mascot
Cocky


Website
www.sc.edu





The University of South Carolina (also referred to as USC, SC, South Carolina, or simply Carolina) is a public, co-educational research university in Columbia, South Carolina, United States, with seven satellite campuses. Its campus covers over 359 acres (145 ha) in downtown Columbia not far from the South Carolina State House. The University is categorized by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching as having "highest research activity."[4] It has been ranked as an "up-and-coming" university by U.S. News & World Report,[5] and its undergraduate and graduate International Business programs have ranked among the top three programs in the nation for over a decade.[6] It also houses the largest collection of Robert Burns and Scottish literature materials outside Scotland,[7] and the world's largest Ernest Hemingway collection.[8]
Founded in 1801 as South Carolina College, South Carolina is the flagship institution of the University of South Carolina System and offers more than 350 programs of study, leading to bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees from fourteen degree-granting colleges and schools. The University of South Carolina has a total enrollment of approximately 50,000 students, with over 34,000 on the main Columbia campus as of fall 2017 - making it the largest university in the Carolinas.[9] USC also has several thousand future students in feeder programs at surrounding technical colleges. Professional schools on the Columbia campus include business, engineering, law, medicine, pharmacy, and social work.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Foundation and early history
1.2 Civil War and Reconstruction


2 Campus
3 Points of interest

3.1 Arts and culture
3.2 Sports


4 Academics

4.1 Admissions
4.2 South Carolina Honors College
4.3 National rankings


5 Research
6 Student life

6.1 Demographics
6.2 Housing
6.3 Student government
6.4 Organizations
6.5 Media
6.6 Greek organizations
6.7 Recreation


7 Athletics

7.1 Fight song and alma mater

7.1.1 Fight song
7.1.2 Alma mater




8 Recent accomplishments
9 Notable people

9.1 People
9.2 Presidents
9.3 Board of trustees


10 Photo gallery
11 See also
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the University of South Carolina
Foundation and early history[edit]




The University's first President Reverend Jonathan Maxcy


The University was founded as South Carolina College on December 19, 1801, by an act of the South Carolina General Assembly initiated by Governor John Drayton in an effort to promote harmony between the Lowcountry and the Backcountry. On January 10, 1805, having an initial enrollment of nine students, the college commenced classes with a traditional classical curriculum. The first president was the Baptist minister and theologian Reverend Jonathan Maxcy. He was an alumnus of Brown University, with an honorary degree from Harvard University. Before coming to the college, Maxcy had served as the second president of Brown and the third president of Union College. Maxcy's tenure lasted from 1804 through 1820.[10]




South Carolina College as it appeared in 1850 looking from College Street


When South Carolina College opened its doors in 1801, the building now known as Rutledge College was the only building on campus. Located one block southeast of the State Capitol, it served as an administrative office, academic building, residence hall, and chapel. However, the master plan for the original campus called for a total of eleven buildings, all facing a large lush gathering area. In 1807, the original President's House was the next building to be erected. The building now known as DeSaussure College followed shortly thereafter, and the remaining eight buildings were constructed over the next several decades. When completed, all eleven buildings formed a U-shape open to Sumter Street. This modified quadrangle became known as the Horseshoe.
As with other southern universities in the antebellum period, the most important organizations for students were the two literary societies, the Clariosophic Society and the Euphradian Society.[11] These two societies, which arose from a split in an earlier literary society known as the Philomathic, grew to encapsulate the majority of the student body from the 1820s onward.
The College became a symbol of the South in the antebellum period as its graduates were on the forefront of secession from the Union. With the generous support of the General Assembly, South Carolina College acquired a reputation as the leading institution of the South and attracted several noteworthy scholars, including Francis Lieber, Thomas Cooper, and Joseph LeConte.
Civil War and Reconstruction[edit]
Seventy-two students were present for classes in January 1862 and the college functioned as best it could until a call by the Confederate government for South Carolina to fill its quota of 18,000 soldiers. A system of conscription would begin on March 20 for all men between the ages of eighteen and forty-five, so on March 8 all of the students at the college volunteered for service in order to avoid the dishonor of having been conscripted. Despite the depletion of students, the professors issued a notice that the college would temporarily close and would reopen to those under eighteen. When the college reopened on March 17, only nine students showed up for classes and it became quite apparent to all that the college would not last past the end of the term in June.
On June 25 with the consent of the state government, the Confederate authorities took possession of the college buildings and converted them into a hospital. After many unsuccessful attempts to reopen the college, the trustees passed a resolution on December 2, 1863 that officially closed the college. By February 1865, Sherman's army had reached the outskirts of Columbia and the college was spared from destruction by the Union forces because of its use as a hospital. In addition, a company of the 25th Iowa Volunteer Infantry Regiment was stationed at the campus on February 17 to protect it from harm and to thwart off pillaging Yankee soldiers.




An 1872 aerial illustration of the University of South Carolina Horseshoe


The Union army took possession of the college on May 24, 1865 and although the future for the college appeared bleak with it under military control, General John Porter Hatch sent a letter on June 19 to the remaining professors at the college that it should reopen as soon as possible. The appointment of Benjamin Franklin Perry as provisional governor of South Carolina on June 30 by President Andrew Johnson restored civilian rule to the state. Perry reinstated the trustees to their positions and the board met on September 20 to authorize the college to reopen on the first Monday of January in 1866. In a message to the legislature in October, Perry sought to convert the college into a university because with the state in an impoverished situation, it would provide a more practical education. Little opposition developed to change the College into a university and bill to establish the University of South Carolina was passed by the General Assembly on December 19, 1865.
The University Act of 1869 reorganized the University and provided it with generous financial support. An amendment was added to the act by W. J. Whipper, a black representative from Beaufort, that would prevent racial discrimination from the admissions policy of the University. The legislature further proved its seriousness towards racial equality by electing two black trustees to the governing board of the University on March 9, 1869. A normal school was established by the legislature on the campus of the University as well as a preparatory school since most of the black students of the state were ill-prepared for the academic work required at a university. In addition, to encourage enrollment by blacks, tuition and other fees were abolished. On October 7, 1873, Henry E. Hayne, the Secretary of State of South Carolina, became the first black student when he registered for the fall session in the medical college of the University.[12][13]
Campus[edit]




Built in 1909, Davis College was the university's first new building after the Civil War and currently houses the School of Library and Information Science


The Horseshoe is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and most of its buildings reflect the federal style of architecture in vogue in the early days of the nation. Among them is the South Caroliniana Library, which was designed by Robert Mills and is the first freestanding academic library in the United States.[14]
Over the years the eleven original buildings on the Horseshoe survived a fire, an earthquake, and the Civil War, but in 1939 McKissick Museum replaced the original President's House. The President's House would eventually return to the Horseshoe after extensive remodeling of one of its original buildings, which was dedicated as such in 1952.
During the 20th century: the campus began to spread out dramatically from the Horseshoe. Today it includes the student union, 24 residence halls, numerous academic buildings, Longstreet Theatre, the Koger Center for the Arts, the Carolina Coliseum, the Colonial Life Arena, Carolina Stadium, and various facilities for Olympic sports. (Williams-Brice Stadium is located approximately one mile off campus.) Recent additions to the campus are the Strom Thurmond Wellness and Fitness Center, the Greek Village, the Green Quad, the Honors College Residence Hall, the Public Health Research Center, the Inn at USC, the Colonial Life Arena and Carolina Stadium. Future plans also include a new home for the School of Law (to be constructed in the block bounded by Gervais, Senate, Pendleton, and Bull streets with construction scheduled to begin in 2013) and a new home for the Moore School of Business, currently under construction at the corner of Assembly and Greene streets.[15]




The University of South Carolina's historic Horseshoe, on which the university's first building was built in 1805


The campus continues to expand west toward the Congaree River in support of its research initiatives (see below). Three separate sites, each specializing in its own research area, will initially cover 500,000 square feet (46,500 m2) spread over six city blocks and will eventually grow to 5,000,000 square feet (465,000 m2). This new district of campus, named Innovista,[16] will mix university and private research buildings, parking garages, and commercial and residential units. At the center will be a public plaza called Foundation Square.
The University of South Carolina also operates a transit system under Parking Services called Carolina Shuttle which operates 7 routes and 14 buses including converted buses that use more energy-efficient biodiesel. The system operates during the Fall and Spring semesters, with limited operation during the summer, reading days, and holidays. Service is free to all USC students, faculty and staff.[17] A new system called "Cocky's Caravan" was added in 2008 as a weekend service, shuttling students from main areas on campus to the local entertainment district Five Points. In 2011, Cocky's Caravan was shut down and replaced by a partnership with Checker Yellow Cab known as "Carolina Cab" that offers students free rides from Five Points to their homes within 5 miles (8 km) of campus.
Points of interest[edit]




The Thomas Cooper Library, built in 1976, is the main student library on the University of South Carolina campus






Opened in 2002, Colonial Life Arena's 18,000 seats make it the largest arena in the state of South Carolina






Koger Center for the Arts (est. 1989)






Melton Memorial Observatory, built in 1928






Darla Moore School of Business (2014)






McMaster art building (1911)






South Caroliniana Library (est. 1840)



The Horseshoe
School of Law
National Advocacy Center
Close/Hipp Building
Thomas Cooper Library
South Caroliniana Library
Maxcy Monument
Capstone House
West Quad (Green Quad)
Honors Residence
The Inn at USC
Russell House (University Union)
Darla Moore School of Business
USC Alumni Center[18]

Arts and culture[edit]

Koger Center for the Arts
Longstreet Theatre
McKissick Museum
Education Museum
W. Gordon Belser Arboretum
Gibbes Green

Sports[edit]

Williams-Brice Stadium
Colonial Life Arena
Carolina Stadium
Stone Stadium
Carolina Coliseum
Carolina Softball Stadium at Beckham Field
Strom Thurmond Wellness & Fitness Center
Carolina Tennis Center

Academics[edit]
Admissions[edit]




Lieber College, originally constructed in 1837, is the office of undergraduate admissions at the University of South Carolina and is listed in the National Register of Historic Places


Classified as more selective,[19] USC admitted 63% of those who applied to be Freshmen in 2011.[20] When admitting Freshmen, the university puts emphasis on the rigor of high school study and scores on standardized test, SAT or ACT. It also considers class rank, extracurricular activities, and an optional personal statement. The average incoming freshman had a combined SAT score (critical reading and math) of 1199[21] and a GPA of 4.01.[22]
For the Freshman enrollment of 2017, the average ACT and SAT scores were 27.3 and 1254, respectively, with an average GPA of 4.04.[23]
South Carolina Honors College[edit]
Founded in 1978, the South Carolina Honors College offers academically gifted undergraduates the advantages of a small liberal arts college with the resources and academic depth of a comprehensive research university.[24][25] After gaining acceptance to the University of South Carolina, students must apply separately to the Honors College and demonstrate significant academic achievement. In 2014, entering freshmen had an average weighted GPA of 4.69 and an average SAT score (critical reading and math) of 1430.[24]
Over 400 courses are offered exclusively to Honors College students. Students are required to complete a Senior Thesis under the direction of a faculty advisor in order to graduate from the college with Honors. Since 1994, Honors College students have won more than 278 national awards and fellowships.
The SC Honors College offers housing for freshmen and sophomores in the new Honors College residence hall, on the former site of the university's "Towers" dormitories. Upperclassmen have the opportunity to live in the Honors Residence Hall or in Honors College student housing on the historic horseshoe.
In March 2012, the SC Honors College was ranked number one among fifty public university honors colleges,[26]
National rankings[edit]


University rankings


National


ARWU[28]
100-119


Forbes[29]
186


U.S. News & World Report[30]
108


Washington Monthly[31]
105[27]


Global


ARWU[32]
301-400


QS[33]
601-650


Times[34]
NR


U.S. News & World Report[35]
300




Publication
Rank[36]
Category


U.S. News & World Report
# 1
Undergraduate international business for 13 consecutive years


# 1
Graduate international business
(20 consecutive years as either # 1 or # 2)


# 3
School psychology doctoral program


# 4
Graduate social psychology


# 10
Undergraduate Insurance/Risk Management


# 17
Graduate library science, including # 2 school library media
and # 11 services for children and youth


#23
Graduate Public Health


#24
Graduate Business (among public universities), including #24 Part-time MBA


#25
Graduate Criminology


#42
Pharmacy


#46
Graduate Healthcare Management


#51
Graduate Political Science


#52
Top public institutions, National Universities


#53
Graduate Social Work


# 58
Graduate Nursing


# 86
Medical Schools, Research (#57 Primary Care)


# 87
Law Schools


# 108
National Universities


National Research Council[37]
# 7
Electrical engineering doctoral program (#1 Southern Region*)


# 10
Geography doctoral program (#2 Southern Region)


# 26
English doctoral program (#5 Southern Region)


# 29
Biological sciences doctoral program (#8 Southern Region)


# 29
Chemical engineering doctoral program (#7 Southern Region)


# 31
Mechanical engineering doctoral program (#7 Southern Region)


# 36
History doctoral program (#7 Southern Region)


# 41
Pharmacy doctoral program (#2 Southern Region)


# 47
Chemistry doctoral program (#9 Southern Region)


American Board of Pediatrics
# 2
Pediatrics residency program


Journal of Health Education
# 5
Health education doctoral program


Latin Trade
# 5
MBA programs for Latin Americans


American Academy of Kinesiology
& Physical Education
# 1
Exercise science


Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Education
# 9
Hotel, restaurant, & tourism management


Journal of Public Affairs Education
# 10
Publication rates of faculty research (Dept. of Political Science) in journals
associated with the American Society for Public Administration


The Financial Times of London
# 25
MBA program (# 55 worldwide; # 2 worldwide in international business)


The Wall Street Journal / Harris Interactive
# 49
Business school (# 7 worldwide in international business)


Kiplinger's Personal Finance
# 32
Best Values in Public Colleges


Public Accounting Report
# 25
Masters of Accounting Program


Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index
# 1
Kinesiology and exercise science doctoral program


Top 10
Marine science


Top 10
Nuclear engineering


* Southern Region includes South Carolina, North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama, Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana, Delaware, Maryland, District of Columbia, Virginia, West Virginia, Georgia and Florida
Research[edit]
USC is one of 62 public and 32 private research institutions and the one of the two universities in South Carolina classified a research institution of "very high research activity" by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.[38] USC was awarded $230.2 million in research funding in the 2014 fiscal year, a record amount for the school and an increase of 4.5% over the year prior.[39]
During his tenure, former Carolina president John Palms articulated a "Cathedrals of Excellence" budgeting philosophy. Palms advocated the money from fundraising be channeled into USC's best programs, rather than spread the funds evenly.[40] The strategy would pay off in the long term when these programs became nationally prominent, making a name for USC and attracting grant money.[41] His primary goal was for the University of South Carolina to be admitted to the Association of American Universities - an association of the leading 62 research universities in the United States and Canada.[40]




Completed in May 2000, the $32 million, state-of-the-art Graduate Science Research Center is home to the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of South Carolina


Former President Andrew Sorensen raised even larger sums for research, including a $300 million grant for colorectal cancer. In the spirit of Palms' budget, the board of directors moved to transform university land on Assembly Street into an "innovation district" called Innovista that will develop four strengths: biomedicine, nanotechnology, environmental science and alternative fuels.
Innovista is a partnered development with the City of Columbia. The 200-acre (0.8 km2) campus will house offices and private research firms among the university offices and labs, as well as residences and retail. Innovista is planned to add five million square feet of floor space to the metro area and is intended to set Columbia on a more urban path.[42]
Current president, Harris Pastides, has a research background. His prior history with the university includes serving as the vice president for research and health sciences, executive director of the SC Research Foundation, dean of the Arnold School of Public Health and as an epidemiology professor.[43] His stated objectives on taking over the position included boosting academics, promoting research and launching an ambitious fund raising campaign.[43]
In May 2009, USC was selected by the U.S. Department of Energy as one of 31 universities nationwide to house an Energy Frontier Research Center that is expected to bring $12.5 million in federal funding, the largest single award in the university's history, to the College of Engineering and Computing. President Pastides commented on the grant, "This award solidifies the university's position as a leader in alternative-fuel research."[44]
The University of South Carolina is a member of the SEC Academic Consortium. Now renamed the SECU, the initiative was a collaborative endeavor designed to promote research, scholarship and achievement amongst the member universities in the Southeastern conference. The SECU formed its mission to serve as a means to bolster collaborative academic endeavors of Southeastern Conference universities. Its goals include highlighting the endeavors and achievements of SEC faculty, students and its universities and advancing the academic reputation of SEC universities.[45][46]
Student life[edit]
Demographics[edit]
Over 30,000 students attend the Columbia campus of the University of South Carolina, coming from all 46 South Carolina counties. In addition, students from all 50 states and more than 100 foreign countries are represented. (Almost 16,000 students study at the regional campuses of the University of South Carolina System.)
Housing[edit]




West Quad, also called the "Green Quad", became the University of South Carolina's first LEED certified residence hall when it opened in 2004.


The University of South Carolina campus is home to twenty-five residence halls; the most recently completed hall opened in the fall of 2011. The housing on campus is under the supervision of Department of Student Housing, and quality of life is enhanced through the Residence Hall Association, whose structure was determined by former president and vice president Amanda Pippin and Steve Smith.
University Housing provides over 6,200 on-campus housing units. Most of these Housing Centers have rooms that are air-conditioned and offer phone and cable television outlets and data connections networked to the university mainframe with access to the Internet. Housing provides many types of living experiences on the campus. Some include family residents in the 9 story Cliff Apartments, where each apartment has a stove and refrigerator. Rent includes all utilities. Freshmen housing, these centers, or residence halls, have layouts that maximize opportunities for student interaction. Freshman Centers typically feature double rooms and a central bathroom on each floor per unit. Notable freshmen centers include the 11-story Columbia Hall, 10-story Bates House and Patterson Hall, as well as South Tower which has 18 floors. Apartment style units in the modern housing units, which are often referred to as the "Quads", are the most requested type of housing among upper-level students. All are air-conditioned featuring two-, three-, and four-private bedroom floor plans with a living/dining area, kitchen, and bath.[47] Undergraduates may choose housing in a specific "living and learning community". The concept is to create a better social and learning environment by housing students with similar academic or career interests together.[48] Learning communities enhance students' living experience by providing active learning experiences, faculty-student interactions, and opportunities to explore diversity, community service, undergraduate research, and study abroad; some of these centers are Maxcy College, Capstone, and Preston Residential College.[49]
Nine-story Patterson Hall, with a capacity of approximately 600 female freshmen, is Carolina's largest residence hall. The tallest and most notable landmark on the Columbia campus is the 18-story Capstone House. Top of Carolina Dining Room is on the 18th floor and was the only revolving restaurant on an American college campus. In the fall of 2004, the $29 million West Quad (now Green Quad) opened and became one of only four in the world to be certified by the U.S. Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program. The 172,000-square-foot (16,000 m2) complex includes three four-story buildings with the latest technology and environmental features for conserving water and energy and creating a healthier, greener environment for the 500 undergraduate students. West Quad, which was built with a significant amount of recycled materials, ranging from the cement blocks and copper roof to the interior carpet, is also intended to encourage students to learn more about their environment.[50]
Since campus academic enrollment exceeds the capacity of on-campus housing, the university is adding more residence halls, most of which will be suite-style. As a result, some students live in popular off-campus housing, including apartments at Greene Crossing, The Club at Carolina Stadium, Pointe West, College Suites, RiverSide Estates/University Commons, The Wilshire House at Union Station, Whaley's Mill (now The Loft), Granby Mill, and Garnet River Walk; houses in the Shandon, Rosewood, and Olympia areas of Columbia; and off-campus housing provided by Greek organizations.[51]
Student government[edit]
USC's student government is composed of the Executive, Judicial, and Legislative branches. A 50-member Student Senate is led by the Student Body Vice President. The Student Senate enacts referendums, resolutions, and bills to enhance the student body in non-academic fields, maintains a budget for student life programs and organizations, confirms nominations for cabinet positions, and makes recommendations for change within the university. Student Government is operated entirely by students with a Constitutional Council (its version of a Supreme Court) and Elections Commission. Authority derives from the Student Government Constitution, a document written and adopted with the inception of Student Government and overseen by the President of the University of South Carolina and the University's Board of Trustees.
Organizations[edit]
Students may participate in any of the 400 registered student organizations.
Carolina Productions is a student organization responsible for providing diverse educational programs, entertainment, and special events for the university. It is composed of seven commissions, each of which concentrates on separate programming.
Honor societies include Alpha Epsilon Delta, Alpha Lambda Delta, Alpha Phi Sigma, Beta Alpha Psi, Carolina Scholars Association, Chi Sigma Iota, Eta Sigma Delta, Gamma Beta Phi, Golden Key, Kappa Delta Epsilon Society, McNair Scholars Association, Mortar Board, Mu Sigma Rho, National Residence Hall Honorary, National Society of Collegiate Scholars, Omicron Delta Kappa, Order of Omega, Phi Alpha Theta, Phi Beta Kappa, Phi Lambda Sigma, Phi Sigma Pi, Pi Tau Sigma, Psi Chi, Rho Chi, Sigma Alpha Lambda, Sigma Delta Pi, Sigma Iota Rho, Tau Sigma, and Tau Beta Pi.
Professional organizations include Kappa Kappa Psi National Band Fraternity, Academy of Student Pharmacists, Alpha Kappa Psi, American Marketing Association, Delta Sigma Pi, Gamecock Pre-Veterinary Association, Global Business Council, Library and Information Science Student Association, Phi Alpha Delta, Public Relations Student Society of America, Social Work Student Association, Men in Nursing, Student Nurses Association, American Society of Civil Engineers, Biomedical Engineering Society, Phi Beta Lambda, Theta Tau, Society of Women Engineers, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, among others.
Religious organizations include Canterbury Community (The Episcopal Church), Christian Legal Society, Baptist Collegiate Ministry, Campus Crusade for Christ, Chi Alpha (Assemblies of God), Christ's Student Church (Church of Christ), Hillel (Jewish), Lutheran Campus Ministry, Methodist Student Network, Muslim Students Association, Orthodox Christian Fellowship, Presbyterian (USA) Student Association, The Navigators, Reformed University Fellowship (Presbyterian Church in America), St. Thomas More Catholic Community, InterVarsity Christian Fellowship, Student Christian Fellowship, Saint Theodore's Anglican Chapel, and Kappa Upsilon Chi.
Minority and international student organizations include Association of African American Students, Students Allied for Latin America, Bisexual, Gay, Lesbian and Straight Alliance, Black Graduate Student Association, (LASO) Latin American Student Organization, Hellenic Student Organization, NAACP, Brothers of Nubian Descent, Ethnic Student Ministries, Indian Cultural Exchange, Indian Student Association, International Student Association, Nihon Club, Fellowship Association of Chinese Students and Scholars, Taiwanese Students Association, Thai Students Association, Turkish Student Association, Vietnamese Student Association, Filipino-American Student Association, SEED, Secular Student Alliance at USC, Society of Black Engineers, Hindu Students Council, and African-American Male Institute.
Other organizations include choral groups, concert band, the Carolina Debate Union, the USC Mock Trial Team, dance, drama/theater, jazz band, the Mighty Sound of the Southeast, music ensembles, musical theater, the anime club Nashi[52] (Creators of the annual event Nashi-Con, garnering over 1000 attendees annually to the university), opera, pep band, symphony orchestra, and the campus radio station.
Students can also join the Reserve Officers Training Corps (ROTC) or participate in any of the local projects sponsored by Habitat for Humanity.
Media[edit]
The Daily Gamecock is an editorially independent student newspaper founded in 1908 that is published Monday through Friday during the fall and spring semesters and nine times during the summer, with the exception of university holidays and exam periods. It has a readership of more than 30,000 and is distributed across the university campus and regional campuses in the USC System.
The student run radio station, WUSC, began broadcasting on the AM dial in 1947. In January 1977 WUSC began broadcasting on the FM dial, and in 1982 the station found its current home at 90.5 FM. In June 2006, WUSC upgraded to a current digital transmitter and are now broadcasting in HD radio. WUSC-FM was one of the first stations in the state to broadcast in HD and recently made history by being the first station in the state to broadcast in HD2.[53]
Students also publish a literary magazine, Garnet & Black, which was formed in 1994 as a consolidation of the university's former yearbook and its literary magazine. The magazine focuses on timely issues and trends of student interest and regularly offering tidbits on current events and a "Create" section showcasing students' literature and artwork. It is published four times a year and is free to students at many locations across the Carolina community.[54]
USC established its first television station in the Fall 2006, Student Government Television (SGTV). It was funded by Student Government until April 2007 when Student Government released SGTV to the Department of Student Media, which also operates The Daily Gamecock, Garnet & Black Magazine and WUSC-FM. It was then that the station changed its name to it current name, Student Gamecock Television (SGTV). SGTV airs student created content 24/7 that can be seen on campus cable channel 4. It can also be watched live off-campus during the academic year on its official website stream. SGTV strives to provide original, informative and entertaining programming while serving as an outlet for student work.
Greek organizations[edit]
About 15% of the male student body and 24% of the female student body participate in Greek organizations.[55] Greek life is governed by an internal body that is called the Greek Council. There are two separate councils, one for males and another for females, that oversee activities and recruitment for fraternities and sororities on campus. The organizations hold two rush classes for the fall and spring semesters. The Greek organizations are heavily involved on campus with community service projects and spirit contests.[56]




Greek Organizations at University of South Carolina



Fraternities

Alpha Epsilon Pi, Alpha Phi Alpha, Alpha Tau Omega, Beta Theta Pi, Chi Psi, Delta Kappa Epsilon, Delta Tau Delta, Delta Upsilon, Iota Phi Theta, Kappa Alpha Order, Kappa Alpha Psi, Kappa Sigma, Lambda Chi Alpha, Omega Psi Phi, Phi Beta Sigma, Phi Iota Alpha, Phi Gamma Delta, Phi Kappa Sigma, Phi Kappa Tau, Phi Sigma Kappa, Pi Kappa Alpha, Pi Kappa Phi, Sigma Alpha Epsilon, Sigma Beta Rho, Sigma Chi, Sigma Lambda Beta, Sigma Nu, Tau Kappa Epsilon, Theta Delta Chi, Theta Chi



Sororities

Alpha Chi Omega, Alpha Delta Pi, Alpha Gamma Delta, Alpha Kappa Alpha, Alpha Xi Delta, Chi Omega, Delta Delta Delta, Delta Sigma Theta, Delta Zeta, Gamma Phi Beta, Kappa Delta, Kappa Delta Chi, Kappa Kappa Gamma, Phi Mu, Pi Beta Phi, Sigma Gamma Rho, Sigma Iota Alpha, Zeta Phi Beta, Zeta Sigma Chi, Zeta Tau Alpha




The University of South Carolina also has four Musical Greek organizations; Kappa Kappa Psi, Tau Beta Sigma, Phi Mu Alpha, and Sigma Alpha Iota.
There are two service sororities; Epsilon Sigma Alpha and Omega Phi Alpha
There is one Service Fraternity, Alpha Phi Omega.
There are three co-ed professional business fraternities on campus; Delta Sigma Pi, Alpha Kappa Psi, and Sigma Omega Upsilon.
The most prominent features of Greek life at the university are the large, mostly Greek Revival style mansions maintained by the national fraternities and sororities as chapter houses. Lining Lincoln Street, Gadsden Street, and Mark Buyck Way are the houses referred to as the Greek Village. All students who live in these residences are members of a sorority or fraternity, and while the properties are managed by the university, each house is privately owned by a fraternity or sorority.[57]
The following chart is a list of the 20 fraternities and sororities with houses in the Greek Village:




The University of South Carolina Greek Village is the home of 20 sorority and fraternity houses




Fraternities
Sororities


Alpha Tau Omega
Alpha Chi Omega


Chi Psi
Alpha Delta Pi


Kappa Alpha Order
Alpha Gamma Delta


Kappa Sigma
Chi Omega


Lambda Chi Alpha
Delta Delta Delta


Pi Kappa Phi
Delta Zeta


Sigma Alpha Epsilon
Gamma Phi Beta


Sigma Nu
Kappa Delta


Phi Kappa Tau
Kappa Kappa Gamma



Phi Mu



Zeta Tau Alpha


Recreation[edit]
Students tend to socialize off campus in Five Points and the Congaree Vista. Both of these areas are within walking distance of campus and offer restaurants, bars, cafés, and a variety of local entertainment.
Lake Murray and the three rivers (Saluda River, Broad River, and Congaree River) around Columbia offer students many recreational activities. The South Carolina coast—Charleston, SC, Myrtle Beach, Hilton Head—is only a 1.5 to 2 hour drive for additional recreational activities.
Athletics[edit]
Main article: South Carolina Gamecocks




USC's Athletics Logo






The university's mascot, Cocky entertaining Gamecock fans at Gamecock Village prior to the USC vs. LousLaf game in 2007.






Williams-Brice Stadium (est. 1930, renovated 1996)


The university offers club, intramural, and varsity sports. Its 19 varsity sports teams compete in the Southeastern Conference (except for men's soccer which competes in Conference USA and women's sand volleyball which competes as an independent) and are known as the Gamecocks. The Gamecocks have won ten national team championships: 2017 NCAA Championship in women's basketball; 2010 & 2011 NCAA Championships in baseball; 2002 NCAA Championship in women's outdoor track & field; 2005, 2007, and 2015 National Championships in women's equestrian; and 2005, 2006, and 2007 Hunt Seat National Championships in women's equestrian. Also, the men's and women's track & field teams have produced many NCAA individual champions, world championship medalists, and Olympic medalists. The baseball and basketball teams have also produced Olympic medalists. Other significant accomplishments include 2010 SEC Eastern Division Champions in football, NCAA runner-up four times in women's track & field (2000, 2001, 2003, 2005), NCAA runner-up four times in baseball (1975, 1977, 2002, 2012), 1993 NCAA runner-up in men's soccer, 2005 & 2006 NIT champions in men's basketball, and the 1980 Heisman Trophy winner George Rogers. See the grid at the main article for other championships.
Fight song and alma mater[edit]
Notable among a number of songs commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement, convocation, and athletic games are: The Fighting Gamecocks Lead the Way, the USC fight song and We Hail Thee Carolina, the university's alma mater.
Fight song[edit]
USC band director, James Pritchard, obtained a band arrangement of the Elmer Bernstein-penned song "Step to the Rear" from the Broadway musical How Now, Dow Jones in 1968 and the marching band played the song at the first game of the 1968 season.[58] It caught the ear of Coach Paul Dietzel who contacted Pritchard about making it the official fight song of the university to replace the original "Carolina Fight Song" (or "Carolina Let Your Voices Ring," now called the "Old Fight Song").[58] Dietzel wrote the lyrics for the song, but asked that he remain anonymous because knowledge that the football coach wrote the lyrics might render it unacceptable to the basketball program.[58] The song was officially introduced on November 16, 1968, prior to the football game against Virginia Tech and has been the fight song since the Fall of 1969.[58]
Alma mater[edit]
The Gamecock reported in its March 1911 issue that very little progress had been made on the alma mater for the university despite a reward of $50 by the faculty. English professor, George A. Wauchope, took it upon himself and wrote the lyrics for the alma mater in 1911 set to the tune Flow Gently, Sweet Afton by Robert Burns. Other songs were written and sung, but Wauchope's song proved to be the most popular and it was adopted by the university in 1912.[59]
The tradition has developed that alumni raise their right hand as though raising a cup for the phrase "Here's A Health, Carolina" as if offering a toast.[60]
Recent accomplishments[edit]

Since 1994 students have won 383 national fellowship and scholarship competitions totaling more than $11.4 million for advanced academic study. Included are seven selections to the USA Today All-Academic Team and nearly 150 Marshall, Rhodes, Truman, National Science Foundation, Fulbright, Goldwater, Madison, Cooke, Javits, Udall, and Knowles Science Teaching fellows and scholars—among others. During the 2007-08 academic year alone, South Carolina students won 31 awards and more than $1.3 million.[61]
USC was listed as No. 9 among the nation's "Most Promising and Innovative Schools" by U.S. News & World Report. The first-time category is based on "promising, innovative changes" in academics, faculty, students, facilities or the campus.[62][63]
On June 30, 2010, USC won the national championship in Division I baseball at the College World Series, defeating UCLA at Rosenblatt Stadium in Omaha. Sophomore center fielder Jackie Bradley Jr. was named the College World Series Most Outstanding Player.[64]
On October 9, 2010, USC defeated the top-ranked Alabama Crimson Tide by a score of 35-21 at Williams Brice Stadium in Columbia, SC. ESPN's College GameDay (football) broadcast live from Old Campus District, University of South Carolina on the Carolina campus during the morning hours before the game. This is the first time in the university's history that the football team has defeated a top ranked opponent.[65]
On November 13, 2010, Carolina traveled to Gainesville, FL and defeated the Florida Gators 36-14 to clinch the SEC Eastern Division football title. This marked the school's first trip to the SEC Championship Game in Atlanta since the University of South Carolina joined the SEC in 1992.[66]
On June 28, 2011, USC won the national championship in Division I baseball at the College World Series, defeating Florida at TD Ameritrade Park in Omaha. Second baseman Scott Wingo was named the College World Series Most Outstanding Player. The Gamecocks also set records for most consecutive College World Series wins (11) and the most consecutive NCAA tournament wins (16) in the victory.[67]
In 2012, the South Carolina Honors College was ranked the number one honors college in the nation, according to "A Review of Fifty Public University Honors Programs."[68][69][70]
In the 2013-2014 season USC's women's basketball team won their first SEC Regular Season championship and secured the program's first-ever No. 1 seed in the NCAA tournament.[71]
In 2013, the university was selected by the estate of Elmore Leonard to become the repository of an archive of the author's papers and personal effects.[72]
In July 2014, it was announced that USC placed the most student-athletes on the 2013-14 SEC Academic Honor Roll of any of the 12 schools in the conference. The Gamecocks led the SEC with 336 student-athletes on the list, followed by second-place University of Georgia with 290. To be named to the list, a student-athlete must have maintained a 3.0 grade point average on the fall, winter, spring or first year academic honor rolls, or a cumulative GPA at or above 3.0.[73]
In the 2016-2017 season USC's women's basketball team was awarded a No. 1 seed in the NCAA tournament for the fourth consecutive year. The Gamecocks would go on to defeat Mississippi State in the tournament final to capture the program's first national championship.
In 2017, the men's basketball team competed in the NCAA tournament as the #7 seed in the east region. The Gamecocks reached the Sweet Sixteen by upsetting #2 seed Duke, and for the first time in school history, they reached the Elite Eight by beating #3 seed Baylor and the Final Four by beating #4 seed Florida.

Notable people[edit]
People[edit]
Main article: List of University of South Carolina people
The university has over 250,000 living alumni; and since 1801, millions have attended the school.[citation needed]







Andrew Card, BS 1971, U.S. Secretary of Transportation under George H. W. Bush, White House Chief of Staff under George W. Bush









Rita Cosby, BA 1989, three time Emmy Award winner, special correspondent for Inside Edition









Lindsey Graham, BA 1977, South Carolina Senator in the United States Senate









Richard Riley, JD 1959, former Governor of South Carolina, 6th United States Secretary of Education









Joe Wilson, JD 1972, the U.S. Representative for South Carolina's 2nd congressional district









Larry Kellner, BS 1981, former CEO of Continental Airlines, member of the Boeing board of directors









Alex Molinaroli, President and CEO of Johnson Controls, BS EE 1983, member of Interstate Batteries Board of Directors









Henry McMaster, JD, current Governor of South Carolina.









Wade Hampton III, 1836, Governor of South Carolina, United States Senator, and Confederate General.









John B. Floyd, 1829, Governor of Virginia, United States Secretary of War.[74][better source needed]




Presidents[edit]
Main article: Presidents of the University of South Carolina
During its more than two hundred-year history, the university has had 27 presidents. The Board of Trustees announced the selection of Harris Pastides as the 28th president on July 11, 2008.
Board of trustees[edit]
Main article: University of South Carolina System
Since its charter in 1801, the university has been governed by a board of trustees, which now governs the entire USC system.
Photo gallery[edit]







Flowers in front of Thomas Cooper Library









The fountain and pond in front of Thomas Cooper Library




See also[edit]


South Carolina portal
University portal



The First Year Experience Program
University of South Carolina Library


References[edit]


^ https://giving.sc.edu/UserFiles/usc/Documents/16146_endowment%20report_for%20web.pdf
^ "About The University of South Carolina" (PDF). University of South Carolina. Retrieved October 31, 2017. 
^ "University of South Carolina". Sc.edu. Retrieved August 14, 2014. 
^ "Institutional Profile: University of South Carolina-Columbia". Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. Retrieved November 1, 2013. 
^ "Best Colleges 2010: Up-and-coming National Universities". U.S. News & World Report. 2009. Archived from the original on August 26, 2009. Retrieved November 1, 2013. 
^ "Highlights: Rankings". University of South Carolina. Retrieved November 1, 2013. 
^ "Burns scholar Roy honored by University of Glasgow". University of South Carolina. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ Baity, Caroline (September 27, 2012). "After 2,000-piece acquisition, USC now has world's largest Hemingway collection". Daily Gamecock. Retrieved October 21, 2014. 
^ "Preliminary Enrollment Report - Fall 2015". Ipr.sc.edu. Retrieved August 14, 2014. 
^ [1] Archived March 7, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Durham, David (2008). A Southern Moderate in Radical Times: Henry Washington Hilliard, 1808-1892. Baton Rouge: LSU Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0807133286. 
^ Reynolds, John S. (1969). Reconstruction in South Carolina. Negro University Press. p. 233. 
^ Hollis, Daniel Walker (1956). "University of South Carolina". II. University of South Carolina Press: 66. 
^ "About the South Caroliniana Library - University Libraries". University of South Carolina. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ University of South Carolina – Highlights Archived December 18, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Innovista: Innovative Research and modern, urban lifestyle". University of South Carolina. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ "USC Vehicle Management & Parking Services". University of South Carolina. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ "My Carolina Alumni Association - Your New Home". My Carolina - My Carolina Alumni Association. Retrieved May 29, 2015. 
^ "USC Profile at the Carnegie Foundation". Carnegie Foundation. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ "USC Common Data Set: 2011-2012". University of South Carolina. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ "Freshman class sets records for size, scores". University of South Carolina. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ "Admitted Class Profile". University of South Carolina, Office of Undergraduate Admissions. Retrieved March 30, 2016. 
^ "Admitted Class Profile". University of South Carolina. 
^ a b "SC Honors College - Office of Undergraduate Admissions - University of South Carolina". Retrieved August 15, 2016. 
^ Roko, Ellyde (December 2, 2004). "New program at University of South Carolina targets top students". The State. 
^ "Top honor for SC Honors College". University of South Carolina. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ "2014 National Universities Rankings". Washington Monthly. n.d. Archived from the original on August 28, 2014. Retrieved May 25, 2015. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017: USA". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "America's Top Colleges". Forbes. July 5, 2016. 
^ "Best Colleges 2017: National Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. September 12, 2016. 
^ "2016 Rankings - National Universities". Washington Monthly. Retrieved September 6, 2016. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "QS World University Rankings® 2018". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2017. Retrieved 25 July 2017. 
^ "World University Rankings 2016-17". THE Education Ltd. Retrieved September 21, 2016. 
^ "Best Global Universities Rankings: 2017". U.S. News & World Report LP. Retrieved October 25, 2016. 
^ University of South Carolina - Highlights Archived December 18, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "USC doctoral programs gain in ratings, prestige". University of South Carolina. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ "Carnegie Classifications - Standard Listings". Retrieved August 15, 2016. 
^ "USC's research awards total $230.2 million for 2014 - Office of the Vice President for Research - University of South Carolina". Retrieved May 29, 2015. 
^ a b Lesesne, Henry H. (2001). A History of the University of South Carolina, 1940-2000. University of South Carolina Press. p. 331. 
^ Lesesne, Henry H. (2001). A History of the University of South Carolina, 1940-2000. University of South Carolina Press. p. 332. 
^ "Microsoft PowerPoint - USC 2009 CHEPresentation-FINAL 7-31 [Compatibility Mode]" (PDF). Retrieved December 29, 2010. 
^ a b "Pastides named USC president". The Post and Courier. July 12, 2008. Retrieved December 29, 2010. 
^ "Record award to create Energy Frontier Research Center". University of South Carolina. Retrieved December 13, 2012. 
^ "SECU". SEC. Retrieved February 13, 2013. 
^ "SECU: The Academic Initiative of the SEC". SEC Digital Network. Retrieved February 13, 2013. 
^ "Apartment Style Description". Housing.sc.edu. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ Living and Learning Communities Archived March 27, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Living and Learning Communities Guide Archived July 20, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ West Quad Grand Opening Archived August 8, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "USC Institutional Assessment and Compliance". Ipr.sc.edu. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "Nashi website". Web.sa.sc.edu. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "About WUSC". Wusc.sc.edu. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ Usc: Student Media Archived May 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "USC Common Data Set: 2011". Ipr.sc.edu. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "USC Greek Life". Sa.sc.edu. October 11, 2012. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "USC Greek Housing". Sa.sc.edu. October 11, 2012. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ a b c d The Carolina Bands Collection: Series I: Sheet Music (1914-2000s): 1/12 "Step to the Rear." The Music Library at the University of South Carolina website. Retrieved December 1, 2009.
^ "USC: Office of the University Registrar: A University Tradition". Registrar.sc.edu. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "USC: Alma Mater". Sc.edu. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ University of South Carolina - Highlights Archived December 18, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "USC News". Uscnews.sc.edu. August 22, 2008. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "University of South Carolina ranked in Top 10 'Most Promising and Innovative Schools' in the nation » Anderson Independent Mail". Independentmail.com. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "UCLA Bruins vs South Carolina Gamecocks - Recap". ESPN.com. Retrieved May 29, 2015. 
^ "Alabama Crimson Tide vs South Carolina Gamecocks - Recap". ESPN.com. Retrieved May 29, 2015. 
^ "South Carolina Gamecocks vs Florida Gators - Recap". ESPN.com. Retrieved May 29, 2015. 
^ "Record-setting S. Carolina sweeps Florida, wins 2nd straight national title". Sports.espn.go.com. June 28, 2011. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "Top honor for SC Honors College". Schc.sc.edu. March 27, 2012. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ Smith, Gina (March 31, 2012). "USC Honors College is No. 1". Thestate.com. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "USC's Honors College Ranked #1 in Nation". Wltx.com. March 28, 2012. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ "Georgia Lady Bulldogs vs South Carolina Gamecocks - Recap". ESPN.com. Retrieved May 29, 2015. 
^ Schuessler, Jennifer. "Elmore Leonard's Papers (and Hawaiian Shirts) Go to University". Retrieved August 15, 2016. 
^ "Gamecocks are No. 1 on the SEC Academic Honor Roll University of South Carolina Official Athletic Site". Retrieved May 29, 2015. 
^ List of University of South Carolina people


Further reading[edit]

Hollis, Daniel Walker, (1951) University of South Carolina Volume I South Carolina College, Columbia: University of South Carolina Press
Hollis, Daniel Walker, (1956) University of South Carolina Volume II College to University Columbia: University of South Carolina Press

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to University of South Carolina.



Official website
South Carolina Athletics website
 "University of South Carolina". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921. 
 "University of South Carolina". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914. 
 "South Carolina College". New International Encyclopedia. 1905. 







v
t
e


University of South Carolina




Located in: Columbia, South Carolina



Academics



University of South Carolina School of Law
Moore School of Business
Palmetto Health Richland
University of South Carolina Press








Athletics




Teams



South Carolina Gamecocks





Men's sports



Baseball
Basketball
Football
Golf
Soccer
Swimming & Diving
Tennis
Track & Field





Women's sports



Basketball
Cross Country
Equestrian
Golf
Beach Volleyball
Soccer
Swimming & Diving
Softball
Tennis
Track & Field
Volleyball





Facilities



Williams-Brice Stadium
Colonial Life Arena
Founders Park
Stone Stadium








Campus



The Horseshoe
Currell College
Melton Memorial Observatory
South Carolina Institute of Anthropology and Archaeology
W. Gordon Belser Arboretum
Koger Center for the Arts
Libraries





Student life



Cocky
The Daily Gamecock
WUSC-FM
Student Gamecock Television (SGTV)
The Fighting Gamecocks Lead the Way
We Hail Thee Carolina
Mighty Sound of the Southeast
Five Points
Congaree Vista
Riverbanks Zoo
Lake Murray





Miscellaneous



Notable Gamecocks
Presidents
Board of Trustees
History of the University
Clariosophic
Euphradian
S.C.C. Cadets
Carolina-Clemson rivalry








Founded: 1801
Students: 33,565
Endowment: 655.4 million










Links to related articles











v
t
e


University of South Carolina System



Flagship Campus



USC Columbia





Senior Campuses



USC Aiken
USC Beaufort
USC Upstate





Regional Campuses



USC Lancaster
USC Salkehatchie
USC Sumter
USC Union





Governance



Board of Trustees
Presidents












v
t
e


Colleges and universities in South Carolina



Public institutions



The Citadel
Clemson
Coastal Carolina
College of Charleston
Francis Marion
Lander
South Carolina State
USC Aiken
USC Beaufort
USC Columbia
USC Lancaster
USC Salkehatchie
USC Sumter
USC Union
USC Upstate
Winthrop





Private institutions



Allen
Anderson
Benedict
Bob Jones
Charleston Southern
Claflin
Columbia
Columbia International
Coker
Converse
Erskine
Furman
Limestone
Morris
Newberry
North Greenville
Presbyterian
Sherman
Southern Wesleyan
Spartanburg Methodist
Voorhees
Wofford





Technical colleges



Aiken TC
Central Carolina TC
Denmark TC
Florence-Darlington TC
Greenville TC
Horry-Georgetown TC
Midlands TC
Northeastern TC
Orangeburg-Calhoun TC
Piedmont TC
Spartanburg CC
TC of the Lowcountry
Tri-County TC
Trident TC
Williamsburg TC
York TC





Seminaries, graduate, and
professional institutions



Charleston School of Law
Erskine Theological Seminary
Geneva Reformed Seminary
Greenville Presbyterian Theological Seminary
Lutheran Theological Southern Seminary
Medical University of South Carolina
USC School of Law












v
t
e


Universities Research Association



Public



Alabama
Arizona
Arizona State
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Colorado State
Florida
Florida State
Houston
Illinois

Chicago
Urbana–Champaign


Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
LSU
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Mississippi
Nebraska
New Mexico
New Mexico State
North Carolina
North Texas
Northern Illinois
Ohio State
Oklahoma
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
South Carolina
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


Tennessee
Texas

Arlington
Austin
Dallas


Texas A&M
Texas Tech
Virginia
Virginia Tech
Washington
Wayne State
William & Mary
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Harvard
Illinois Tech
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northeastern
Northwestern
Notre Dame
Penn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
Rockefeller
SMU
Stanford
Syracuse
Tufts
Tulane
Vanderbilt
WUSTL
Yale





International



McGill
Toronto
Pisa
Waseda
Manchester
Liverpool
UCL












v
t
e


Southeastern Universities Research Association



Standard members



Alabama
UAB
UAHuntsville
Arkansas
Auburn
Baylor
Catholic
UCF
Christopher Newport
Clemson
Delaware
Duke
East Carolina
Florida
Florida Atlantic
Florida Tech
FIU
Florida State
George Mason
George Washington
Georgetown
Georgia
Georgia Tech
Georgia State
Hampton
Houston
James Madison
Kentucky
UL Lafayette
LSU
Louisiana Tech
Maryland
UMBC
MIT
Memphis
Miami
Ole Miss
Mississippi State
New Orleans
Norfolk State
North Carolina A&T
North Carolina
NC State
Oklahoma
Old Dominion
Regina
Rice
Richmond
South Carolina
South Florida
Southern Miss
Tennessee
Texas
Texas A&M
Tulane
Vanderbilt
Virginia
VCU
Virginia Tech
Virginia State
West Virginia
William & Mary





Affiliate members



Idaho State
Ohio












v
t
e


Southeastern Conference



East Division



Florida Gators
Georgia Bulldogs and Lady Bulldogs
Kentucky Wildcats
Missouri Tigers
South Carolina Gamecocks
Tennessee Volunteers
Vanderbilt Commodores








West Division



Alabama Crimson Tide
Arkansas Razorbacks
Auburn Tigers
LSU Tigers and Lady Tigers
Ole Miss Rebels
Mississippi State Bulldogs
Texas A&M Aggies





Championships and awards



National championships
Conference champions





Media



SEC Network (SEC Nation - SEC Storied - SEC Rewind)
SEC on CBS
CBS Sports
ESPN





Former media outlets



Raycom Sports
Jefferson Pilot Sports
Lincoln Financial Sports
SEC TV (defunct) (list of affiliates)
Turner Sports
Lorimar Sports Network (defunct)
TVS Television Network (defunct)












v
t
e


International Business Education Alliance






University of South Carolina
ESSEC Business School
Fundação Getúlio Vargas
University of Mannheim











Coordinates: 33°59′51″N 81°01′31″W﻿ / ﻿33.99750°N 81.02528°W﻿ / 33.99750; -81.02528



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 127554299
LCCN: n79056338
ISNI: 0000 0000 9075 106X
GND: 10523-5
SUDOC: 029973333
BNF: cb121485671 (data)
ULAN: 500286871
NLA: 35831806
NKC: ko2009297672











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_South_Carolina&oldid=816306816"					Categories: University of South CarolinaUniversity of South Carolina SystemUniversities and colleges in South CarolinaBuildings and structures in Columbia, South CarolinaBuildings and structures with revolving restaurantsEducation in Columbia, South CarolinaFlagship universities in the United StatesSchools of public health in the United StatesUniversities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and SchoolsTourist attractions in Columbia, South CarolinaV-12 Navy College Training ProgramHidden categories: All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from May 2017Webarchive template wayback linksUse mdy dates from August 2016Pages using deprecated image syntaxInstances of Infobox university using image sizeAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's EncyclopediaWikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRWWikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameterWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International EncyclopediaCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers