
University of Göttingen

Georg-August-Universität Göttingen





Latin: Universitas Regiæ Georgiæ Augustæ


Motto
In publica commoda (Latin)[1]



Motto in English

For the good of all


Type
Public


Established
1734


Budget
€ 1.119 billion[2]


President
Ulrike Beisiegel



Academic staff

4,446[3]



Administrative staff

7,822[3]


Students
31,500[4]


Location
Göttingen, Lower Saxony, Germany


Campus
University town


Affiliations
German Excellence Universities
Coimbra Group
EUA
U4 Network


Website
www.uni-goettingen.de





The University of Göttingen (German: Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, GAU, known informally as Georgia Augusta) is a public research university in the city of Göttingen, Germany. Founded in 1734 by George II, King of Great Britain and Elector of Hanover, and starting classes in 1737, the university is the oldest in the state of Lower Saxony and the largest in student enrollment, which stands at around 31,500[5]. Home to many noted figures, it represents one of Germany's historic and traditional institutions. Göttingen has been called "the city of science".[6]
As for reputation, the University of Göttingen was previously supported by the German Universities Excellence Initiative, holds membership to the Coimbra Group, and boasts an association with around 40 Nobel Prize winners. Furthermore, the university maintains strong connections with major research institutes based in Göttingen, such as those of the Max Planck Society for the Advancement of Science and the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Scientific Community. With approximately 8 million media units, the Göttingen State and University Library ranks among the largest libraries in Germany.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Inauguration
1.2 18th–19th centuries
1.3 Turn of the 20th Century
1.4 "Great purge" of 1933
1.5 Renovation after War


2 Campus

2.1 Library
2.2 Gardens


3 Organisation

3.1 Faculties, centers, and institutes


4 Academics

4.1 Reputation and rankings
4.2 Partner institutions
4.3 Exchange programs


5 Traditions
6 Student life
7 Notable people
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]
Inauguration[edit]
In 1734, King George II of Great Britain, who was also Elector of Hanover, gave his Prime Minister in Hanover, Gerlach Adolph von Münchhausen, the order to establish a university in Göttingen to propagate the ideas of academic freedom and enlightenment at the times of the European Enlightenment.




King George II, founder and president of the university






King George II in the Pauliner Church in 1748


Initially, the only new buildings constructed for the opening of the university were a riding hall and a fencing house, while courses were taught in the Paulinerkirche and associated Dominican monastery, or in the homes of professors. No university auditorium was built until well into the 19th century.[citation needed]
18th–19th centuries[edit]
Throughout the remainder of the 18th century the University of Göttingen was in the top rank of German universities, with its free spirit and atmosphere of scientific exploration and research. Famously, Georg Christoph Lichtenberg was the first to hold a professorship (1769–99) explicitly dedicated to experimental physics in Germany.[citation needed] By 1812, Göttingen had become an internationally acknowledged modern university with a library of more than 200,000 volumes.[citation needed]
In the first years of the University of Göttingen, it became known especially for its Faculty of Law. In the 18th century Johann Stephan Pütter, a scholar of public law at that time, taught jus publicum for half a century. The subject had attracted students such as Klemens Wenzel Lothar von Metternich, later diplomat and Prime Minister of Austria, and Wilhelm von Humboldt, who later established the University of Berlin. In 1809 Arthur Schopenhauer, the German philosopher best known for his work The World as Will and Representation, became a student at the university, where he studied metaphysics and psychology under Gottlob Ernst Schulze, who advised him to concentrate on Plato and Kant.[citation needed] By the university's centenary in 1837, it was known as the "university of law," as the students enrolled by the faculty of law often made up more than half of the university's students. Göttingen became a Mecca for the study of public law in Germany.[citation needed]




The old building of the university and its library in 1815


During this time, the University of Göttingen achieved renown for its critical work on history as well. An Enlightenment institution, it produced the Göttingen School of History.
However, political disturbances, in which both professors and students were implicated, lowered the attendance to 860 in 1834. The expulsion in 1837 of the seven professors – the so-called Die Göttinger Sieben (the Germanist Wilhelm Eduard Albrecht (1800–1876), the historian Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann (1785–1860), the orientalist Georg Heinrich August Ewald (1803–1875), the historian Georg Gottfried Gervinus (1805–1875), the physicist Wilhelm Eduard Weber (1804–1891), and the philologist brothers Jakob (1785–1863) and Wilhelm Grimm (1786–1859)) – for protesting against the revocation by King Ernest Augustus I of Hanover of the liberal constitution of 1833 further reduced the prosperity of the university.[citation needed]
Otto von Bismarck, the main creator and the first Chancellor of the second German Empire, had also studied law in Göttingen in 1833: he lived in a tiny house on the "Wall," now known as "Bismarck Cottage". According to oral tradition, he lived there because his rowdiness had caused him to be banned from living within the city walls.[citation needed]




Alte Aula (Great Hall), also Karzer, at Wilhelmsplatz (built in 1835–1837)


Turn of the 20th Century[edit]




The interior of the university Aula


At the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century, the University of Göttingen achieved its academic peak. Göttingen maintained a strong focus on natural science, especially mathematics. By 1900, David Hilbert and Felix Klein had attracted mathematicians from around the world to Göttingen, which made it a leading center of mathematics by the turn of the 20th century.[citation needed] Likewise, the Faculty of Theology in conjunction with other orientalists and ancient historians across the university became an international center for the study of religion and antiquity.
In 1903, its teaching staff numbered 121 and its students 1529. Ludwig Prandtl joined the university in 1904, and developed it into a leader in fluid mechanics and in aerodynamics over the next two decades. In 1925, Prandtl was appointed as the director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Fluid Mechanics. He introduced the concept of boundary layer and founded mathematical aerodynamics by calculating air flow in the down wind direction. Many of Prandtl's students went on to make fundamental contributions to aerodynamics.
From 1921 to 1933, the physics theory group was led by Max Born, who, during this time, became one of the three discoverers of the non-relativistic theory of quantum mechanics. He may also have been the first to propose its probabilistic relationship with classical physics. It was one of the main centers of the development of modern physics.




The old Auditorium Maximum (built in 1826–1865)


During this time, the German language became an international academic language. A number of dissertations in the UK and the US had German titles. One might be considered having had a complete academic training only when one had studied in Germany. Thus, many American students were proud of having studied in Germany, and the University of Göttingen had profound impacts on the US. A number of American politicians, lawyers, historians and writers received their education from both Harvard and Göttingen. For example, Edward Everett, once Secretary of State and President of Harvard University, stayed in Göttingen for two years of study. George Ticknor spent two years studying classics in Göttingen. Even John Lothrop Motley, a diplomat and historian, had personal friendship with Otto von Bismarck during his two-year-long study in Göttingen. George Bancroft, a politician and historian, received his PhD from the University of Göttingen in 1820.[7]
"Great purge" of 1933[edit]
In the 1930s, the university became a focal point for the Nazi crackdown on "Jewish physics", as represented by the work of Albert Einstein. In what was later called the "great purge" of 1933, academics including Max Born, Victor Goldschmidt, James Franck, Eugene Wigner, Leó Szilárd, Edward Teller, Edmund Landau, Emmy Noether, and Richard Courant were expelled or fled. Most of them fled Nazi Germany for places like the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom.
Renovation after War[edit]
After World War II, the University of Göttingen was the first university in the western Zones to be re-opened under British control in 1945.
Campus[edit]
The university is spread out in several locations around the city.




Sign at Göttingen train station displaying the motto Stadt, die Wissen schafft ("City that creates knowledge").


The central university complex with the Central Library and Mensa (student refectory/dining hall) is located right next to the inner city and comprises the faculties for Theology, Social sciences, Law, Economics/Business Administration and Linguistics. The departments of Ancient History, Classics, various languages, Psychology and Philosophy are nearby. Located to the south of the city is the Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science with its main building, the Mathematisches Institut, on the same street as the German Aerospace Center and the Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organisation. Elsewhere in the city are the departments of Anthropology and Educational Sciences as well as the Medical Faculty with its associated hospitals.
Just north of the city a new scientific center has been built in which most of the natural sciences (Chemistry, Biology, Plant Pathology, Agronomy, Forestry, Geology, Physics, Computer Science) are now located, including the GZMB. Other institutes are set around the inner city.
Library[edit]
Closely linked with the university is the Göttingen State and University Library (German: Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, or SUB Göttingen). With around 8 million media units and precious manuscripts, the library is designed for Göttingen University as well as the central library for the German State of Lower Saxony (with its central catalogue) and for the Göttingen Academy of Sciences, founded as the 'Royal Society for Sciences'.




The Pauliner Church, once the seat of the University Library in which Heinrich Heine, the Brothers Grimm, and Goethe worked






Central Library and "Raumskulptur" sculpture


Gardens[edit]
The university maintains three botanical gardens: the Alter Botanischer Garten der Universität Göttingen, the Neuer Botanischer Garten der Universität Göttingen, and the Forstbotanischer Garten und Pflanzengeographisches Arboretum der Universität Göttingen.
Organisation[edit]
Today the university consists of 13 faculties and around 26,000 students are enrolled. More than 400 professors and 4,000 academic staff work at the university, assisted by a technical and administrative staff of over 7,000. The post-war expansion of the university led to the establishment of a new, modern "university quarter" in the north of the city. The architecture of the old university can still be seen in the Auditorium Maximum (1826/1865) and the Great Hall (1835/1837) at Wilhelmsplatz.




Traditional Observatory of the University


Faculties, centers, and institutes[edit]
The University of Göttingen encompasses 13 faculties and a total of 47 additional centers and institutes (including associated centers and institutes but excluding institutes or departments within the faculties themselves).

Faculties



Faculty of Agricultural Sciences
Faculty of Biology and Psychology
Faculty of Chemistry
Faculty of Forest Sciences and Forest Ecology
Faculty of Geoscience and Geography
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Faculty of Physics
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Social Sciences
Faculty of Economic Sciences
Faculty of Humanities
Faculty of Theology
Medical Center (Universitätsmedizin Göttingen)



Centers and institutes



Göttingen Research Campus
Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities
GWDG (IT Center)
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
German Primate Center
Institute for Regional Research
Institute of the Protestant Church in Germany for Ecclesiastical Law
Laser Laboratory Göttingen
Centrum Orbis Orientalis et Occidentalis (CORO) – Center for Ancient and Oriental Studies
Center for Modern East Asian Studies (CeMEAS)
Center for Modern Indian Studies (CeMIS)
Courant Research Center: Education and Religion
Courant Research Center: Text Structures
Göttingen Center for Digital Humanities
Centrum Orbis Orientalis et Occidentalis (CORO) - Abteilung Lehre II - Antike Kulturen
Internationales Schreibzentrum
Center for Medieval and Early Modern Studies (ZMF)
Center of Modern Humanities (ZTMK)
Center for Comparative Literature Studies
Forum for Interdisciplinary Religious Studies (FIRSt)
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Göttingen (BCCN)
Courant Research Center: Evolution of Social Behaviour
Courant Research Center: Geobiology
Courant Research Center: Nano-Spectroscopy and X-Ray Imaging
Courant Research Center: Higher Order Structures in Mathematics
DFG (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) Research Center for the Molecular Physiology of the Brain (CMPB)
European Neuroscience Institute (ENI)
Geosciene Center
Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB)
Center of Biodiversity and sustainable Land Use
Center for Statistics (ZfS)
Center for Systems Neuroscience
Center for Computational Sciences
Research Center for Animal Production and Technology
Center for European, Governance and Economic Development Research (cege)
Courant Research Center: Poverty, Equity and Growth in Developing Countries
Institute of Diversity Research
Interdisciplinary Center for Sustainable Development (IZNE)
Center for Social Science Methods (MZS)
Center for Empirical Research into Teaching and Schools (ZeUS)
Center for Medical Law
Institute of Regional Research
Institute of Sugar Beet Research
Sociological Research Institute (SOFI)
Institute of Economics in Small Business Economics
Institute of Applied Plant Nutrition (IAPN)
SFB 755 Nanoscale Photonic Imaging
SFB 803 Functionality Controlled by Organization in and between Membranes
SFB 860 Integrative Structural Biology of Dynamic Macromolecular Assemblies
SFB 889 Cellular Mechanisms of Sensory Processing
SFB 937 Collective Behavior of Soft and Biological Matter
SFB 963 Astrophysical Flow Instabilities and Turbulence
SFB 990 Ecological and Socioeconomic Functions of Tropical Lowland Rainforest Transformation Systems (Sumatra, Indonesia)
SFB 1002 Modulatory Units in Heart Failure
SFB 1073 Atomic Scale Control of Energy Conversion


Academics[edit]
Reputation and rankings[edit]


University rankings


Global


ARWU World[8]
95


Times World[10]
113=


QS World[9]
181=


A well-established institution, the University of Göttingen has long been rated among the best universities in Germany and across the globe. Within the framework of the 2006–07 German Universities Excellence Initiative, it won funding for its future concept "Tradition, Innovation, Autonomy," its graduate school "Neurosciences and Molecular Biosciences," and its research cluster "Microscopy at the Nanometer Range." In the 2012 Excellence Initiative, Göttingen succeeded in obtaining funds for its graduate school "Neurosciences and Molecular Biosciences" and its research cluster "Microscopy at the Nanometer Range" but failed in its bid for future concept financing.
The University of Göttingen is associated with 40 Nobel laureates. The most recent Nobel laureates associated with the university are Stefan Hell (Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 2014) and Thomas C. Südhof (Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, 2013). Stefan Hell has been a lecturer (in Privatdozent capacity) at the University of Göttingen since 2004 and the director of the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in the Göttingen Research Campus since 2002, while Thomas Südhof, currently a professor at Stanford University, worked on his doctoral thesis at the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in the lab of British biochemist Victor P. Whittaker.
Göttingen has declined in overall international rankings in recent years. For example, in the Shanghai Ranking (ARWU) of 2017, it is ranked 95th, while in 2004 it was ranked 79th.[11] Similarly, in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2017, it is ranked 113th and was previously ranked 43rd in 2011.
Partner institutions[edit]
The university is organizationally and personally interlinked with the following independent and semi-independent institutions. There are four Max Planck Society for the Promotion of Science Institutes situated in Göttingen:

Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry (Karl Friedrich Bonhoeffer Institute)
Max Planck Institute for Experimental Medicine
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, formerly Max Planck Institute for Flow Research
Max Planck Institute for the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity, formerly Max Planck Institute for History
German Primate Center – Leibniz Institute for Primate Research

Besides, the Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research, formerly Max Planck Institute for Aeronomy is closely linked and has cooperation with the university.
Exchange programs[edit]
As Germany is a member of the European Union, university students have the opportunity to participate in the Erasmus Programme. The university also has exchange programs and partnerships with reputable universities outside Europe such as University of Technology, Sydney in Australia, Tsinghua University, Peking University and Fudan University in China, Tokyo University in Japan and the University of California, Berkeley, in the United States.[12]
Traditions[edit]




PhD students who just finished have to kiss the Gänseliesel and give her a bouquet of flowers


The most famous tradition of the university is that PhD students who have just passed their Rigorosum (oral doctoral examination) or dissertation defense sit in a wagon – decorated with flowers and balloons and accompanied by relatives and friends, drive around the inner city and arrive at the Marktplatz – the central square where the old town hall and the Gänseliesel statue are located. The "newly born doctor" shall climb up to the statue of Gänseliesel (a poor princess in an old fairy tale who was compelled to keep geese by a wicked woman and later regained her identity), kiss the Gänseliesel and give bouquets to her.[13]
Student life[edit]




Gänseliesel fountain and pedestrian zone


There is an old saying about life in Göttingen, still inscribed in Latin nowadays on the wall of the entrance to the Ratskeller (the restaurant located in the basement of the old town hall): Latin: Extra Gottingam non est vita, si est vita, non est ita (There is no life outside Göttingen. Even if it is life, it is no life like here).

"Ancient university towns are wonderfully alike. Göttingen is like Cambridge in England or Yale in America: very provincial, not on the way to anywhere – no one comes to these backwaters except for the company of professors. And the professors are sure that this is the centre of the world. There is an inscription in the Ratskeller there which reads 'Extra Gottingam non est vita', 'Outside Göttingen there is no life'. This epigram, or should I call it epitaph, is not taken as seriously by the undergraduates as by the professors."
— Bronowski, 1973, The Ascent of Man, p. 360

The university offers eight snack shops and six Mensas serving lunch at low prices for the students. One Mensa also provides dinner for students.
Notable people[edit]
Main article: List of University of Göttingen people
Notable people that have studied and taught at Georg-August University include the American banker J. P. Morgan, the seismologist Beno Gutenberg, the endocrinologist Hakaru Hashimoto, who studied there before World War I, and several notable Nobel laureates like Max Planck and Werner Heisenberg. Heinrich Heine, the famous German poet, studied law and was awarded the degree of Dr.iur..
Jürgen Habermas, a German philosopher and sociologist, pursued his study here in Göttingen. Later, Richard von Weizsäcker, the former President of Germany, earned his Dr.Jur. here. Gerhard Schröder, the former Chancellor of Germany, also graduated from the school of law in Göttingen.
Klemens Wenzel Lothar von Metternich, later diplomat and Prime Minister of Austria, and Wilhelm von Humboldt, who later established the University of Berlin, Arthur Schopenhauer, the German philosopher. The Brothers Grimm had taught here and compiled the first German Dictionary. In the 19th century, Gustav von Hugo and Rudolf von Jhering, a jurist who created the theory of "culpa in contraendo" and wrote Battle for Right, taught here and maintained the reputation of the faculty of law, as well as Otto von Bismarck, the main creator and the first Chancellor of the second German Empire.
The German inventor of the jet engine, Pabst von Ohain, also studied aerodynamics under Ludwig Prandtl. Edmund Husserl, the philosopher and known as the father of phenomenology, taught here. Max Weber, the sociologist studied here for one term. Carl Friedrich Gauss taught here in the 19th century. Bernhard Riemann, Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet and a number of significant mathematicians made their contributions to mathematics here.







Carl Friedrich Gauss
mathematician









Bernhard Riemann
mathematician









David Hilbert
mathematician









Felix Klein
mathematician









Constantin Carathéodory
mathematician









Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet
mathematician









J. Robert Oppenheimer
physicist









Friedrich Wöhler
chemist









Heinrich Heine
poet









Brothers Grimm
writers









Arthur Schopenhauer
philosopher









Rudolf von Jhering
jurist









Otto von Bismarck
"Iron Chancellor" of the second German Empire









Richard von Weizsäcker
former President of Germany









Gerhard Schröder
former Chancellor of Germany









Max Weber
sociologist









Jürgen Habermas
sociologist









John von Neumann
mathematician









Gottlieb Burckhardt
psychiatrist









Rudolph Sohm
lawyer and church historian









William Graham Sumner
sociologist









Emmy Noether
mathematician









Edward Teller
physicist









August Weismann
biologist









Emil Wiechert
physicist









Arnold Sommerfeld
physicist









Ludwig Prandtl
physicist









Theodore von Kármán
physicist




See also[edit]


Lower Saxony portal
University portal



Göttinger Digitalisierungszentrum
List of early modern universities in Europe
List of universities in Germany
List of forestry universities and colleges


References[edit]



^ Universität Göttingen (October 5, 2009). "Leitbild für Alumni Göttingen". Retrieved July 17, 2017. 
^ "Tabelle: Finanzhilfe, Sondermittel, Drittmittel der Georg-August-Universität Göttingen (mit Medizin)" (PDF). University of Göttingen (in German). Retrieved 2017-06-22. 
^ a b "Beschäftigte (Personenzählung) an der Georg-August-Universität Göttingen (mit Medizin)" (PDF). University of Göttingen (in German). Retrieved 2017-06-22. 
^ "Studierende (Personenzählung) an der Georg-August-Universität Göttingen (mit Medizin)" (PDF). University of Göttingen (in German). Retrieved 2017-06-22. 
^ "Studierende (Personenzählung) an der Georg-August-Universität Göttingen (mit Medizin)" (PDF). University of Göttingen (in German). Retrieved 2017-06-22. 
^ "Göttingen Tourismus - HOME". Goettingen-tourismus.de. 2017-01-04. Retrieved 2017-02-09. 
^ Deanna Spingola, The Ruling Elite: a Study in Imperialism, Genocide and Emancipation, 2011, p. 92.
^ Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017
^ QS World University Rankings 2018
^ World University Rankings 2018
^ "University of Göttingen Rankings". ARWU. Retrieved 4 October 2017. 
^ Dr. Frank Witzel, Andreas Riechel, Internetredaktion, Stabsstelle Presse, Kommunikation und Marketing. "Georg-August-Universität Göttingen - Exchange opportunities outside Europe". Retrieved 4 July 2015. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ MADHUVANTHI KANNAN. "Scientists' haven". The Hindu. Retrieved 4 July 2015. 




Constance Reid, Hilbert, Springer, 1996, ISBN 0-387-94674-8.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen (category)






Wikisource has original text related to this article:
University of Göttingen




The University of Göttingen – home page
Shame at Göttingen, detailing the 1933 purge







v
t
e


University of Göttingen



Leadership



President
Ulrike Beisiegel
Vice President
Norbert Lossau








Faculties



Faculty of Agricultural Sciences
Faculty of Biology and Psychology
Faculty of Chemistry
Faculty of Forest Sciences and Forest Ecology
Faculty of Geoscience and Geography
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Faculty of Physics
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Social Sciences
Faculty of Economic Sciences
Faculty of Humanities
Faculty of Theology
Medical Center





Recognized institutes & centers



German Aerospace Center (DLR)
German Primate Center
Center for European Governance and Economic Development Research
Göttingen Observatory
Center for Retrospective Digitization
Johann Sebastian Bach Institute





Partner institutions



Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht
Dieterich Publishing House
Max Planck Institute for the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Max Planck Institute for Experimental Medicine
Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research
International Max Planck Research School for Molecular Biology
International Max Planck Research School for Neurosciences





Holdings & collections



Göttingen State and University Library
Paulinerkirche
Göttingen manuscript
Sammlung für Völkerkunde
Forestry Botanical Garden and Arboretum
New Botanic Garden of Göttingen University
Old Botanical Garden of Göttingen University
Theater im OP





Major academic projects



AnimalBase
Germania Sacra
New Bach Edition
Deutsches Wörterbuch
Encyclopedia of Fairy Tales





Affiliated movements & developments



Göttingen School of History
History of religions school
Ritschlianism
Göttingen Manifesto
Göttingen minipig
Goettingen Journal of International Law
Göttingen Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages
Zentralblatt MATH
The Göttingen Circle
Kaiser Wilhelm Society





Affiliated people



List of University of Göttingen people
University of Göttingen alumni
University of Göttingen faculty
Göttingen Seven
Göttingen Eighteen
Akademische Orchestervereinigung Göttingen





Student associations



Corps Hannovera Göttingen












v
t
e


 German U15







Freie Universität Berlin (FU Berlin)
Humboldt University Berlin (HU Berlin)
University of Bonn
University of Cologne
University of Freiburg
Goethe University of Frankfurt
University of Göttingen
University of Hamburg (UHH)
Heidelberg University
Leipzig University
University of Mainz
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich (LMU Munich)
University of Münster
University of Tübingen
University of Würzburg












v
t
e


 German Excellence Universities






RWTH Aachen University
Freie Universität Berlin (FU Berlin)
Humboldt University of Berlin (HU Berlin)
University of Bremen
University of Cologne
Dresden University of Technology (TU Dresden)
Heidelberg University
University of Konstanz
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich (LMU Munich)
Technical University of Munich (TUM)
University of Tübingen












v
t
e


Compostela Group of Universities






Erasmus University College Brussels
São Paulo State University
University of Chemical Technology and Metallurgy
Universidad Mayor
Masaryk University
Santo Domingo Institute of Technology
University of Oulu
University of Nantes
Ilia State University
International School of Management
Philipps-Universität Marburg
University of Regensburg
University of Pécs
University of Foggia
Kore University of Enna
International Telematic University
University of Perugia
International School of Law and Business
University of Malta
Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education
Universidad Anáhuac Xalapa
University of Monterrey
University of Guadalajara
Centro de Enseñanza Técnica y Superior
Universidad La Salle
University of Bergen
University of Lima
Pontifical Catholic University of Peru
Adam Mickiewicz University
University of Łódź
University of Évora
University of Lisbon
University of Minho
Columbus University
Pan-European University
EMUNI University
University of A Coruña
University of Almeria
University of the Basque Country
University of Burgos
University of Cádiz
University of Cantabria
University of Extremadura
University of Girona
University of Jaen
Jaume I University
University of León
University of Lleida
University of Málaga
University of Oviedo
University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria
Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena
Rovira i Virgili University
Salamanca University
University of Santiago de Compostela
Technical University of Madrid
University of Vigo
University of Zaragoza
Karlstad University
University of Fribourg
University of Roehampton
University of Arizona
Drexel University
University of Massachusetts Lowell








European University Association
Networks of European universities












v
t
e


Coimbra Group of European research universities






Aarhus
Barcelona
Bergen
Bologna
Bristol
Budapest
Coimbra
Dublin
Durham
Edinburgh
Galway
Geneva
Göttingen
Granada
Graz
Groningen
Heidelberg
Iași
Istanbul
Jena
Kraków
Leiden
Leuven
Louvain-la-Neuve
Lyon
Montpellier
Padua
Pavia
Poitiers
Prague
St. Petersburg
Salamanca
Siena
Tartu
Turku I
Turku II
Uppsala
Vilnius
Würzburg












v
t
e


 Universities in Germany



North



Bremen
Jacobs University Bremen
Flensburg
Göttingen
Greifswald
Hamburg
University of Fine Arts of Hamburg
Helmut Schmidt University
Kühne Logistics University
University of Music and Theatre Hamburg
Hannover
Hildesheim
Kiel
Lübeck
Lüneburg
Oldenburg
Osnabrück
Rostock
Vechta





East



Berlin University of the Arts
Free University of Berlin
Humboldt University of Berlin
Erfurt
Viadrina European University
Hertie School of Governance
Halle-Wittenberg
Jena
Leipzig
Magdeburg
Potsdam
Bauhaus University Weimar





South



Augsburg
Bamberg
Bayreuth
Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt
Erlangen-Nuremberg
Freiburg
Heidelberg
Hohenheim
Konstanz
Mannheim
Munich
Bundeswehr University Munich
Ukrainian Free University
Passau
Regensburg
Tübingen
Ulm
Würzburg
Zeppelin





West



Bielefeld
Ruhr University Bochum
Bonn
Cologne
Duisburg-Essen
Düsseldorf
Frankfurt am Main
Giessen
Hagen
Kassel
Koblenz and Landau
Mainz
Marburg
Münster
Paderborn
Saarland
Siegen
German University of Administrative Sciences Speyer
Trier
Witten/Herdecke
Wuppertal





Technical universities



RWTH Aachen
TU Berlin
Brandenburg University of Technology
Braunschweig University of Technology
Chemnitz University of Technology
Clausthal University of Technology
TU Darmstadt
TU Dortmund
TU Dresden
Freiberg University of Mining and Technology
Hamburg University of Technology
HafenCity University Hamburg
University of Hanover
Technische Universität Ilmenau
Kaiserslautern
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
TU Munich
Stuttgart









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 154205442
LCCN: n80126141
ISNI: 0000 0001 2366 5214
GND: 2024315-7
SUDOC: 026581698
BNF: cb11880172g (data)






Coordinates: 51°32′31″N 9°56′04″E﻿ / ﻿51.54194°N 9.93444°E﻿ / 51.54194; 9.93444





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_Göttingen&oldid=814854599"					Categories: 1734 establishments in the Holy Roman EmpireEducational institutions established in the 1730sUniversities and colleges in Lower SaxonyUniversity of GöttingenHidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles containing Latin-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing German-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2017Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersCoordinates on Wikidata