Not to be confused with Pennsylvania State University or Pennsylvania College of Technology.

University of Pennsylvania




Latin: Universitas Pennsylvaniensis


Motto
Leges sine moribus vanae (Latin)



Motto in English

Laws without morals are useless


Type
Private


Established
1740[note 1]


Endowment
$12.2 billion (2017)[1]


Budget
$7.74 billion (FY 2016)[2]


President
Amy Gutmann


Provost
Wendell Pritchett



Academic staff

4,645 faculty members[2]



Administrative staff

2,500[2]


Students
21,563 (fall 2015)[2]


Undergraduates
10,406 (fall 2015)[2]


Postgraduates
11,157 (fall 2015)[2]


Location
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.


Campus
Urban, 1,094 acres (4.43 km2) total: 302 acres (1.22 km2), University City campus; 700 acres (2.8 km2), New Bolton Center; 92 acres (0.37 km2), Morris Arboretum


Colors
Red and Blue[3]
         


Athletics
NCAA Division I – Ivy League
Philadelphia Big 5
City 6


Nickname
Quakers


Affiliations
AAU
COFHE
NAICU
568 Group
URA


Website
www.upenn.edu





The University of Pennsylvania (commonly known as Penn or UPenn) is a private Ivy League research university located in the University City section of Philadelphia. Incorporated as The Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania, Penn is one of 14 founding members of the Association of American Universities and one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution.[4]
Benjamin Franklin, Penn's founder, advocated an educational program that focused as much on practical education for commerce and public service as on the classics and theology, though his proposed curriculum was never adopted. The university coat of arms features a dolphin on the red chief, adopted directly from the Franklin family's own coat of arms.[5] Penn was one of the first academic institutions to follow a multidisciplinary model pioneered by several European universities, concentrating multiple "faculties" (e.g., theology, classics, medicine) into one institution.[6] It was also home to many other educational innovations. The first school of medicine in North America (Perelman School of Medicine, 1765), the first collegiate business school (Wharton School, 1881) and the first "student union" building and organization (Houston Hall, 1896)[7] were founded at Penn. With an endowment of $10.72 billion (2016), Penn had the seventh largest endowment of all colleges in the United States.[8] All of Penn's schools exhibit very high research activity.[9] In fiscal year 2015, Penn's academic research budget was $851 million, involving more than 4,300 faculty, 1,100 postdoctoral fellows and 5,500 support staff/graduate assistants.[2]
Over its history, the university has also produced many distinguished alumni. These include 14 heads of state (including two U.S. Presidents); 25 billionaires – the most of any university in the world at the undergraduate level; three United States Supreme Court justices; over 33 United States Senators, 42 United States Governors and 158 members of the U.S. House of Representatives; 8 signers of the United States Declaration of Independence; and 12 signers of the United States Constitution.[10][11][12] In addition, some 30 Nobel laureates, 169 Guggenheim Fellows and 80 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences have been affiliated with Penn.[13] In addition, Penn has produced a significant number of Fortune 500 CEOs, in third place worldwide after Harvard and Stanford.[14][15]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Early campuses
1.2 Evolution from commuter school to research university
1.3 Educational innovations
1.4 Motto
1.5 Seal


2 Campus

2.1 Libraries
2.2 The University Museum
2.3 Residences
2.4 Campus police


3 Academics

3.1 Coordinated dual-degree and interdisciplinary programs
3.2 Academic medical center and biomedical research complex
3.3 Admissions selectivity


4 Research, innovations and discoveries
5 Rankings
6 Student life

6.1 Demographics
6.2 Selected student organizations


7 Athletics

7.1 Rowing
7.2 Rugby
7.3 Cricket
7.4 Football
7.5 Basketball
7.6 Facilities


8 Notable people
9 Controversies
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 External links



History[edit]




Academy and College of Philadelphia (c. 1780), 4th and Arch Streets, Philadelphia, home of what became the University from 1751 to 1801






"House intended for the President of the United States" from "Birch's Views of Philadelphia" (1800), home of the College of Philadelphia/University of Pennsylvania from 1801 to 1829






Benjamin Franklin was the primary founder, President of the Board of Trustees and a trustee of the Academy and College of Philadelphia, which merged with the University of the State of Pennsylvania to form the University of Pennsylvania in 1791 (Charles Willson Peale, 1785)






Ninth Street Campus (above Chestnut Street): Medical Hall (left) and College Hall (right), both built 1829–1830


The University considers itself the fourth-oldest institution of higher education in the United States,[note 2] as well as the first university in the United States with both undergraduate and graduate studies.




This statue of Benjamin Franklin donated by Justus C. Strawbridge to the City of Philadelphia in 1899 now sits in front of College Hall[16]


In 1740, a group of Philadelphians joined together to erect a great preaching hall for the traveling evangelist George Whitefield, who toured the American colonies delivering open air sermons. The building was designed and built by Edmund Woolley and was the largest building in the city at the time, drawing thousands of people the first time it was preached in.[17]:26 It was initially planned to serve as a charity school as well, but a lack of funds forced plans for the chapel and school to be suspended. According to Franklin's autobiography, it was in 1743 when he first had the idea to establish an academy, "thinking the Rev. Richard Peters a fit person to superintend such an institution". However, Peters declined a casual inquiry from Franklin and nothing further was done for another six years.[17]:30 In the fall of 1749, now more eager to create a school to educate future generations, Benjamin Franklin circulated a pamphlet titled "Proposals Relating to the Education of Youth in Pensilvania", his vision for what he called a "Public Academy of Philadelphia".[18] Unlike the other Colonial colleges that existed in 1749—Harvard, William & Mary, Yale and Princeton—Franklin's new school would not focus merely on education for the clergy. He advocated an innovative concept of higher education, one which would teach both the ornamental knowledge of the arts and the practical skills necessary for making a living and doing public service. The proposed program of study could have become the nation's first modern liberal arts curriculum, although it was never implemented because William Smith (1727-1803), an Anglican priest who became the first provost and other trustees strongly preferred the traditional curriculum.[19][20]
Franklin assembled a board of trustees from among the leading citizens of Philadelphia, the first such non-sectarian board in America. At the first meeting of the 24 members of the Board of Trustees (November 13, 1749), the issue of where to locate the school was a prime concern. Although a lot across Sixth Street from the old Pennsylvania State House (later renamed and famously known since 1776 as "Independence Hall"), was offered without cost by James Logan, its owner, the Trustees realized that the building erected in 1740, which was still vacant, would be an even better site. The original sponsors of the dormant building still owed considerable construction debts and asked Franklin's group to assume their debts and, accordingly, their inactive trusts. On February 1, 1750, the new board took over the building and trusts of the old board. On August 13, 1751, the "Academy of Philadelphia", using the great hall at 4th and Arch Streets, took in its first secondary students. A charity school also was chartered July 13, 1753[21]:12 in accordance with the intentions of the original "New Building" donors, although it lasted only a few years. On June 16, 1755, the "College of Philadelphia" was chartered, paving the way for the addition of undergraduate instruction.[21]:13 All three schools shared the same Board of Trustees and were considered to be part of the same institution.[22] The first commencement exercises were held on May 17, 1757.[21]:14




1755 Charter creating the College of Philadelphia






"The Quad" in the Fall, from Fisher-Hassenfeld College House, facing Ware College House


The institution of higher learning was known as the College of Philadelphia from 1755 to 1779. In 1779, not trusting then-provost the Reverend William Smith's "Loyalist" tendencies, the revolutionary State Legislature created a University of the State of Pennsylvania.[22] The result was a schism, with Smith continuing to operate an attenuated version of the College of Philadelphia. In 1791, the Legislature issued a new charter, merging the two institutions into a new University of Pennsylvania with twelve men from each institution on the new Board of Trustees.[22]
Penn has three claims to being the first university in the United States, according to university archives director Mark Frazier Lloyd: the 1765 founding of the first medical school in America[23] made Penn the first institution to offer both "undergraduate" and professional education; the 1779 charter made it the first American institution of higher learning to take the name of "University"; and existing colleges were established as seminaries (although, as detailed earlier, Penn adopted a traditional seminary curriculum as well).[24]
After being located in downtown Philadelphia for more than a century, the campus was moved across the Schuylkill River to property purchased from the Blockley Almshouse in West Philadelphia in 1872, where it has since remained in an area now known as University City. Although Penn began operating as an academy or secondary school in 1751 and obtained its collegiate charter in 1755, it initially designated 1750 as its founding date; this is the year which appears on the first iteration of the university seal. Sometime later in its early history, Penn began to consider 1749 as its founding date and this year was referenced for over a century, including at the centennial celebration in 1849.[25] In 1899, the board of trustees voted to adjust the founding date earlier again, this time to 1740, the date of "the creation of the earliest of the many educational trusts the University has taken upon itself".[26] The board of trustees voted in response to a three-year campaign by Penn's General Alumni Society to retroactively revise the university's founding date to appear older than Princeton University, which had been chartered in 1746.[27]
Early campuses[edit]
The Academy of Philadelphia, a secondary school for boys, began operations in 1751 in an unused church building at 4th and Arch Streets which had sat unfinished and dormant for over a decade. Upon receiving a collegiate charter in 1755, the first classes for the College of Philadelphia were taught in the same building, in many cases to the same boys who had already graduated from The Academy of Philadelphia. In 1801, the University moved to the unused Presidential Mansion at 9th and Market Streets, a building that both George Washington and John Adams had declined to occupy while Philadelphia was the temporary national capital.[21] Classes were held in the mansion until 1829, when it was demolished. Architect William Strickland designed twin buildings on the same site, College Hall and Medical Hall (both 1829–1830), which formed the core of the Ninth Street Campus until Penn's move to West Philadelphia in the 1870s.
Evolution from commuter school to research university[edit]
As recently as the 1950s, the University of Pennsylvania was considered a "commuter school".[28] The Pennsylvania Urban Redevelopment Act of 1954 enabled the university to expand and build facilities better suited to a residential university. At first, when the Ivy League was being organized, the athletic directors of the other seven schools protested, fearing Penn's football prowess and arguing that its students' relatively weaker academic credentials would give it an unfair advantage in recruiting athletes.[29]
Gradually, over the second half of the 20th century, the school raised its profile, became more selective and dramatically increased its endowment. Between 1995 and 2005, the university spent over a billion dollars on campus improvements to attract top students and faculty.[30]
Educational innovations[edit]




College Hall and then Logan Hall viewed from Woodland Ave, c. 1892


Penn's educational innovations include: the nation's first medical school in 1765; the first university teaching hospital in 1874; the Wharton School, the world's first collegiate business school, in 1881; the first American student union building, Houston Hall, in 1896;[31] the country's second school of veterinary medicine; and the home of ENIAC, the world's first electronic, large-scale, general-purpose digital computer in 1946. Penn is also home to the oldest continuously functioning psychology department in North America and is where the American Medical Association was founded.[32][33] In 1921, Penn was also the first university to award a PhD to an African-American woman, Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander (in economics).[34]




Statue of the Reverend George Whitefield at the University of Pennsylvania


Motto[edit]
Penn's motto is based on a line from Horace's III.24 (Book 3, Ode 24), quid leges sine moribus vanae proficiunt? ("of what avail empty laws without [good] morals?"). From 1756 to 1898, the motto read Sine Moribus Vanae. When it was pointed out that the motto could be translated as "Loose women without morals", the university quickly changed the motto to literae sine moribus vanae ("Letters without morals [are] useless"). In 1932, all elements of the seal were revised and as part of the redesign it was decided that the new motto "mutilated" Horace and it was changed to its present wording, Leges Sine Moribus Vanae ("Laws without morals [are] useless").[35]
Seal[edit]




1757–1780



1933 – present




The official seal of the Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania serves as the signature and symbol of authenticity on documents issued by the corporation.[36] A request for one was first recorded in a meeting of the trustees in 1753 during which some of the Trustees "desired to get a Common Seal engraved for the Use of [the] Corporation". However, it was not until a meeting in 1756 that "a public Seal for the College with a proper device and Motto" was requested to be engraved in silver.[37] The most recent design, a modified version of the original seal, was approved in 1932, adopted a year later and is still used for much of the same purposes as the original.[36]
The outer ring of the current seal is inscribed with "Universitas Pennsylvaniensis", the Latin name of the University of Pennsylvania. The inside contains seven stacked books on a desk with the titles of subjects of the trivium and a modified quadrivium, components of a classical education: Theolog[ia], Astronom[ia], Philosoph[ia], Mathemat[ica], Logica, Rhetorica and Grammatica. Between the books and the outer ring is the Latin motto of the University, "Leges Sine Moribus Vanae".[36]
Campus[edit]




Overlooking Lower Quad from Upper Quad


Much of Penn's architecture was designed by the Cope & Stewardson firm, whose principal architects combined the Gothic architecture of the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge with the local landscape to establish the Collegiate Gothic style. The present core campus covers over 279 acres (1.13 km2) in a contiguous area of West Philadelphia's University City section, whereas the older heart of the campus comprises the University of Pennsylvania Campus Historic District. All of Penn's schools and most of its research institutes are located on this campus. The surrounding neighborhood includes several restaurants and pubs, a large upscale grocery store and a movie theater on the western edge of campus.
The campus has several notable art installations. The "Covenant", better known to the student body as "The Tampons",[38] is a large red structure located on Locust Walk between the high rise residences. It was installed in 1975 and is made of rolled sheets of milled steel. A larger-than-life white button, known as "The Button", is another popular sculpture. It sits at the south entrance of Van Pelt Library and has button holes large enough to stand in. Penn also has a replica of the "Love" sculpture, part of a series created by Robert Indiana. It is a painted aluminum sculpture and was installed in 1998.
The Module 6 Utility Plant and Garage at Penn was designed by BLT Architects and completed in 1995. Module 6 is located at 38th and Walnut and includes spaces for 627 vehicles, 9,000 sq ft (840 m2) of storefront retail operations, a 9,500-ton chiller module and corresponding extension of the campus chilled water loop and a 4,000-ton ice storage facility.[39]
In 2007, Penn acquired about 35 acres (140,000 m2) between the campus and the Schuylkill River (the former site of the Philadelphia Civic Center and a nearby 24-acre (97,000 m2) site owned by the United States Postal Service). Dubbed the Postal Lands, the site extends from Market Street on the north to Penn's Bower Field on the south, including the former main regional U.S. Postal Building at 30th and Market Streets, now the regional office for the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. Over the next decade, the site will become the home to educational, research, biomedical, and mixed-use facilities. The first phase, comprising a park and athletic facilities, opened in the fall of 2011. Penn also plans new connections between the campus and the city, including a pedestrian bridge. In 2010, in its first significant expansion across the Schuylkill River, Penn purchased 23 acres at the northwest corner of 34th Street and Grays Ferry Avenue from DuPont for storage and office space.




Upper Quad Gate


In September 2011, Penn completed the construction of the $46.5 million 24-acre (97,000 m2) Penn Park, which features passive and active recreation and athletic components framed and subdivided by canopy trees, lawns, and meadows. It is located east of the Highline Green and stretches from Walnut Street to South Streets. The University also owns the 92-acre (370,000 m2) Morris Arboretum in Chestnut Hill in northwestern Philadelphia, the official arboretum of the state of Pennsylvania. Penn also owns the 687-acre (2.78 km2) New Bolton Center, the research and large-animal health care center of its Veterinary School. Located near Kennett Square, New Bolton Center received nationwide media attention when Kentucky Derby winner Barbaro underwent surgery at its Widener Hospital for injuries suffered while running in the Preakness Stakes.
Penn borders Drexel University and is near the University of the Sciences in Philadelphia. The renowned cancer research center Wistar Institute is also located on campus. In 2014, a new 7-story glass and steel building was completed next to the Institute's historic 117-year-old brick building further expanding collaboration between the university and the Wistar Institute.[40]
Libraries[edit]




Fisher Fine Arts Library, also referred to as the Furness Library or simply the Fine Arts Library


Penn's library began in 1750 with a donation of books from cartographer Lewis Evans. Twelve years later, then-provost William Smith sailed to England to raise additional funds to increase the collection size. Benjamin Franklin was one of the Libraries' earliest donors and, as a Trustee, saw to it that funds were allocated for the purchase of texts from London, many of which are still part of the collection, more than 250 years later. It has grown into a system of 15 libraries (13 are on the contiguous campus) with 400 full-time equivalent (FTE) employees and a total operating budget of more than $48 million. The library system has 6.19 million book and serial volumes as well as 4.23 million microform items and 1.11 million e-books.[2] It subscribes to over 68,000 print serials and e-journals.[41]
Penn's Libraries, with associated school or subject area: Annenberg (School of Communications), located in the Annenberg School; Biddle (Law), located in the Law School; Biomedical, located adjacent to the Robert Wood Johnson Pavilion of the Medical School; Chemistry, located in the 1973 Wing of the Chemistry Building; Dental Medicine; Engineering, located on the second floor of the Towne Building in the Engineering School; Fine Arts, located within the Fisher Fine Arts Library, designed by Frank Furness; Katz Center for Advanced Judaic Studies, located on Walnut Street at Washington Square; Lea Library, located within the Van Pelt Library; Lippincott (Wharton School), located on the second floor of the Van Pelt-Dietrich Library Center; Math/Physics/Astronomy, located on the third floor of David Rittenhouse Laboratory; Museum (Archaeology); Rare Books and Manuscripts; Van Pelt-Dietrich Library Center (Humanities and Social Sciences) – location of Weigle Information Commons; Veterinary Medicine, located in Penn Campus and New Bolton Center; and High Density Storage.
The Penn Libraries are strong in Area Studies,[42] with bibliographers for Africa, East Asia, Judaica, Latin America, Middle East, Russia and Slavic and South Asia. As a result, the Penn Libraries have extensive collections in several hundred languages.
The University Museum[edit]




University Museum and Warden Garden


Main article: University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology
Since the University museum was founded in 1887, it has taken part in 400 research projects worldwide.[43] The museum's first project was an excavation of Nippur, a location in current day Iraq.[44] The museum has three gallery floors with artifacts from Egypt, the Middle East, Mesoamerica, Asia, the Mediterranean, Africa and indigenous artifacts of the Americas.[43] Its most famous object is the goat rearing into the branches of a rosette-leafed plant, from the royal tombs of Ur. The Museum's excavations and collections foster a strong research base for graduate students in the Graduate Group in the Art and Archaeology of the Mediterranean World. Features of the Beaux-Arts building include a rotunda and gardens that include Egyptian papyrus. The Institute of Contemporary Art, which is based on Penn's campus, showcases various art exhibitions throughout the year.
Residences[edit]
Main article: University of Pennsylvania College Houses
Every College House at the University of Pennsylvania has at least four members of faculty in the roles of House Dean, Faculty Master and College House Fellows.[45] Within the College Houses, Penn has nearly 40 themed residential programs for students with shared interests such as world cinema or science and technology. Many of the nearby homes and apartments in the area surrounding the campus are often rented by undergraduate students moving off campus after their first year, as well as by graduate and professional students.
The College Houses include W.E.B. Du Bois, Fisher Hassenfeld, Gregory, Harnwell, Harrison, Hill, Kings Court English, New College House, Riepe, Rodin, Stouffer and Ware.[46] Fisher Hassenfeld, Ware and Riepe together make up one building called "The Quad".
Campus police[edit]
The University of Pennsylvania Police Department (UPPD) is the largest private police department in Pennsylvania, with 117 members. All officers are sworn municipal police officers and retain general law enforcement authority while on the campus.[47]
In 2016, a UPPD explosives detection dog named "Zzisa" took fifth place in a national competition.[48]
Academics[edit]


University of Pennsylvania graduate and professional schools[49]


School
Year founded






Annenberg School for Communication
1958


Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
1881[50]


Graduate School of Education
1915


Law School
1850[note 3]


Perelman School of Medicine
1765[52]


School of Dental Medicine
1878[53]


School of Design
1868


School of Engineering and Applied Science
1850[54]


School of Nursing
1935


School of Social Policy and Practice
1948


School of Veterinary Medicine
1884[55]


The Wharton School
1881[56]


The College of Arts and Sciences is the undergraduate division of the School of Arts and Sciences. The School of Arts and Sciences also contains the Graduate Division and the College of Liberal and Professional Studies, which is home to the Fels Institute of Government, the master's programs in Organizational Dynamics, and the Environmental Studies (MES) program. Wharton is the business school of the University of Pennsylvania. Other schools with undergraduate programs include the School of Nursing and the School of Engineering and Applied Science (SEAS).
Penn has a strong focus on interdisciplinary learning and research. It offers double degree programs, unique majors, and academic flexibility. Penn's "One University" policy allows undergraduates access to courses at all of Penn's undergraduate and graduate schools, except the medical, veterinary and dental schools. Undergraduates at Penn may also take courses at Bryn Mawr, Haverford and Swarthmore, under a reciprocal agreement known as the Quaker Consortium.
Coordinated dual-degree and interdisciplinary programs[edit]
Penn offers specialized coordinated dual-degree (CDD) programs, which award candidates degrees from multiple schools at the University upon completion of graduation criteria of both schools. Undergraduate programs include:

The Jerome Fisher Program in Management and Technology
Artificial Intelligence: Computer and Cognitive Science
The Huntsman Program in International Studies and Business
Nursing and Health Care Management
The Roy and Diana Vagelos Program in Life Sciences and Management
Vagelos Scholars Program in Molecular Life Sciences
Vagelos Integrated Program in Energy Research (VIPER)
Accelerated 7 year Bio-Dental Program
Singh Program in Networked & Social Systems Engineering (NETS)[57]
Accelerated 6-year Law and Medicine Program[58]

Dual-degree programs which lead to the same multiple degrees without participation in the specific above programs are also available. Unlike CDD programs, "dual degree" students fulfill requirements of both programs independently without involvement of another program. Specialized dual-degree programs include Liberal Studies and Technology as well as an Artificial Intelligence: Computer and Cognitive Science Program. Both programs award a degree from the College of Arts and Sciences and a degree from the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. In addition, the Vagelos Scholars Program in Molecular Life Sciences allows its students to either double major in the sciences or submatriculate and earn both a B.A. and a M.S. in four years. The most recent Vagelos Integrated Program in Energy Research (VIPER) will be first offered for the class of 2016. A joint program of Penn's School of Arts and Sciences and the School of Engineering and Applied Science, VIPER leads to dual Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science in Engineering degrees by combining majors from each school.
For graduate programs, Penn offers many formalized double degree graduate degrees such as a joint J.D./MBA, and maintains a list of interdisciplinary institutions, such as the Institute for Medicine and Engineering, the Joseph H. Lauder Institute for Management and International Studies, and the Institute for Research in Cognitive Science.
Academic medical center and biomedical research complex[edit]




Perelman School of Medicine



University of Pennsylvania School of Dental Medicine




Penn's health-related programs—including the Schools of Medicine, Dental Medicine, Nursing, and Veterinary Medicine, and programs in bioengineering (School of Engineering), biology (School of Arts and Sciences), and health management (the Wharton School)—are among the university's strongest academic components.
However, the size of Penn's biomedical research organization adds a very capital intensive component to the university's operations and introduces revenue instability due to changing government regulations, reduced federal funding for research and Medicaid/Medicare program changes. This is a primary reason highlighted in bond rating agencies' views on Penn's overall financial rating, which ranks one notch below its academic peers. Penn has worked to address these issues by pooling its schools (as well as several hospitals and clinical practices) into the University of Pennsylvania Health System, thereby pooling resources for greater efficiencies and research impact.
Admissions selectivity[edit]
The Princeton Review ranks Penn as the 6th most selective school in the United States.[59] For the Class of 2018, entering in the fall of 2014, the University received a record of 35,868 applications and admitted 9.9 percent of the applicants (7% in the regular decision cycle), marking Penn's most selective admissions cycle in the history of the University.[60] The Atlantic also ranked Penn among the 10 most selective schools in the country. At the graduate level, based on admission statistics from U.S. News & World Report, Penn's most selective programs include its law school, the health care schools (medicine, dental medicine, nursing, Social Work and veterinary) and its business school.
Research, innovations and discoveries[edit]




Claudia Cohen Hall, formerly Logan Hall, home of the College of Arts and Sciences and former home of the Wharton School and originally, the medical school


Penn is considered a "very high research activity" university.[61] Its economic impact on the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for 2015 amounted to $14.3 billion.[62] In fiscal year 2015, Penn's research budget was $851 million. In line with its well-known interdisciplinary tradition, Penn's research centers often span two or more disciplines. In the 2010–2011 academic year alone, five interdisciplinary research centers were created or substantially expanded; these include the Center for Health-care Financing,[63] the Center for Global Women's Health at the Nursing School,[64] the $13 million Morris Arboretum's Horticulture Center,[65] the $15 million Jay H. Baker Retailing Center at Wharton[66] and the $13 million Translational Research Center at Penn Medicine.[67] With these additions, Penn now counts 165 research centers hosting a research community of over 4,300 faculty and over 1,100 postdoctoral fellows, 5,500 academic support staff and graduate student trainees.[2] To further assist the advancement of interdisciplinary research President Amy Gutmann established the "Penn Integrates Knowledge" title awarded to selected Penn professors "whose research and teaching exemplify the integration of knowledge".[68] These professors hold endowed professorships and joint appointments between Penn's schools. The most recent of the 22 PIK professors is George Demiris, who started at Penn in January 2018 with a joint appointment at the School of Nursing and the Perelman School of Medicine.[68]
As a powerful research-oriented institution Penn is also among the most prolific and high-quality producers of doctoral students. With 487 PhDs awarded in 2009, Penn ranks third in the Ivy League, only behind Columbia and Cornell (Harvard did not report data).[69] It also has one of the highest numbers of post-doctoral appointees (933 in number for 2004–2007), ranking third in the Ivy League (behind Harvard and Yale) and tenth nationally.[70] In most disciplines Penn professors' productivity is among the highest in the nation and first in the fields of Epidemiology, Business, Communication Studies, Comparative Literature, Languages, Information Science, Criminal Justice and Criminology, Social Sciences and Sociology.[71] According to the National Research Council nearly three-quarters of Penn's 41 assessed programs were placed in ranges including the top 10 rankings in their fields, with more than half of these in ranges including the top 5 rankings in these fields.[72]




ENIAC, the first general-purpose electronic computer, was born at Penn in 1946


Penn's research tradition has historically been complemented by innovations that shaped higher education. In addition to establishing the first medical school, the first university teaching hospital, the first business school and the first student union, Penn was also the cradle of other significant developments. In 1852, Penn Law was the first law school in the nation to publish a law journal still in existence (then called The American Law Register, now the Penn Law Review, one of the most cited law journals in the world).[73] Under the deanship of William Draper Lewis, the law school was also one of the first schools to emphasize legal teaching by full-time professors instead of practitioners, a system that is still followed today.[74] The Wharton School was home to several pioneering developments in business education. It established the first research center in a business school in 1921 and the first center for entrepreneurship center in 1973[75] and it regularly introduced novel curricula for which BusinessWeek wrote, "Wharton is on the crest of a wave of reinvention and change in management education".[76][77]
Several major scientific discoveries have also taken place at Penn. The university is probably best known as the place where the first general-purpose electronic computer (ENIAC) was born in 1946 at the Moore School of Electrical Engineering.[78] It was here also where the world's first spelling and grammar checkers were created, as well as the popular COBOL programming language.[78] Penn can also boast some of the most important discoveries in the field of medicine. The dialysis machine used as an artificial replacement for lost kidney function was conceived and devised out of a pressure cooker by William Inouye while he was still a student at Penn Med;[79] the Rubella and Hepatitis B vaccines were developed at Penn;[79][80] the discovery of cancer's link with genes, cognitive therapy, Retin-A (the cream used to treat acne), Resistin, the Philadelphia gene (linked to chronic myelogenous leukemia) and the technology behind PET Scans were all discovered by Penn Med researchers.[79] More recent gene research has led to the discovery of the genes for fragile X syndrome, the most common form of inherited mental retardation; spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, a disorder marked by progressive muscle wasting; and Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, a progressive neurodegenerative disease that affects the hands, feet and limbs.[79] Conductive polymer was also developed at Penn by Alan J. Heeger, Alan MacDiarmid and Hideki Shirakawa, an invention that earned them the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. On faculty since 1965, Ralph L. Brinster developed the scientific basis for in vitro fertilization and the transgenic mouse at Penn. The theory of superconductivity was also partly developed at Penn, by then faculty member John Robert Schrieffer (along with John Bardeen and Leon Cooper). The university has also contributed major advancements in the fields of economics and management. Among the many discoveries are conjoint analysis, widely used as a predictive tool especially in market research, Simon Kuznets's method of measuring Gross National Product,[81] the Penn effect (the observation that consumer price levels in richer countries are systematically higher than in poorer ones) and the "Wharton Model"[82] developed by Nobel-laureate Lawrence Klein to measure and forecast economic activity. The idea behind Health Maintenance Organizations also belonged to Penn professor Robert Eilers, who put it into practice during then President Nixon's health reform in the 1970s.[81]
Rankings[edit]






University rankings


National


ARWU[83]
15


Forbes[84]
7


U.S. News & World Report[85]
8


Washington Monthly[86]
5


Global


ARWU[87]
18


QS[88]
19


Times[89]
10


U.S. News & World Report[90]
14






National Program Rankings[91]


Program
Ranking


Biological Sciences
19


Business
1


Chemistry
19


Clinical Psychology
11


Computer Science
19


Earth Sciences
77


Economics
10


Education
3


Engineering
19


English
3


Fine Arts
33


History
11


Law
7


Mathematics
17


Medicine: Primary Care
8


Medicine: Research
5


Nursing: Master's
3


Nursing–Anesthesia
29


Nursing–Midwifery
7


Physics
16


Political Science
19


Psychology
8


Public Affairs
45


Social Work
12


Sociology
11


Statistics
8


Veterinary Science
7






Global Program Rankings[92]


Program
Ranking


Arts and Humanities
13


Biology and Biochemistry
17


Chemistry
43


Clinical Medicine
8


Computer Science
89


Economics and Business
3


Engineering
146


Immunology
10


Materials Science
41


Mathematics
65


Microbiology
10


Molecular Biology and Genetics
12


Neuroscience and Behavior
10


Pharmacology and Toxicology
43


Physics
42


Plant and Animal Science
105


Psychiatry/Psychology
9


Social Sciences and Public Health
19


Space Science
90







General rankings

According to U.S. News & World Report 's 2017 rankings, Penn is ranked tied for 8th among national universities in the United States.[93] U.S. News also includes Penn in its Most Popular National Universities list[94] and so does The Princeton Review in its Dream Colleges list.[95] As reported by USA Today, Penn was ranked 1st in the United States by College Factual for 2015.[96]
In their 2016/2017 editions, Penn was ranked 18th in the world by the QS World University Rankings, 18th by the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) and 13th by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings. According to the 2015 ARWU ranking, Penn is also the 8th and 9th best university in the world for economics/business and social sciences studies, respectively.[97] University of Pennsylvania ranked 12th among 300 Best World Universities in 2012 compiled by Human Resources & Labor Review (HRLR) on Measurements of World's Top 300 Universities Graduates' Performance.[98]

Research rankings

The Center for Measuring University Performance places Penn in the first tier of the United States' top research universities (tied with Columbia, MIT and Stanford), based on research expenditures, faculty awards, PhD granted and other academic criteria.[99] Penn was also ranked 18th of all U.S. colleges and universities in terms of R&D expenditures in fiscal year 2013 by the National Science Foundation.[100] The High Impact Universities research performance index ranks Penn 8th in the world, whereas the 2010 Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities (published by the Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan) ranks Penn 11th in the world for 2007, 2008 and 2010 and 9th for 2009.[citation needed] The Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers measures universities' research productivity, research impact, and research excellence based on the scientific papers published by their academic staff. The SCImago Institutions Rankings World Report 2012, which ranks world universities, national institutions and academies in terms of research output, ranks Penn 7th nationally among U.S. universities (2nd in the Ivy League behind Harvard) and 28th in the world overall (the first being France's Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique).[101]

Other rankings

The Mines ParisTech International Professional Ranking, which ranks universities on the basis of the number of alumni listed among CEOs in the 500 largest worldwide companies, ranks Penn 11th worldwide and 2nd nationally behind Harvard.[102] According to a US News article in 2010, Penn is tied for second (tied with Dartmouth College and Tufts University) for the number of undergraduate alumni who are current Fortune 100 CEOs.[103] Forbes ranked Penn 17th, based on a variety of criteria.[104]

Undergraduate programs

Penn's arts and science programs are all well regarded, with many departments ranked among the nation's top 10. At the undergraduate level, Wharton (Penn's business school) and Penn's nursing school have maintained their No. 1, 2 or 3 rankings since U.S. News began reviewing such programs.[citation needed] The College of Arts and Sciences' English Department is also consistently ranked in the top five humanities programs in the country, ranking 3rd in the most current U.S. News report. In the School of Engineering, top departments are bioengineering (typically ranked in the top 5 by U.S. News), mechanical engineering, chemical engineering and nanotechnology.[citation needed] The school is also strong in some areas of computer science and artificial intelligence.[citation needed]

Graduate and professional programs

Among its professional schools, the schools of business, communication, dentistry, medicine, nursing, and veterinary medicine rank in the top 5 nationally (see U.S. News and National Research Council).[citation needed] Penn's Law School is ranked 7th, its Design school is 8th, and its School of Education and School of Social Policy and Practice are ranked in the top 10 (see U.S. News).[citation needed] In the 2010 QS Global 200 Business Schools Report, Penn was ranked 2nd in North America.[105]

Executive salary

Amy Gutmann's total compensation in 2016 was $3,333,378, placing her as the second highest paid college president in the Ivy League, behind Columbia University's Lee C. Bollinger.[106]
Student life[edit]


Ethnic enrollment,
Fall 2014[107]
Under-
graduates


African American
693 (7.1%)


Native American
9 (0.1%)


Asian American and
Pacific Islander
1,917 (19.7%)


Hispanic and
Latino American
1,008 (10.3%)


White
4,355 (44.7%)


International
1,103 (11.3%)


Two or more races
373 (3.8%)


Unknown
288 (3.0%)


Total
9,746 (99.9%)






Library of the Philomathean Society






Psi Upsilon Fraternity a.k.a. The Castle






Phi Delta Theta and Kappa Sigma


Demographics[edit]
Of those accepted for admission to the undergraduate Class of 2018, 52 percent are Asian, Hispanic, African-American or Native American.[2] In addition, 53% of current students are women.[2]
Twelve percent of the undergraduate Class of 2018 were international students.[2] The composition of international students accepted in the Class of 2018 is: 43% from Asia; 15% from Africa and the Middle East; 20% from Europe; 15% from Canada and Mexico; 5% from the Caribbean, Central America and South America; 3% from Australia and the Pacific Islands.[2] The acceptance rate for international students applying for the class of 2018 was 429 out of 6,428 (6.7%).[2]
Selected student organizations[edit]
The Philomathean Society, founded in 1813, is the United States' oldest continuously existing collegiate literary society and continues to host lectures and intellectual events.[108] The Mask and Wig Club is the oldest all-male musical comedy troupe in the country. The University of Pennsylvania Glee Club, founded in 1862, is one of the oldest continually operating collegiate choruses in the United States. Bruce Montgomery, its best-known and longest-serving director, led the club from 1956 until 2000.[109] The International Affairs Association (IAA) was founded in 1963 as an organization to promote international affairs and diplomacy at Penn and beyond.[110] With over 400 members, it is the largest student-funded organization on campus. The IAA serves as an umbrella organization for various conferences (UPMUNC, ILMUNC and PIRC), as well as a host of other academic and social activities. The Penn Debate Society (PDS), founded in 1984 as the Penn Parliamentary Debate Society, is Penn's debate team, which competes regularly on the American Parliamentary Debate Association and the international British Parliamentary circuit.[111] The PDS has a history of success, consistently fielding debaters ranked in the top 10 nationally and advancing teams to elimination rounds at the World University Debating Championships.
The University of Pennsylvania Band has been a part of student life since 1897.[112] The Penn Band performs at football and basketball games as well as university functions (e.g. commencement and convocation) throughout the year and was the first college band to perform at Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.[112] Membership fluctuates between 80 and 100 students.[112]

Performing arts organizations

Penn is home to numerous organizations that promote the arts, from dance to spoken word, jazz to stand-up comedy, theatre, a cappella and more. The Performing Arts Council (PAC) oversees 45 student organizations in these areas.[113] The PAC has four subcommittees: A Cappella Council; Dance Arts Council; Singer, Musicians, and Comedians (SMAC); and Theatre Arts Council (TAC-e).
The Dance Arts Council (DAC) comprises 13 organizations, including the African Rhythms, Pan-Asian Dance Troupe and the West Philly Swingers.[114] The Arts House Dance Company is one of the council's most prominent groups. Founded in 1985, the Company is known for its strong technique, innovative student choreography and vivid stage presence.[115]

Religious organizations

Dating back to 1857, The Christian Association (a.k.a. The CA) is the oldest religious organization at the University and is composed primarily of students from Mainline Protestant backgrounds.[116] When the University moved to its current campus in the 1880s the CA was based out of Houston Hall. After moving around several times it relocated to its new building at 36th and Locust Streets (now the ARCH Building), which it occupied from 1928 until 2000. During its most active period it ran several foreign missions as well as a camp for socio-economically disadvantaged children in Philadelphia.[117] At present the CA occupies part of the parsonage at Tabernacle United Church of Christ.[118]
The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute's Sinai Scholars Society Academic Symposium is a prestigious event that brings together Jewish college students with noted Jewish academics for a day of in-depth discussion and debate at the university.[119][120]
The Penn Newman Catholic Center (the 'Newman Center') was founded in 1893 with the mission of supporting students, faculty and staff in their religious endeavors. The organization brings prominent Christian figures to campus, including James Martin in September 2015.[121] During the 2015 World Meetings of Families, which included a visit from Pope Francis to Philadelphia, the Newman Center hosted over 900 Penn students and alumni.[121]

The Daily Pennsylvanian

See also: The Daily Pennsylvanian
The Daily Pennsylvanian is an independent, student-run newspaper, which has been published daily since it was founded in 1885.[122] The newspaper went unpublished from May 1943 to November 1945 due to World War II.[122] In 1984, the university lost all editorial and financial control of The Daily Pennsylvanian when the newspaper became its own corporation.[122] In 2007, The Daily Pennsylvanian won the Pacemaker Award administered by the Associated Collegiate Press.[123]
Athletics[edit]
Main article: Penn Quakers
Penn's sports teams are nicknamed the Quakers, but the teams are often also referred to as The Red & Blue. The athletes participate in the Ivy League and Division I (Division I FCS for football) in the NCAA. In recent decades, they often have been league champions in football (14 times from 1982 to 2010) and basketball (22 times from 1970 to 2006). The first athletic team at Penn was its cricket team.[124]




Varsity rowers approach Poughkeepsie Bridge on the Hudson River, 1915


Rowing[edit]
Rowing at Penn dates back to at least 1854 with the founding of the University Barge Club. The university currently hosts both heavyweight and lightweight men's teams and an openweight women's team, all of which compete as part of the Eastern Sprints League. Penn Rowing has produced a long list of famous coaches and Olympians, including Susan Francia, John B. Kelly Jr., Joe Burk, Rusty Callow, Harry Parker and Ted Nash. In addition, the 1955 men's heavyweight crew is one of only four American university crews to win the Grand Challenge Cup at the Henley Royal Regatta. The teams row out of College Boat Club, No.11 Boathouse Row.
Rugby[edit]
The Penn Men's Rugby Football Club is recognized as one of the oldest collegiate rugby teams in America. The earliest documentation of its existence comes from a 1910 issue of the Daily Pennsylvanian. The team existed on and off during the World Wars.
The current club has its roots in the 1960s and from the influence of star winger Andrew Margolis. The University of Pennsylvania rugby teams play in the Ivy Rugby Conference and have finished as runners-up in both 15s and 7s.[125] As of 2011[update], the club now utilize the state-of-the-art facilities at Penn Park. Quakers Rugby played on national TV at the 2013 Collegiate Rugby Championship, a college rugby tournament played every June at PPL Park in Philadelphia and broadcast live on NBC. In their inaugural year of participation, the Penn men's rugby team won the Shield Competition, beating local rivals Temple University 17–12 in the final. In doing so, they became the first Philadelphia team to beat a non-Philadelphia team in CRC history, with a 14–12 win over the University of Texas in the Shield semi-final.[126]
Cricket[edit]
In the latter half of the nineteenth century and in the early twentieth Philadelphia was the center of cricket in the United States. Cricket had gained in popularity among the upper class from their travels abroad and cricket clubs sprung up all across the Eastern Seaboard (even today Philadelphia still has three cricket clubs—the Philadelphia, the Merion and the Germantown). Many East Coast universities and colleges fielded cricket teams with the University of Pennsylvania and Haverford College being two of the best in the country. (Cricket was the first organized sport at Pennsylvania.) The Penn Cricket Team frequently toured Canada and the British Isles, and even defeated a combined Oxford-Cambridge team in 1895.[127] Perhaps the University's most famous cricket player was George Patterson who went on to play for the professional Philadelphia Cricket Team. Following the First World War, cricket began to experience a serious decline as baseball became the preferred sport of the warmer months, but to this day the University still fields a cricket team.
Football[edit]
Main article: Penn Quakers football




Franklin Field, home to football, field hockey, lacrosse and track and field


Penn first fielded a football team against Princeton at the Germantown Cricket Club in Philadelphia on November 11, 1876.[128]
Penn football made many contributions to the sport in its early days. During the 1890s, Penn's famed coach and alumnus George Washington Woodruff introduced the quarterback kick, a forerunner of the forward pass, as well as the place-kick from scrimmage and the delayed pass. In 1894, 1895, 1897 and 1904, Penn was generally regarded as the national champion of collegiate football.[128] The achievements of two of Penn's outstanding players from that era—John Heisman and John Outland—are remembered each year with the presentation of the Heisman Trophy to the most outstanding college football player of the year, and the Outland Trophy to the most outstanding college football interior lineman of the year.
In addition, each year the Bednarik Award is given to college football's best defensive player. Chuck Bednarik (Class of 1949) was a three-time All-American center/linebacker who starred on the 1947 team and is generally regarded as Penn's all-time finest. In addition to Bednarik, the 1947 squad boasted four-time All-American tackle George Savitsky and three-time All-American halfback Skip Minisi. All three standouts were subsequently elected to the College Football Hall of Fame, as was their coach, George Munger (a star running back at Penn in the early 1930s). Bednarik went on to play for 12 years with the Philadelphia Eagles, becoming the NFL's last 60-minute man. He was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1969. During his presidency of the institution from 1948 to 1953, Harold Stassen attempted to recultivate Penn's heyday of big-time college football, but the effort lacked support and was short-lived.
ESPN's College GameDay traveled to Penn to highlight the Harvard-Penn game on November 17, 2002, the first time the popular college football show had visited an Ivy League campus.
Basketball[edit]




The Palestra, "Cathedral of Basketball"


Main article: Penn Quakers men's basketball
Penn basketball is steeped in tradition. Penn made its only (and the Ivy League's second) Final Four appearance in 1979, where the Quakers lost to Magic Johnson-led Michigan State in Salt Lake City. (Dartmouth twice finished second in the tournament in the 1940s, but that was before the beginning of formal League play.) Penn's team is also a member of the Philadelphia Big 5, along with La Salle, Saint Joseph's, Temple and Villanova. In 2007, the men's team won its third consecutive Ivy League title and then lost in the first round of the NCAA Tournament to Texas A&M.
Facilities[edit]
Franklin Field is where the Quakers play football, field hockey, lacrosse, sprint football and track and field (and formerly soccer). It is the oldest stadium still operating for football games and was the first stadium to sport two tiers. It hosted the first commercially televised football game, was once the home field of the Philadelphia Eagles, and was the site of early Army–Navy games. Today it is also used by Penn students for recreation such as intramural and club sports, including touch football and cricket. Franklin Field hosts the annual collegiate track and field event "the Penn Relays."
Penn's home court, the Palestra, is an arena used for men's and women's basketball teams, volleyball teams, wrestling team and Philadelphia Big Five basketball, as well as high school sporting events. The Palestra has hosted more NCAA Tournament basketball games than any other facility. Penn baseball plays its home games at Meiklejohn Stadium.
The Olympic Boycott Games of 1980 were held at the University of Pennsylvania in response to Moscow's hosting of the 1980 Summer Olympics following the Soviet incursion in Afghanistan. Twenty-nine of the boycotting nations participated in the Boycott Games.
Notable people[edit]
Main article: List of University of Pennsylvania people
See also: List of Nobel laureates affiliated with the University of Pennsylvania







Francis Hopkinson, signed the Declaration of Independence and designed the first official American Flag









George Clymer, Founding father; early advocate for complete independence from Britain









James Wilson, Founding father; one of the six original justices appointed by George Washington to the Supreme Court of the United States









Benjamin Rush, Founding Father of the United States; Surgeon General of the Continental Army









9th President of the United States William Henry Harrison









Famed gunslinger John Henry "Doc" Holliday attended the Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery









Martha Hughes Cannon, first female State Senator elected in the United States









William Wrigley, Jr., founder and eponym of the Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company









American poet and critic Ezra Pound, a major figure in the early modernist movement, studied at the College[129]









Physician and poet William Carlos Williams graduated from Penn's School of Medicine









Kwame Nkrumah, first President of Ghana, and previously first Prime Minister of Ghana









45th President of the United States Donald Trump









Warren Buffett, considered by some to be one of the most successful investors in the world[130][131]









Arlen Specter, former U.S. Senator majored in international relations and graduated Phi Beta Kappa in 1951









Noam Chomsky studied philosophy and linguistics at Penn, graduating with a BA in 1949, an MA in 1951 and a PhD in 1955









Steve Wynn, known for his involvement in the American luxury casino and hotel industry









Ed Rendell, 45th Governor of Pennsylvania; 96th Mayor of Philadelphia









Jon Huntsman Jr., politician, businessman and diplomat









Elon Musk, founder and CEO of PayPal,[132] Tesla Motors[133] and SpaceX[134]




Penn has produced many alumni that have distinguished themselves in the sciences, academia, politics, the military, arts and media. The size, quality and diversity of Penn's alumni body have established the institution as one of the most powerful alumni networks in the United States, as well as internationally.[135]
Fourteen heads of state or government have attended or graduated from Penn, including current president Donald J. Trump, former president William Henry Harrison, who attended the medical school for less than a semester;[136] former Prime Minister of the Philippines Cesar Virata; the first president of Nigeria, Nnamdi Azikiwe; the first president of Ghana, Kwame Nkrumah; and the current president of Ivory Coast, Alassane Ouattara. Other notable politicians who hold a degree from Penn include India's Minister of State for Finance Jayant Sinha,[137] former ambassador to China and former 2012 presidential candidate and Utah governor Jon Huntsman, Jr., Mexico's current minister of finance, Ernesto J. Cordero, long-serving Pennsylvania senator Arlen Specter and former Pennsylvania governor Ed Rendell.
The university's presence in the judiciary in and outside of the United States is also notable. It has produced three United States Supreme Court justices, William J. Brennan, Owen J. Roberts and James Wilson, Supreme Court justices of foreign states (e.g., Ronald Wilson of the High Court of Australia and Ayala Procaccia of the Israel Supreme Court), European Court of Human Rights judge Nona Tsotsoria, Irish Court of Appeal justice Gerard Hogan and founders of international law firms, e.g. James Harry Covington (co-founder of Covington & Burling), Martin Lipton (co-founder of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen, & Katz) and George Wharton Pepper (U.S. Senator from Pennsylvania and founder of Pepper Hamilton).
Penn alumni also have a strong presence in financial and economic life. Penn has educated several governors of central banks including Yasin Anwar (State Bank of Pakistan), Ignazio Visco (Bank of Italy), Kim Choongsoo (Bank of Korea), Zeti Akhtar Aziz (Central Bank of Malaysia), Pridiyathorn Devakula (Governor, Bank of Thailand, and former Minister of Finance), Farouk El Okdah (Central Bank of Egypt) and Alfonso Prat Gay (Central Bank of Argentina), as well as the director of the United States National Economic Council, Gene Sperling. Founders of technology companies include Ralph J. Roberts (co-founder of Comcast), Elon Musk (founder of PayPal, Tesla Motors and SpaceX), Leonard Bosack (co-founder of Cisco), David Brown (co-founder of Silicon Graphics) and Mark Pincus (founder of Zynga, the company behind Farmville). Other notable businessmen and entrepreneurs who attended or graduated from the University of Pennsylvania include William S. Paley (former president of CBS), Warren Buffett[note 4] (CEO of Berkshire Hathaway), Donald Trump, Jr., and Ivanka Trump, Safra Catz (president and CFO of Oracle Corporation), Leonard Lauder (chairman emeritus of Estée Lauder Companies and son of founder Estée Lauder), Steven A. Cohen (founder of SAC Capital Advisors), Robert Kapito (president of BlackRock, the world's largest asset manager) and P. Roy Vagelos (former president and CEO of multinational pharmaceutical company Merck & Co.).
Among other distinguished alumni are the current or past presidents of Harvard University, Drew Gilpin Faust; the University of California, Mark Yudof; and Northwestern University, Morton O. Schapiro; poets William Augustus Muhlenberg, Ezra Pound and William Carlos Williams, linguist and political theorist Noam Chomsky, architect Louis Kahn, cartoonist Charles Addams, actress Candice Bergen, theatrical producer Harold Prince, counter-terrorism expert and author Richard A. Clarke, pollster and strategist Frank Luntz, attorney Gloria Allred, journalist Joe Klein, fashion designer Tory Burch, recording artist John Legend and football athlete and coach John Heisman.
Within the ranks of Penn's most historic graduates are also eight signers of the Declaration of Independence and nine signers of the Constitution. These include George Clymer, Francis Hopkinson, Thomas McKean, Robert Morris, William Paca, George Ross, Benjamin Rush, James Wilson, Thomas Fitzsimons, Jared Ingersoll, Rufus King, Thomas Mifflin, Gouverneur Morris and Hugh Williamson.
In total, 30 Penn affiliates have won Nobel Prizes, of whom four are current faculty members and nine are alumni.[citation needed] Penn also counts 115 members of the United States National Academies, 79 members of the Academy of Arts and Sciences, eight National Medal of Science laureates, 108 Sloan Fellows, 30 members of the American Philosophical Society and 170 Guggenheim Fellowships.[citation needed]
Controversies[edit]
From 1930 to 1966, there were 54 documented Rowbottom riots, a student tradition of rioting which included everything from car smashing to panty raids.[138] After 1966, there were five more instances of "Rowbottoms", the latest occurring in 1980.[138]
In 1965, Penn students learned that the university was sponsoring research projects for the United States' chemical and biological weapons program.[139] According to Herman and Rutman, the revelation that "CB Projects Spicerack and Summit were directly connected with U.S. military activities in Southeast Asia", caused students to petition Penn president Gaylord Harnwell to halt the program, citing the project as being "immoral, inhuman, illegal, and unbefitting of an academic institution".[139] Members of the faculty believed that an academic university should not be performing classified research and voted to re-examine the University agency which was responsible for the project on November 4, 1965.[139]
In 1984, the Head Lab at the University of Pennsylvania was raided by members of the Animal Liberation Front.[140] Sixty hours' worth of video footage depicting animal cruelty was stolen from the lab.[141] The video footage was released to PETA who edited the tapes and created the documentary Unnecessary Fuss.[141] As a result of an investigation called by the Office for Protection from Research Risks, the chief veterinarian was fired and the Head Lab was closed.[141]
The school gained notoriety in 1993 for the water buffalo incident in which a student who told a noisy group of black students to "shut up, you water buffalo" was charged with violating the university's racial harassment policy.[142]
In recent years, mental health has become an issue on campus with ten student suicides between the years of 2013 to 2016.[143] The school responded by launching a task force.[144]
See also[edit]


Philadelphia portal
Pennsylvania portal
University portal



List of universities by number of billionaire alumni
Education in Philadelphia
Think Tanks and Civil Societies Program (TTCSP)
University of Pennsylvania Press


Notes[edit]



^ The University officially uses 1740 as its founding date and has since 1899. The ideas and intellectual inspiration for the academic institution stem from 1749, with a pamphlet published by Benjamin Franklin, (1705/1706–1790). When Franklin's institution was established, it inhabited a schoolhouse built in 1740 for another school, which never came to practical fruition. Penn archivist Mark Frazier Lloyd [1] notes: "In 1899, UPenn's Trustees adopted a resolution that established 1740 as the founding date, but good cases may be made for 1749, when Franklin first convened the Trustees, or 1751, when the first classes were taught at the affiliated secondary school for boys, Academy of Philadelphia, or 1755, when Penn obtained its collegiate charter to add a post-secondary institution, the College of Philadelphia." Princeton's library [2] presents another, diplomatically phrased view.
^ Penn is the fourth-oldest using the founding dates claimed by each institution. The College of Philadelphia (later Penn), College of New Jersey (later Princeton University) and King's College (later Columbia College, now Columbia University) all originated within a few years of each other. After initially designating 1750 as its founding date, Penn later considered 1749 to be its founding date for more than a century, including alumni observing a centennial celebration in 1849. In 1895, several elite universities in the United States convened in New York City as the "Intercollegiate Commission" at the invitation of John J. McCook, a Union Army officer during the American Civil War and member of Princeton's board of trustees who chaired its Committee on Academic Dress. The primary purpose of the conference was to standardize American academic regalia, which was accomplished through the adoption of the Intercollegiate Code on Academic Costume. This formalized protocol included a provision that henceforth academic processions would place visiting dignitaries and other officials in the order of their institution's founding dates. The following year, Penn's The Alumni Register magazine, published by the General Alumni Society, began a campaign to retroactively revise the University's founding date to 1740, in order to become older than Princeton, which had been chartered in 1746. Three years later in 1899, Penn's board of trustees acceded to this alumni initiative and officially changed its founding date from 1749 to 1740, affecting its rank in academic processions as well as the informal bragging rights that come with the age-based hierarchy in academia generally. See Building Penn's Brand for more details on why Penn did this. Princeton implicitly challenges this rationale, [3] also considering itself to be the nation's fourth oldest institution of higher learning. [4] To further complicate the comparison, a University of Edinburgh-educated Presbyterian minister from Scotland, named William Tennent and his son Gilbert Tennent operated a "Log College" in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, from 1726 until 1746; some have suggested a connection between it and Princeton because five members of Princeton's first Board of Trustees were affiliated with the "Log College", including Gilbert Tennent, William Tennent, Jr., and Samuel Finley, the latter of whom later became President of Princeton. All twelve members of Princeton's first Board of Trustees were leaders from the "New Side" or "New Light" wing of the Presbyterian Church in the New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania areas.[5] This antecedent relationship, if considered a formal lineage with institutional continuity, would justify pushing Princeton's founding date back to 1726, earlier than Penn's 1740. However, Princeton has not done so, and a Princeton historian says that "the facts do not warrant" such an interpretation. [6] Columbia also implicitly challenges Penn's use of either 1750, 1749 or 1740, as it claims to be the fifth oldest institution of higher learning in the United States (after Harvard, William & Mary, Yale and Princeton), based upon its charter date of 1754 and Penn's charter date of 1755. [7] Academic histories of American higher education generally list Penn as fifth or sixth, after Princeton and immediately before or after that of Columbia. [8] [9] [10] Even Penn's own account of its early history agrees that the original secondary school (the Academy of Philadelphia) did not add an institution of higher learning (the College of Philadelphia) until 1755, but university officials continue to make it their practice to assert their fourth-oldest place in academic processions. Other American universities which began as a colonial-era, early version of secondary schools such as St. John's College (founded as "King William's School" in 1696) and the University of Delaware (founded as "the Free Academy" in 1743) choose to march based upon the date they became institutions of higher learning. Penn History Professor Edgar Potts Cheyney was a member of the Penn class of 1883 who played a leading role in the 1896-1899 alumni campaign to change the university's formal founding date. According to Cheyney's later history of the event, the university did indeed consider its founding date to be 1749 for almost a century. However, it was changed with good reason, and primarily due to a publication about the university issued by the U.S. Commissioner of Education written by Francis Newton Thorpe, a fellow alumnus and colleague in the Penn history department. The year 1740 is the date of the establishment of the first educational trust that the University had taken upon itself. Cheyney states further that "it might be considered a lawyer's date; it is a familiar legal practice in considering the date of any institution to seek out the oldest trust it administers". He also points out that Harvard's founding date is also the year in which the Massachusetts General Court (state legislature) resolved to establish a fund in a year's time for a "School or College". As well, Princeton claims its founding date as 1746, the date of its first charter. However, the exact words of the charter are unknown, the number and names of the trustees in the charter are unknown, and no known original is extant. With the exception of Columbia University, the majority of the American Colonial Colleges do not have clear-cut dates of foundation (Edgar Potts Cheyney, "History of the University of Pennsylvania: 1740-1940", Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1940: pp. 45-52).
^ In 1790, the first lecture on law was given by James Wilson; however, a full time program was not offered until 1850.[51]
^ Buffett studied at Penn for two years before he transferred to the University of Nebraska.



References[edit]


^ As of June 30, 2017. "Penn's 14.3% Return Was Boosted by 'Notable' Stock Performance". Bloomberg. 2017. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n "Penn: Penn Facts". University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved November 25, 2016. 
^ "Logo & Branding Standards". University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved April 1, 2016. 
^ Brownlee, David B.; Thomas, George E. (2000). Building America's First University: An Historical and Architectural Guide to the University of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 0812235150. 
^ "Office of the University Secretary: History and Meaning of Penn's Shield". Upenn.edu. 2010. Retrieved November 14, 2013. 
^ "Penn: Penn's Heritage". Upenn.edu. 2011. Retrieved August 18, 2011. 
^ Tannenbaum, Seth S. "Undergraduate Student Governance at Penn, 1895–2006". University Archives and Research Center. University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ "2016 NACUBO-Commonfund Study of Endowments" (PDF). National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO). 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2017. 
^ "2010 Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities". Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved July 19, 2011. 
^ "Top 20 Colleges with the most billionaire alumni". CNNMoney. CNN. September 17, 2014. Retrieved September 17, 2014. 
^ "Which Universities Produce the Most Billionaires?". According to annual studies (UBS and Wealth-X Billionaire Census) by UBS and Wealth-X, the University of Pennsylvania has produced the most billionaires in the world, as measured by the number of undergraduate degree holders. Four of the top five schools were Ivy League institutions. 
^ "Penn Signers of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence". Archives.upenn.edu. Retrieved January 24, 2017. 
^ "Facts | University of Pennsylvania". Upenn.edu. Retrieved January 24, 2017. 
^ "Rutgers ranked: Where the Fortune 500 CEOs Went to School". Rutgers Business School. May 23, 2012. 
^ https://www.usnews.com/education/best-graduate-schools/top-business-schools/articles/2012/05/14/where-the-fortune-500-ceos-went-to-school
^ Strawbridge, Justus C. (1899). Ceremonies Attending the Unveiling of the Statue of Benjamin Franklin. Allen, Lane & Scott. ISBN 1-103-92435-4. Retrieved November 24, 2007. 
^ a b Montgomery, Thomas Harrison (1900). A History of the University of Pennsylvania from Its Foundation to A. D. 1770. Philadelphia: George W. Jacobs & Co. LCCN 00003240. 
^ Friedman, Steven Morgan. "A Brief History of the University, University of Pennsylvania Archives". Archives.upenn.edu. Retrieved December 9, 2010. 
^ "Penn's Heritage". University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved May 8, 2016. 
^ N. Landsman, From Colonials to Provincials: American Thought and Culture, 1680-1760 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1997), pp. 30.
^ a b c d Wood, George Bacon (1834). The History of the University of Pennsylvania, from Its Origin to the Year 1827. McCarty and Davis. LCCN 07007833. OCLC 760190902. 
^ a b c "Penn in the 18th Century, University of Pennsylvania Archives". Universdity of Pennsylvania. Retrieved April 29, 2006. 
^ "University of Pennsylvania". World Digital Library. Retrieved February 14, 2013. 
^ "The University of Pennsylvania: America's First University". University Archives and Records Center, University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved April 29, 2006. 
^ "Penn Trustees 1749-1800". University of Pennsylvania University Archives. Retrieved July 23, 2013. 
^ Cheyney, Edward Potts (1940). History of the University of Pennsylvania 1740–1940. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 46–48.  Cheyney was a Penn professor and alumnus from the class of 1883 who advocated the change in Penn's founding date in 1899 to appear older than both Princeton and Columbia. The explanation, "It will have been noted that 1740 is the date of the creation of the earliest of the many educational trusts the University has taken upon itself," is Professor Cheyney's justification (pp. 47-48) for Penn retroactively changing its founding date, not language used by the Board of Trustees.
^ "Presidents of Penn Alumni". www.archives.upenn.edu. Retrieved August 24, 2016. 
^ Collins, Huntly (September 2, 1989). "Pushing For Performance At Penn After 8 Years, The University's President Earns Credit". Philadelphia Inquirer. Retrieved August 4, 2016. 
^ Rottenberg, Dan (February 15, 1991). "Would An Ivy Label Turn It Around For Temple As It Did For Penn? At One Time, Penn Had Many Of The Same Problems Temple Has Now". Philadelphia Inquirer. Retrieved August 5, 2016. 
^ Kostelni, Natalie. "Temple undertaking massive campus projects". Philadelphia Business Journal (February 10, 2005). Retrieved August 5, 2016. 
^ Thomas, George E.; Brownlee, David Bruce (2000). Building America's First University: An Historical and Architectural Guide to the University of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 3. ISBN 0-8122-3515-0. 
^ "Welcome to the Department of Psychology". University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved April 29, 2006. 
^ "History of the School of Medicine". University Archives and Records Center, University of Pennsylvania. Archived from the original on December 15, 2005. Retrieved April 29, 2006. 
^ "The life and accomplishments of Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander". University of Pennsylvania Almanac. September 3, 2002. Retrieved March 31, 2011. 
^ Hughes, Samuel (2002). "Whiskey, Loose Women, and Fig Leaves: The University's seal has a curious history". Pennsylvania Gazette. 100 (3). 
^ a b c "Frequently Asked Questions: Questions about the University". University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved October 4, 2011. 
^ Coleman, William (1749–1768). Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania Minute Books, volume 1. University of Pennsylvania Archives: University of Pennsylvania. pp. 36, 68. 
^ "The Tampons Look Like Tampons: A Public Reminder". www.thedp.com. Retrieved May 16, 2016. 
^ "University of Pennsylvania Module 6 Utility Plant and Garage". BLT Architects. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ Clarke, Dominique (September 26, 2011). "Wistar strategic plan includes new building and research". The Daily Pennsylvanian. Retrieved November 10, 2011. 
^ "Penn Library Data Farm". Retrieved December 24, 2009. 
^ "Area Studies Collections @ Penn". 
^ a b "About Us". Penn Museum. University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. Archived from the original on May 21, 2011. Retrieved August 20, 2011. 
^ "Research at the Penn Museum". Penn Museum. University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Antrhopology. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved August 20, 2011. 
^ "College Houses at Penn" (PDF). College Houses and Academic Services. University of Pennsylvania. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 1, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ "College Houses & Academic Services: University of Pennsylvania". Collegehouses.upenn.edu. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2013. 
^ "Penn Police Department". University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved November 3, 2016. 
^ "USPCA 2016 National Detector Dog Trials - Philadelphia" (PDF). United States Police Canine Association. Retrieved November 3, 2016. 
^ "Graduate and Professional Programs". University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved 22 August 2011. 
^ "About the Graduate Division". Penn Arts & Sciences. University of Pennsylvania School of Arts and Sciences. Retrieved 22 August 2011. 
^ "History of Penn Law school". Penn Law. University of Pennsylvania Law School. Retrieved 22 August 2011. 
^ Carson, Joseph (1869).  A History of the Medical Department of the University of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia: Lindsay and Blakiston. Wikisource. 
^ "History". Penn Dental Medicine. The Robert Schattner Center University of Pennsylvania School of Dental Medicine. Retrieved 22 August 2011. 
^ "History and Heritage". Penn Engineering. University of Pennsylvania School of Engineering and Applied Science. Retrieved 22 August 2011. 
^ "About Us". Penn Veterinary Medicine. University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine. Retrieved 22 August 2011. 
^ "About Wharton". The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved 22 August 2011. 
^ "NETS Homepage". Penn Engineering. Retrieved November 16, 2014. 
^ "Penn to launch joint degree program in law and medicine". Philly.com. Retrieved June 22, 2016. 
^ The Ten Toughest Schools to Get Into (PDF). My College Planning LLC. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 26, 2012. Retrieved July 31, 2011. 
^ Fiona Gleason (March 26, 2014). "BREAKING: Admissions Numbers Released". The Daily Pennsylvanian. Retrieved March 28, 2014. 
^ "Carnegie Foundation Basic Classification "RU/VH"". Carnegie Foundation for the advancement of teaching. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "Study: Penn has $14.3B economic impact". February 18, 2016. Retrieved February 18, 2016. 
^ "New Penn Medicine/Wharton Center to Study Health-care Financing". 
^ "Nursing Goes Global". Penn Current. June 9, 2011. Retrieved May 8, 2016. 
^ "Morris Arboretum's Horticulture Center is a Model of Workaday Sustainability". 
^ "Wharton School Announces $15 Million Gift from Patty and Jay H. Baker to Establish the Jay H. Baker Retailing Center". The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved October 6, 2014. 
^ Nadine Zylberberg (September 17, 2010). "Penn Med receives $13 million for new research center". The Daily Pennsylvanian. Retrieved April 7, 2015. 
^ a b "Penn's PIK Professors". 
^ "Association of Research Libraries Annual Tables". 
^ "MUP Post Doctoral Appointees Table". 
^ "The Chronicle of Higher Education Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index". 
^ Holtzman, Phyllis. "National Research Council Ranks Penn's Graduate Programs Among Nation's Best". Penn News. University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved November 10, 2011. 
^ "Law Journals: Submissions and Ranking". Washington and Lee University School of Law. Retrieved November 10, 2011. 
^ Owen Roberts, William Draper Lewis, 89 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1 (1949)
^ "Wharton History". 
^ "Wharton: A Century of Innovation". 
^ John Byrne; Lori Bongiorno (October 24, 1994). "The Best B Schools Move over, Northwestern—this time, Wharton is No. 1". Businessweek. Retrieved November 10, 2011. 
^ a b "Important Milestones and Fascinating Innovations During the Last Fifty Years of Computing Research at the University of Pennsylvania". 
^ a b c d "Some Research Highlights at PENN Medicine". 
^ "Baruch S. Blumberg". Nndb.com. Retrieved March 18, 2012. 
^ a b "125 Influential People and Ideas" (PDF). 
^ "Wharton Model (economics) – Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Britannica.com. Retrieved March 18, 2012. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017: USA". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "America's Top Colleges". Forbes. July 5, 2016. 
^ "Best Colleges 2017: National Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. September 12, 2016. 
^ "2016 Rankings - National Universities". Washington Monthly. Retrieved September 6, 2016. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "QS World University Rankings® 2018". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2017. Retrieved 25 July 2017. 
^ "World University Rankings 2016-17". THE Education Ltd. Retrieved September 21, 2016. 
^ "Best Global Universities Rankings: 2017". U.S. News & World Report LP. Retrieved October 25, 2016. 
^ "University of Pennsylvania – U.S. News Best Grad School Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved 2 June 2017. 
^ "University of Pennsylvania – U.S. News Best Global University Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved 14 July 2017. 
^ "National University Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved September 18, 2016. 
^ U.S. News Staff (January 24, 2012). "The Most Popular National Universities". Usnews.com. Retrieved March 18, 2012. 
^ "2015 College Hopes & Worries Survey Report". The Princeton Review. Retrieved March 21, 2016. 
^ "UPenn named best college nationwide for 2015". USA TODAY College. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities – 2015". ShanghaiRanking Consultancy. Retrieved October 24, 2015. 
^ "World Top 300 Universities Alumni Ranking". Chasecareer.net. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved June 6, 2012. 
^ "Research- The Center for Measuring University Performance". Mup.asu.edu. Retrieved November 2, 2011. 
^ "Table 17. Higher education R&D expenditures, ranked by FY 2013 R&D expenditures: FYs 2004–13". National Science Foundation. Retrieved November 3, 2015. 
^ "SIR World Report 2012 :: Global Ranking" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 16, 2013. 
^ "International Professional Ranking Of Higher Education Institutions 2011 Survey". MINES Paris Tech. Retrieved July 31, 2011. 
^ Burnsed, Brian (November 15, 2010). "Where CEOs at America's Largest Companies Went to College". Usnews.com. Retrieved July 1, 2012. 
^ "University of Pennsylvania Profile". Forbes. Retrieved March 21, 2016. 
^ "QS Global 200 Business Schools Report 2010 North America". TopMBA. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Retrieved July 31, 2011. 
^ "Amy Gutmann's salary dipped 2.7 percent from last year", Daily Pennsylvanian, retrieved Jan 31, 2017 
^ "University of Pennsylvania Common Data Set 2014-14, Part B" (PDF). University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved November 3, 2015. 
^ Philomathean Society (1913). A History of the Philomathean Society of the University of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania. p. 22. 
^ "Mr. Montgomery, Long-time Glee Club Director and Renaissance Man". University of Pennsylvania Almanac. 55 (1). July 15, 2008. Retrieved August 20, 2011. 
^ Maa, Peter. "Penn IAA – About us". Penn IAA. Penn IAA. Retrieved July 12, 2011. 
^ "Penn Debate Society". 
^ a b c "Who are we?!". Penn Band. University of Pennsylvania Band. Retrieved August 20, 2011. 
^ "Performing Arts Council at the University of Pennsylvania". 
^ "Performing Arts Council at the University of Pennsylvania". 
^ "Arts House Dance Company". 
^ Cheyney, Edward Potts. "A History of the University of Pennsylvania, 1740-1940." Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press (1940): 433-434.
^ "Guide, Christian Association Records, 1857-2000, University of Pennsylvania University Archives". 
^ "The Christian Association at The University of Pennsylvania". 
^ Margolin, Dovid (May 20, 2015). "Sinai Scholarship: Top Students, Academics Explore Torah's Depths at National Forum". Chabad.org. 
^ CHE, JENNY (April 7, 2011). "Floch '11 presents winning paper". Dartmouth College. The Dartmouth. 
^ a b "Catholic groups expecting record turnout for Pope's visit". 
^ a b c "About Us". The Daily Pennsylvanian. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ "2007 ACP Newspaper Pacemaker Winners". ACP. National Scholastic Press Association/Associated Collegiate Press. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ Kieran, John (October 8, 1932). "Sports of the Times". New York Times. p. 22. 
^ Rugby Mag, College 7s Looks to CRC, December 12, 2012, http://www.rugbymag.com/tournaments-special/crc/6668-college-7s-looks-to-crc.html
^ "Fixtures and Results". usasevenscrc.com. 
^ The University of Pennsylvania Archives, 'CRICKET: PENN'S FIRST ORGANIZED SPORT', http://www.archives.upenn.edu/histy/features/sports/cricket/histy.html
^ a b Rottenberg, Dan (1985) "Fight On, Pennsylvania" Trustees of University of Pennsylvania pg. 25, 28, 33, 34.
^ Moody (2007), 14; for Cheltenham Township High School, see McDonald (2005), 91, and Stock (1970), 11.
^ "Ten great investors". Incademy Investor Education. Harriman House Ltd. Retrieved November 20, 2015. 
^ Farrington, Robert. "The top 10 investors of all time". The College Investor. The College Investor, LLC. Retrieved November 20, 2015. 
^ He Won’t Back Down: Elon Musk, ‘‘Wharton School’’, September 1, 2010.
^ Entrepreneur Elon Musk: Why It's Important to Pinch Pennies on the Road to Riches, ‘‘Knowledge@Wharton’’, 03-27-2009
^ SpaceX Leadership: Elon Musk, ‘‘SpaceX’’, November 21, 2011.
^ Online College Tips – Online Colleges (March 14, 2011). "The 10 Most Powerful Alumni Networks | Online College Tips – Online Colleges". Onlinecollege.org. Retrieved March 18, 2012. 
^ William Henry Harrison studied medicine at Penn from 1790 until his father died in 1791; after his father's death Harrison left the University to join the army."William H. Harrison". Ohio History Central An Online Encyclopedia of Ohio History. Ohio Historical Society. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ » Portfolios of the Union Council of Ministers. "Portfolios of the Union Council of Ministers". pmindia.gov.in. 
^ a b McConaghy, Mary D.; Ashish Shrestha. "Student Traditions Rowbottom: Documented Rowbottoms, 1910–1970". University Archives and Records Center. University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 25, 2011. 
^ a b c Herman, Edward S.; Robert J. Rutman; University of Pennsylvania (August 1967). "University of Pennsylvania's CB Warfare Controversy". BioScience. 17 (8): 526–529. doi:10.2307/1294007. JSTOR 1294007. 
^ "Eco-Violence: The Record". Intelligence Report (107). Fall 2002. Retrieved August 23, 2011. 
^ a b c McCarthy, Charles R. "Ethical and Policy Issues in Research Involving Human Participants". Onlineethics.org. Online Ethics Center for Engineering and Science. Archived from the original on April 23, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2011. 
^ Alan Charles Kors; Harvey A. Silverglate. "The Shadow University". The New York Times. Retrieved August 17, 2013. 
^ Lala, Elisa (January 12, 2016). "Penn student's death ruled suicide; 10th in three years at university". PhillyVoice. WWB Holdings, LLC. Retrieved August 4, 2016. 
^ Ozio, Ron (February 19, 2014). "Penn Forms New Task Force on Student Psychological Health and Welfare". Penn News. University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 4, 2016. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to University of Pennsylvania.





Wikisource has original works on the topic: University of Pennsylvania



Official website
University of Pennsylvania athletics website







v
t
e


University of Pennsylvania



Schools



Annenberg School for Communication

Annenberg Public Policy Center
Center for Global Communication Studies


School of Arts and Sciences
School of Dental Medicine
School of Design
Graduate School of Education
School of Engineering and Applied Science
School of Law
Perelman School of Medicine
School of Nursing
School of Social Policy and Practice
School of Veterinary Medicine
Wharton School








Programs



Center for Advanced Judaic Studies
Fels Institute of Government
Graduate Group in the Art and Archaeology of the Mediterranean World
Huntsman Program in International Studies and Business
Jerome Fisher Program in Management and Technology
Lauder Institute
Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics
Singh Program in Networked & Social Systems Engineering (NETS)
Vagelos Program in Life Sciences and Management
Vagelos Scholars Program in Molecular Life Sciences





Places



University City
Annenberg Center for the Performing Arts
College Hall
College Houses
David Rittenhouse Laboratory
Fisher Fine Arts Library
Historic District
Houston Hall
Institute of Contemporary Art
Irvine Auditorium
Kelly Writers House
Meyerson Hall
Moore School of Electrical Engineering
Morris Arboretum
Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology
New Bolton Center
Penn Park
Perelman Quadrangle
Quadrangle Dormitories
Richards Medical Research Laboratories
Van Pelt Library





Athletics



Penn Quakers
Band
"Fight on, Pennsylvania!"
Basketball

Men's
Women's


College Boat Club
Lacrosse
Penn Relays
Soccer

Men's
Women's


Class of 1923 Arena
Franklin Field
Meiklejohn Stadium
Palestra





Media



The Daily Pennsylvanian
Pennsylvania Punch Bowl
University of Pennsylvania Press
Wharton School Publishing
WQHS Radio
WXPN





Life



Student life
Notable alumni and faculty
Wharton School alumni
Mask and Wig
Penn Glee Club
Penn Masala
Penn MERT
PennApps
Philomathean Society
"Hail, Pennsylvania!"
"The Red and the Blue"










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Chief Administrators of the University of Pennsylvania



Provosts



Franklin (1749–1754)
William Smith (1754–1779)
Ewing (1779–1802)
McDowell (1806–1810)
Andrews (1810–1813)
Beasley (1813–1828)
DeLancey (1828–1834)
Ludlow (1834–1852)
Vethake (1853–1859)
Goodwin (1860–1868)
Stillé (1868–1880)
Pepper (1881–1894)
Harrison (1894–1910)
Edgar Smith (1910–1920)
Penniman (1921–1930)





Presidents



Gates (1930–1944)
McClelland (1944–1948)
Stassen (1948–1953)
DuBarry (acting, 1953)
Harnwell (1953–1970)
Myerson (1970–1981)
Hackney (1981–1993)
Fagin (interim, 1993–1994)
Rodin (1994–2004)
Gutmann (2004–present)






The chief administrator prior to 1930 was the provost










v
t
e


Benjamin Franklin




January 6, 1706 – April 17, 1790
President of Pennsylvania (1785–1788), Ambassador to France (1779–1785)
Second Continental Congress (1775–1776)



Founding of the
United States



Join, or Die (1754 political cartoon)
Albany Plan of Union

Albany Congress


Hutchinson Letters Affair
Committee of Secret Correspondence
Committee of Five
Declaration of Independence
Model Treaty

Franco-American alliance
Treaty of Amity and Commerce
Treaty of Alliance


Staten Island Peace Conference
Treaty of Paris, 1783
Delegate, 1787 Constitutional Convention
Pennsylvania Provincial Assembly
Postmaster General
Founding Fathers





Inventions,
other events



Franklin's electrostatic machine
Bifocals
Franklin stove
Glass armonica
Gulf Stream exploration, naming, and chart
Lightning rod
Kite experiment
Pay it forward
Associators

111th Infantry Regiment


Junto club
American Philosophical Society
Library Company of Philadelphia
Pennsylvania Hospital
The Academy and College of Philadelphia

University of Pennsylvania


Philadelphia Contributionship
Union Fire Company
Early American currency
Fugio Cent
United States Postal Service
President, Pennsylvania Abolition Society
Master, Les Neuf Sœurs
Other social contributions and studies
Gravesite





Writings



Silence Dogood letters (1722)
A Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain (1725)
The Busy-Body letters (1729)
Pennsylvania Gazette (1729–1790)
Poor Richard's Almanack (1732–1758)
The Drinker's Dictionary (1737)
"Advice to a Friend on Choosing a Mistress" (1745)
"The Speech of Polly Baker" (1747)
Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc. (1751)
Experiments and Observations on Electricity (1751)
Birch letters (1755)
The Way to Wealth (1758)
Pennsylvania Chronicle (1767)
Rules by Which a Great Empire May Be Reduced to a Small One (1773)
Proposed alliance with the Iroquois (1775)
A Letter To A Royal Academy (1781)
Remarks Concerning the Savages of North America (1784)
The Morals of Chess (1786)
An Address to the Public (1789)
A Plan for Improving the Condition of the Free Blacks (1789)
The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (1771–90, pub. 1791)
Bagatelles and Satires (pub. 1845)
Franklin as a journalist





Legacy



Franklin Court
Benjamin Franklin House
Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology
Benjamin Franklin National Memorial
Franklin Institute
Benjamin Franklin Medal
Depicted in The Apotheosis of Washington
Benjamin Franklin statue, Washington D.C.
In popular culture

Ben and Me (1953 short)
Ben Franklin in Paris (1964 musical play)
1776 (1969 musical
1972 film)
Benjamin Franklin (1974 miniseries)
Liberty! (1997 documentary series)
Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series)
Benjamin Franklin (2002 documentary series)
John Adams (2008 miniseries)
Sons of Liberty (2015 miniseries)
Sons of Ben (supporters group for the Philadelphia Union soccer club


Refunding Certificate
Franklin half dollar
One-hundred dollar bill
Washington-Franklin stamps

other stamps


Cities, counties, schools named for Franklin
Franklin Field
State of Franklin
Ships named USS Franklin
Ben Franklin effect





Related



Age of Enlightenment
American Enlightenment
The New-England Courant
The American Museum magazine
American Revolution

patriots


Syng inkstand





Family



Deborah Read (wife)
Sarah Franklin Bache (daughter)
Francis Franklin (son)
William Franklin (son)
Richard Bache Jr. (grandson)
Benjamin F. Bache (grandson)
Louis F. Bache (grandson)
William Franklin (grandson)
Andrew Harwood (great-grandson)
Alexander Bache (great-grandson)
Josiah Franklin (father)
Jane Mecom (sister)
James Franklin (brother)
Mary Morrell Folger (grandmother)
Peter Folger (grandfather)
Richard Bache (son-in-law)
Ann Smith Franklin (sister-in-law)












v
t
e


Ivy League






Brown Bears
Columbia Lions
Cornell Big Red
Dartmouth Big Green
Harvard Crimson
Princeton Tigers
Penn Quakers
Yale Bulldogs












v
t
e


Philadelphia Big 5



Schools



La Salle University
University of Pennsylvania
Saint Joseph's University
Temple University
Villanova University





Teams



La Salle Explorers
Penn Quakers
St. Joe's Hawks
Temple Owls
Villanova Wildcats





Arenas



Hagan Arena
Liacouras Center
Palestra
The Pavilion
Tom Gola Arena





Related



City 6
Holy War
Robert V. Geasey Trophy
St. Joe's–Temple Rivalry
Battle of 33rd Street












v
t
e


Sports teams based in and around Philadelphia



Baseball



MLB
Philadelphia Phillies
IL
Lehigh Valley IronPigs
EL
Reading Fightin Phils
Trenton Thunder
CL
Wilmington Blue Rocks














Basketball



NBA
Philadelphia 76ers
G League
Delaware 87ers





Football



NFL
Philadelphia Eagles
AFL
Philadelphia Soul
NAL
Lehigh Valley Steelhawks
WFA
Philadelphia Phantomz
IWFL
Philadelphia Firebirds





Hockey



NHL
Philadelphia Flyers
AHL
Lehigh Valley Phantoms
ECHL
Reading Royals
NAHL
Philadelphia Rebels
EHL
Philadelphia Little Flyers
Philadelphia Junior Flyers
Philadelphia Revolution





Rugby league



USARL
Bucks County Sharks
Delaware Black Foxes
Philadelphia Fight





Roller derby



WFTDA
Diamond State Roller Girls
Philly Roller Derby





Soccer



MLS
Philadelphia Union
USL
Bethlehem Steel FC
NPSL
Junior Lone Star FC
PDL
Lehigh Valley United Sonic
Reading United A.C.
ASL
Philadelphia Fury





Tennis



WTT
Philadelphia Freedoms





Lacrosse



NLL
Philadelphia Wings





College athletics
(NCAA Div. I)



Drexel University Dragons
La Salle University Explorers
Saint Joseph's University Hawks
Temple University Owls
University of Pennsylvania Quakers
Villanova University Wildcats
Lafayette College Leopards
Lehigh University Mountain Hawks
Rider University Broncs
University of Delaware Blue Hens

See also: Philadelphia Big 5 and City 6




College athletics
(NCAA Div. II)



Philadelphia University Rams
University of the Sciences Devils
West Chester University Golden Rams
Wilmington University Wildcats





Currently defunct teams


Further information: Template:Defunct Philadelphia sports teams






Main article: Sports in Philadelphia











v
t
e


Association of American Universities



Public



Arizona
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Florida
Georgia Tech
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
Kansas
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Missouri
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


North Carolina
Ohio State
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
Texas
Texas A&M
Virginia
Washington
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brandeis
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Emory
Harvard
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northwestern
NYU
UPenn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
USC
Stanford
Tulane
Vanderbilt
Wash U
Yale





Canadian (public)



McGill
Toronto












v
t
e


Universities Research Association



Public



Alabama
Arizona
Arizona State
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Colorado State
Florida
Florida State
Houston
Illinois

Chicago
Urbana–Champaign


Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
LSU
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Mississippi
Nebraska
New Mexico
New Mexico State
North Carolina
North Texas
Northern Illinois
Ohio State
Oklahoma
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
South Carolina
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


Tennessee
Texas

Arlington
Austin
Dallas


Texas A&M
Texas Tech
Virginia
Virginia Tech
Washington
Wayne State
William & Mary
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Harvard
Illinois Tech
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northeastern
Northwestern
Notre Dame
Penn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
Rockefeller
SMU
Stanford
Syracuse
Tufts
Tulane
Vanderbilt
WUSTL
Yale





International



McGill
Toronto
Pisa
Waseda
Manchester
Liverpool
UCL












v
t
e


568 Group






Amherst College
Boston College
Claremont McKenna College
College of the Holy Cross
Columbia University
Cornell University
Dartmouth College
Davidson College
Duke University
Emory University
Georgetown University
Grinnell College
Haverford College
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Middlebury College
Northwestern University
Pomona College
St. John's College
Swarthmore College
University of Notre Dame
University of Pennsylvania
Vanderbilt University
Wellesley College
Williams College












v
t
e


Colonial colleges






Brown
Columbia
Dartmouth
Harvard
Penn
Princeton
Rutgers
William & Mary
Yale












v
t
e


Largest United States university campuses by enrollment






Arizona State University
University of Central Florida
Ohio State University
Florida International University
Texas A&M University
University of Texas at Austin
Michigan State University
University of Florida
University of Minnesota
Indiana University






(2013–14 Academic Year)










v
t
e


Private colleges and universities in Pennsylvania



Liberal arts
colleges



Albright
Allegheny
Bryn Mawr
Cedar Crest
Chatham
Dickinson
Elizabethtown
Franklin & Marshall
Geneva
Gettysburg
Grove City
Haverford
Juniata
King's
Lafayette
Lebanon Valley
Lycoming
Marywood
Mercyhurst
Messiah
Moravian
Muhlenberg
Saint Vincent
Susquehanna
Swarthmore
Ursinus
Washington & Jefferson
Waynesburg
Westminster
Wilson
York





Universities
and colleges



Alvernia
The American College
Arcadia
Art Institute of Philadelphia
Bucknell
Bryn Athyn
Cabrini
Cairn
Carlow
Carnegie Mellon
Central Penn
Chestnut Hill
Clarks Summit University
Curtis Institute of Music
Delaware Valley
DeSales
Drexel
Duquesne
Eastern
Gannon
Gratz
Gwynedd Mercy
Harcum
Harrisburg University of Science and Technology
Holy Family
Hussian School of Art
Immaculata
Keystone
La Roche
La Salle
Lackawanna
Lancaster Bible
Lehigh
Manor
Marywood
Misericordia
Moore College of Art and Design
Mount Aloysius
Neumann
Peirce
Pennsylvania College of Art and Design
Philadelphia
Point Park
Robert Morris
Rosemont
St. Charles Borromeo Seminary
Saint Francis
Saint Joseph's
Salus
Seton Hill
Thiel
Thomas Jefferson
University of Pennsylvania
University of Scranton
University of the Arts
University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
University of Valley Forge
Villanova
Widener
Wilkes












v
t
e


Colleges and universities in metropolitan Philadelphia






The American College of Financial Services
Arcadia University
Art Institute of Philadelphia
Bryn Mawr College
Cabrini College
Cairn University
Chestnut Hill College
Cheyney University
Curtis Institute of Music
Delaware Valley University
Drexel University
Eastern University
Gratz College
Gwynedd Mercy University
Haverford College
Holy Family University
Immaculata University
La Salle University
Lincoln University
Manor College
Moore College of Art and Design
Neumann University
Peirce College
Penn State Abington
Penn State Brandywine
Penn State Great Valley
Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts
Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine
Philadelphia University
Reconstructionist Rabbinical College
The Restaurant School
Rosemont College
Rutgers University

Camden
Biomedical and Health Sciences


Saint Joseph's University
Salus University
Swarthmore College
Temple University
Thomas Jefferson University
University of the Arts
University of Delaware
University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
University of Pennsylvania
University of Valley Forge
Ursinus College
Villanova University
West Chester University
Westminster Theological Seminary
Widener University












v
t
e


Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges






BU Terriers
Brown Bears
Columbia Lions
Cornell Big Red
Dartmouth Big Green
Georgetown Hoyas
Harvard Crimson
Holy Cross Crusaders
MIT Engineers
Navy Midshipmen
Northeastern Huskies
Penn Quakers
Princeton Tigers
Rutgers Scarlet Knights
Syracuse Orange
Wisconsin Badgers
Yale Bulldogs












v
t
e


Philadelphia College Radio Collective






Bryn Mawr College
Haverford College
La Salle University
Princeton University
Saint Joseph's University
Swarthmore College
Temple University
University of Pennsylvania
Villanova University














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 267632219
LCCN: n79065482
ISNI: 0000 0004 1936 8972
GND: 37246-8
SUDOC: 14446389X






Coordinates: 39°57′N 75°11′W﻿ / ﻿39.95°N 75.19°W﻿ / 39.95; -75.19





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_Pennsylvania&oldid=817840221"					Categories: University of Pennsylvania1740 establishments in PennsylvaniaCollegiate Gothic architecture in the United StatesColonial collegesEastern Pennsylvania Rugby UnionEducational institutions established in the 1740sGothic Revival architecture in PennsylvaniaPhiladelphia Big 5Universities and colleges in PennsylvaniaUniversities and colleges in PhiladelphiaUniversity City, PhiladelphiaV-12 Navy College Training ProgramHidden categories: Use mdy dates from February 2017Articles containing Latin-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxInstances of Infobox university using image sizeAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2011Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2015Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersCoordinates on Wikidata