For other uses, see Upper Canada (disambiguation).


Province of Upper Canada


British colony






1791–1841










Flag







Map of Upper Canada (in orange) with contemporary Canada (in pink) surrounding it



Capital
Newark 1792–1797 (renamed Niagara 1798, Niagara-on-the-Lake 1970)
York (later renamed Toronto in 1834) 1797–1841


Government
Family Compact oligarchy
under a
Constitutional monarchy


Sovereign



 • 
1791–1820
George III


 • 
1820–1830
George IV


 • 
1830–1837
William IV


 • 
1837–1841
Victoria


Lieutenant-Governor; Executive Council of Upper Canada
See list of Lieutenant-Governors


Legislature
Parliament of Upper Canada


 • 
Upper house
Legislative Council


 • 
Lower house
Legislative Assembly


Historical era
British Era


 • 
Constitutional Act of 1791
26 December 1791


 • 
Act of Union 1840
10 February 1841


Area


 • 
1836[1]
258,999 km2 (100,000 sq mi)


Population


 • 
1823[1] est.
150,196 


 • 
1836[1] est.
358,187 


     Density
1/km2 (4/sq mi)


Currency
Halifax pound







Preceded by
Succeeded by






Province of Quebec (1763–1791)






United Province of Canada









Today part of
 Canada (part of Ontario)





Part of a series on the



History of Ontario





Timeline





First Nations



Pays d'en Haut
1500s–1763


Province of Quebec
1763–1791


Upper Canada
1791–1841


Canada West
1841–1867


Ontario
1867–present





Upper Canada Topics




Legislative Assembly
The Family Compact
The Reform Movement
Upper Canada Rebellion
Agriculture
Work and labour organization
Corporations
Imprisonment for debt
Book & newspaper publishers
Orange Order




Province of Canada Topics




Legislative Assembly
Responsible Government
Underground Railroad
Burning of the Parliament Buildings
Confederation




Province of Ontario topics


 Ontario portal





v
t
e





The Province of Upper Canada (French: province du Haut-Canada) was a part of British Canada established in 1791 by the Kingdom of Great Britain, to govern the central third of the lands in British North America and to accommodate Loyalist refugees of the United States after the American Revolution. The new province remained, for the next fifty years of growth and settlement, the colonial government of the territory.
Upper Canada existed from 26 December 1791 to 10 February 1841 and generally comprised present-day Southern Ontario. The "upper" prefix in the name reflects its geographic position along the Great Lakes, mostly above the headwaters of the Saint Lawrence River, contrasted with Lower Canada (present-day Quebec) to the northeast.
Upper Canada included all of modern-day Southern Ontario and all those areas of Northern Ontario in the Pays d'en Haut which had formed part of New France, essentially the watersheds of the Ottawa River or Lakes Huron and Superior, excluding any lands within the watershed of Hudson Bay.



Contents


1 Establishment
2 Government

2.1 Provincial administration
2.2 Parliament
2.3 Local government


3 Politics

3.1 Family Compact
3.2 Reform Movement
3.3 Upper Canada Rebellion of 1837
3.4 Sydenham and the Union of the Canadas


4 Settlement

4.1 First Nations dispossession and reserves
4.2 Loyalists and the land grant system

4.2.1 Assisted immigration
4.2.2 Talbot settlement


4.3 Crown and Clergy reserves
4.4 Land sale system
4.5 Canada Company

4.5.1 Huron Tract


4.6 Clergy Corporation
4.7 List of major cities and towns of Upper Canada


5 Population

5.1 Ethnic groups

5.1.1 First Nations
5.1.2 Metis
5.1.3 Canadiens/French-Canadians
5.1.4 Loyalists/Later Loyalists
5.1.5 Freed slaves
5.1.6 British

5.1.6.1 Irish
5.1.6.2 Scottish
5.1.6.3 English




5.2 Religion

5.2.1 Church of England
5.2.2 Catholic Church
5.2.3 Ryerson and the Methodists
5.2.4 Presbyterians
5.2.5 Mennonites, Tunkers, Quakers, and Children of Peace


5.3 Poverty


6 Trade, monetary policy, and financial institutions

6.1 Corporations
6.2 Currency and banking

6.2.1 Currency
6.2.2 Bank of Upper Canada
6.2.3 Bank wars: the Scottish joint stock banks


6.3 Trade

6.3.1 Wheat and grains
6.3.2 Timber




7 Transportation and communications

7.1 Canal system

7.1.1 Rideau Canal
7.1.2 Welland Canal
7.1.3 Desjardins Canal


7.2 Lake traffic: steamships
7.3 Roads


8 United States relations

8.1 War of 1812 (1812–1815)
8.2 1837 Rebellion and Patriot War


9 Education
10 Canada West
11 See also
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Establishment[edit]
Main article: Constitutional history of Canada




The Province of Quebec in 1774


The control the French had over Canada was handed over to Great Britain in 1763 when the Treaty of Paris ended the Seven Years' War in America. The territories of modern southern Ontario and southern Quebec were initially maintained as the single Province of Quebec, as it had been under the French. From 1763 to 1791, the Province of Quebec maintained its French language, cultural behavioural expectations, practices and laws. This status was renewed and reinforced by the Quebec Act of 1774, which expanded Quebec's territory to include part of the Indian Reserve to the west (i.e., parts of southern Ontario), and other western territories south of the Great Lakes including much of what would become the United States' Northwest Territory, including the modern states of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin and parts of Minnesota.
The part of the province west of Montreal and Quebec in the upper river basin soon began receiving many English-speaking Protestant United Empire Loyalists who arrived in the area as refugees from the American Revolution. This region quickly became culturally distinct. While the act addressed some religious issues, it did not appease those used to English law.
"Upper Canada" became a political entity on 26 December 1791 with the Parliament of Great Britain's passage of the Constitutional Act of 1791. The act divided the Province of Quebec into Upper and Lower Canada. The division was effected so that Loyalist American settlers and British immigrants in Upper Canada could have English laws and institutions, and the French-speaking population of Lower Canada could maintain French civil law and the Catholic religion. The first lieutenant-governor was John Graves Simcoe.
On 1 February 1796, the capital of Upper Canada was moved from Newark (now Niagara-on-the-Lake) to York (now Toronto), which was judged to be less vulnerable to attack by the Americans.
The Act of Union 1840, passed 23 July 1840 by the British Parliament and proclaimed by the Crown on 10 February 1841, merged Upper Canada with Lower Canada to form the short-lived United Province of Canada.
Government[edit]
Provincial administration[edit]
Upper Canada's constitution was said to be "the very image and transcript" of the British constitution, and based on the principal of "mixed monarchy" – a balance of monarchy, aristocracy and democracy.[2]
The Executive arm of government in the colony consisted of a lieutenant-governor, his executive council, and the Officers of the Crown (equivalent to the Officers of the Parliament of Canada): the Adjutant General of the Militia, the Attorney General, the Auditor General of Land Patents, the Auditor General (only one appointment ever made), Crown Lands Office, Indian Office, Inspector General, Kings' Printer, Provincial Secretary & Registrar's Office, Receiver General, Solicitor General, & Surveyor General .[3]
The Executive Council of Upper Canada had a similar function to the Cabinet in England but was not responsible to the Legislative Assembly. They held a consultative position, however, and did not serve in administrative offices as cabinet ministers do. Members of the Executive Council were not necessarily members of the Legislative Assembly but were usually members of the Legislative Council.[4]
Parliament[edit]




The third Parliament Building in York was built between 1829 and 1832 at Front Street.


The Legislative branch of the government consisted of the parliament comprising legislative council and legislative assembly. When the capital was first moved to Toronto from Newark (present-day Niagara-on-the-Lake) in 1796, the Parliament Buildings of Upper Canada were located at the corner of Parliament and Front Streets, in buildings that were burned by US forces in the War of 1812, rebuilt, then burned again by accident. The site was eventually abandoned for another, to the west.
The Legislative Council of Upper Canada was the upper house governing the province of Upper Canada. Although modelled after the British House of Lords, Upper Canada had no aristocracy. Members of the Legislative council, appointed for life, formed the core of the oligarchic group, the Family Compact, that came to dominate government and economy in the province.
The Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada functioned as the lower house in the Parliament of Upper Canada. Its legislative power was subject to veto by the appointed Lieutenant Governor, Executive Council, and Legislative Council.
Local government[edit]
Local government in the Province of Upper Canada was based on districts. In 1788, four districts were created:

Lunenburgh District, later "Eastern"
Mecklenburg District, later "Midland"
Nassau District, later "Home"
Hesse District, later "Western"

The name changes all took place in 1792.[5]
Justices of the Peace were appointed by the Lt. Governor. Any two justices meeting together could form the lowest level of the justice system, the Courts of Request. A Court of Quarter Sessions was held four times a year in each district composed of all the resident justices. The Quarter Sessions met to oversee the administration of the district and deal with legal cases. They formed, in effect, the municipal government until an area was incorporated as either a Police Board or a City after 1834.[6]
Additional districts were created from the existing districts as the population grew until 1849, when local government mainly based on counties came into effect. At that time, there were 20 districts; legislation to create a new Kent District was never completed. Up until 1841, the district officials were appointed by the lieutenant-governor, although usually with local input.
Politics[edit]
Family Compact[edit]
Main article: Family Compact
The Family Compact is the epithet applied to an oligarchic group of men who exercised most of the political and judicial power in Upper Canada from the 1810s to the 1840s. It was noted for its conservatism and opposition to democracy.[7] The uniting factors amongst the Compact were its loyalist tradition, hierarchical class structure and adherence to the established Anglican Church. Leaders such as John Beverley Robinson and John Strachan proclaimed it an ideal government, especially as contrasted with the rowdy democracy in the nearby United States.[8] The Family Compact emerged from the War of 1812 and collapsed in the aftermath of the Rebellions of 1837.






v
t
e


Members of the Family Compact







William Allan
James Baby
G. D'Arcy Boulton
D'Arcy Boulton II
George Boulton
Henry John Boulton
William Henry Boulton
Thomas Clark
George Crookshanks
W. Allan Crookshanks
William Dickson
Richard Duncan
John Elmsley
John Galt
James FitzGibbon
Christopher Hagerman
Charles Heward
William B. Jarvis
William M. Jarvis
Samuel Peters Jarvis
Alpheus Jones
Charles Jones
Jonas Jones
Thomas Jones
James Macaulay
Allan MacNab
Robert Nichol
William Osgoode
William Dummer Powell
Sir John Robinson
William Robinson
Aeneas Shaw
Adiel Sherwood
Levius Sherwood
George Sherwood
Sir David W. Smith
John Strachan







Sources include: Mackenzie, William Lyon (September 19, 1833). "A Political Union". Colonial Advocate. p. 4. 






Some Members of the Family Compact













Bishop Strachan. Acknowledged Anglican leader in the Family Compact. 













John Robinson. Acknowledged leader of the Family Compact. Member of the Legislative Assembly and later the Legislative Council 













William Henry Boulton 8th Mayor of Toronto and member of the Legislative Assembly 













Sir Allan Napier MacNab, 1st Baronet Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada. 













Henry Sherwood 13th Parliament of Upper Canada representing Brockville. 






Reform Movement[edit]
Main articles: William Lyon Mackenzie and The Reform Movement (Upper Canada)
There were many outstanding individual reform politicians in Upper Canada, including Robert Randal, Peter Perry, Marshall Spring Bidwell, William Ketchum and Dr. William Warren Baldwin; however, organised collective reform activity began with Robert Fleming Gourlay. Gourlay was a well-connected Scottish emigrant who arrived in 1817, hoping to encourage "assisted emigration" of the poor from Britain. He solicited information on the colony through township questionnaires, and soon became a critic of government mismanagement. When the local legislature ignored his call for an inquiry, he called for a petition to the British Parliament. He organised township meetings, and a provincial convention – which the government considered dangerous and seditious. Gourlay was tried in December 1818 under the 1804 Sedition Act and jailed for 8 months. He was banished from the province in August 1819. His expulsion made him a martyr in the reform community.[9]
The next wave of organised Reform activity emerged in the 1830s through the work of William Lyon Mackenzie, James Lesslie, John Rolph, William John O'Grady and Dr Thomas Morrison, all of Toronto. They were critical to introducing the British Political Unions to Upper Canada. Political Unions were not parties. The unions organised petitions to Parliament.
The Upper Canada Central Political Union was organised in 1832–33 by Dr Thomas David Morrison (mayor of Toronto in 1836) while William Lyon Mackenzie was in England. This union collected 19,930 signatures on a petition protesting Mackenzie's unjust expulsion from the House of Assembly by the Family Compact.[10]




Second market in York (Toronto)


This union was reorganised as the Canadian Alliance Society (1835). It shared a large meeting space in the market buildings with the Mechanics Institute and the Children of Peace. The Canadian Alliance Society adopted much of the platform (such as secret ballot & universal suffrage) of the Owenite National Union of the Working Classes in London, England, that were to be integrated into the Chartist movement in England.[11]
The Canadian Alliance Society was reborn as the Constitutional Reform Society (1836), when it was led by the more moderate reformer, Dr William W. Baldwin. After the disastrous 1836 elections, it took the final form as the Toronto Political Union in 1837. It was the Toronto Political Union that called for a Constitutional Convention in July 1837, and began organising local "Vigilance Committees" to elect delegates. This became the organizational structure for the Rebellion of 1837.[12]






v
t
e


Members of the Reform Movement (Upper Canada)







   


William Lyon Mackenzie
James Lesslie
John Rolph
William John O'Grady




David Willson
Samuel Hughes
John McIntosh
Marshall Spring Bidwell




Robert Baldwin
William Warren Baldwin
Francis Hincks
Charles Duncombe




Samuel Lount
Peter Matthews
Jesse Lloyd
Anthony Van Egmond




Thomas D. Morrison
David Gibson
James Hervey Price
Joseph Shepard











Members of the Reform Movement













Robert Fleming Gourlay 













William Lyon Mackenzie 













Dr Thomas D. Morrison 













Robert Baldwin 













Samuel Lount 






Upper Canada Rebellion of 1837[edit]
Main articles: Rebellions of 1837, Upper Canada Rebellion, and Patriot War
The Upper Canada Rebellion was an insurrection against the oligarchic government of the Family Compact by W.L. Mackenzie in December 1837. Long term grievances included antagonism between Later Loyalists and British Loyalists, political corruption, the collapse of the international financial system and the resultant economic distress, and a growing republican sentiment. While public grievances had existed for years, it was the Rebellion in Lower Canada (present day Quebec) that emboldened rebels in Upper Canada to openly revolt soon after. The Upper Canada Rebellion was largely defeated shortly after it began, although resistance lingered until 1838 (and became more violent) – mainly through the support of the Hunters' Lodges, a secret anti-British, American militia that emerged in states around the Great Lakes. They launched the Patriot War in 1838–39.[13]
John Lambton, Lord Durham's support for "responsible government" undercut the Tories and gradually led the public to reject what it viewed as poor administration, unfair land and education policies, and inadequate attention to urgent transportation needs. Durham's report led to the administrative unification of Upper and Lower Canada as the Province of Canada in 1841. Responsible government did not occur until the late 1840s under Robert Baldwin and Louis-Hippolyte Lafontaine.[14]
Sydenham and the Union of the Canadas[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Report on the Affairs of British North America



Main articles: Charles Poulett Thomson, 1st Baron Sydenham and Province of Canada
After the Rebellions, the new governor, Charles Poulett Thomson, 1st Baron Sydenham, proved an exemplary Utilitarian, despite his aristocratic pretensions. This combination of free trade and aristocratic pretensions needs to be underscored; although a liberal capitalist, Sydenham was no radical democrat. Sydenham approached the task of implementing those aspects of Durham's report that the colonial office approved of, municipal reform, and the union of the Canadas, with a "campaign of state violence and coercive institutional innovation... empowered not just by the British state but also by his Benthamite certainties."[15] Like governors Bond Head before him, and Metcalfe after, he was to turn to the Orange Order for often violent support. It was Sydenham who played a critical role in transforming Compact Tories into Conservatives.
Sydenham introduced a vast expansion of the state apparatus through the introduction of municipal government. Areas not already governed through civic corporations or police boards would be governed through centrally controlled District Councils with authority over roads, schools, and local policing. A strengthened Executive Council would further usurp much of the elected assembly's legislative role, leaving elected politician's to simply review the administration's legislative program and budgets.
Settlement[edit]
First Nations dispossession and reserves[edit]
Main articles: First Nations in Ontario, Anishinaabe, and Iroquois
The First Nations occupying the territory that was to become Upper Canada were:

Anishinaabe or Anishinabe—or more properly (plural) Anishinaabeg or Anishinabek. The plural form of the word is the autonym often used by the Odawa, Ojibwe, and Algonquin peoples.
The Iroquois, also known as the Haudenosaunee or the "People of the Longhouse",[16]

Prior to the creation of Upper Canada in 1791 much land had already been ceded by the First Nations to the Crown in accordance with the Royal Proclamation of 1763. During the American Revolutionary War most of the First Nations supported the British. After the Americans launched a campaign that burned the villages of the Iroquois in New York State in 1779[17] the refugees fled to Fort Niagara and other British posts, and remained permanently in Canada.
Land was granted to these allied Six Nations who had served on the British side during the American Revolution by the Haldimand Proclamation (1784). Haldimand had purchased a tract of land from the Mississaugas. The nature of the grant has been under dispute.
Loyalists and the land grant system[edit]
Main article: United Empire Loyalist




An 1824 land deed for Upper Canada


Crown land policy to 1825 was multi-fold in the use of a "free" resource that had value to people who themselves may have little or no money for its purchase and for the price of settling upon it to support themselves and a create a new society. First, the cash-strapped Crown government in Canada could pay and reward the services and loyalty of the "United Empire Loyalists" who, originated outside of Canada, without encumbrance of debt by being awarded with small portions of land (under 200 acres (80 ha)) with the proviso that it be settled by those to which it was granted; Second, portions would be reserved for the future use of the Crown and the Clergy that did not require settlement by which to gain control. Lt. Governor Simcoe saw this as the mechanism by which an aristocracy might be created,[18] and that compact settlement could be avoided with the grants of large tracts of land to those Loyalists not required to settle on it as the means of gaining control.
Assisted immigration[edit]
Main articles: Calton weavers and Petworth Emigration Scheme
The Calton weavers were a community of handweavers established in the community of Calton, then in Lanarkshire just outside Glasgow, Scotland in the 18th century.[19] In the early 19th century, many of the weavers emigrated to Canada, settling in Carleton Place and other communities in eastern Ontario, where they continued their trade.[20]
In 1825, 1,878 Irish Immigrants from the city of Cork arrived in the community of Scott's Plains. The British Parliament had approved an experimental emigration plan to transport poor Irish families to Upper Canada in 1822. The scheme was managed by Peter Robinson, a member of the Family Compact and brother of the Attorney General. Scott's Plains was renamed Peterborough in his honour.
Talbot settlement[edit]
Main article: Talbot settlement
Thomas Talbot emigrated in 1791, where he became personal secretary to John Graves Simcoe, Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada. Talbot convinced the government to allow him to implement a land settlement scheme of 5,000 acres (2,000 ha) in Elgin County in the townships of Dunwich and Aldborough in 1803.[21] According to his government agreement, he was entitled to 200 acres (80 ha) for every settler who received 50 acres (20 ha); in this way he gained an estate of 20,000 acres (8,000 ha). Talbot's administration was regarded as despotic. He was infamous for registering settlers' names on the local settlement map in pencil and if displeased, erasing their entry. Talbot's abuse of power was a contributing factor in the Upper Canada Rebellion of 1837.[22]
Crown and Clergy reserves[edit]
Main article: Clergy reserve
The Crown reserves, one seventh of all lands granted, were to provide the provincial executive with an independent source of revenue not under the control of the elected Assembly. The Clergy Reserves, also one seventh of all lands granted in the province, were created "for the support and maintenance of a Protestant clergy" in lieu of tithes. The revenue from the lease of these lands was claimed by the Rev. John Strachan on behalf of the Church of England. These reserves were directly administered by the Crown; which, in turn, came under increasing political pressure from other Protestant bodies. The Reserve lands were to be a focal point of dissent within the Legislative Assembly.[23]
Land sale system[edit]
The land grant policy changed after 1825 as the Upper Canadian administration faced a financial crisis that would otherwise require raising local taxes, thereby making it more dependent on a local elected legislature. The Upper Canadian state ended its policy of granting land to "unofficial" settlers and implemented a broad plan of revenue-generating sales. The Crown replaced its old policy of land grants to ordinary settlers in newly opened districts with land sales by auction. It also passed legislation that allowed the auctioning of previously granted land for payment of back-taxes.[24]
Canada Company[edit]
Main article: Canada Company




Canada Company Office 1834




“
The greater portion of British emigrants, arriving in Canada without funds and the most exalted ideas of the value and productiveness of land, purchase extensively on credit... Everything goes on well for a short time. A log-house is erected with the assistance of old settlers, and the clearing of forest is commenced. Credit is obtained at a neighbouring store... During this period he has led a life of toil and privation... On the arrival of the fourth harvest, he is reminded by the storekeeper to pay his account with cash, or discharge part of it with his disposable produce, for which he gets a very small price. He is also informed that the purchase money of the land has been accumulating with interest... he finds himself poorer than when he commenced operation. Disappointment preys on his spirit... the land ultimately reverts to the former proprietor, or a new purchaser is found.
”


— Patrick Shirreff, 1835


Few chose to lease the Crown reserves as long as free grants of land were still available. The Lieutenant Governor increasingly found himself depending upon the customs duties shared with, but collected in Lower Canada for revenue; after a dispute with the lower province on the relative proportions to be allocated to each, these duties were withheld, forcing the Lt. Governor of Upper Canada to search for new sources of revenue. It is important to note, then, that the Canada Company was created as a means of generating government revenue that was not under the control of the elected Assembly, thereby granting the Lt. Governor greater independence from local voters.
The plan for the Canada Company was promoted by the province's Attorney General, John Beverly Robinson, then studying law at Lincoln's Inn in London. The Lt. Governor's financial crisis led to a quick adoption of Robinson's scheme to sell the Crown reserves to a new land company which would provide the provincial government with annual payments of between £15,000 to £20,000. The Canada Company was chartered in London in 1826; after three years of mismanagement by John Galt, the company hired William Allan and Thomas Mercer Jones to manage the company's Upper Canadian business. Jones was to manage the "Huron Tract," and Allan to sell the Crown reserves already surveyed in other districts.[25]
According to the Canada Company, "the poorest individual can here procure for himself and family a valuable tract; which, with a little labour, he can soon convert into a comfortable home, such as he could probably never attain in any other country – all his own!" However, recent studies have suggested that a minimum of £100 to £200 plus the cost of land was required to start a new farm in the bush. As a result, few of these poor settlers had any hope of starting their own farm, although many tried.[26]
Huron Tract[edit]




Huron Tract Purchase area, located in Southern Ontario, highlighted in yellow


Main article: Huron Tract
The Huron Tract lies in the counties of Huron, Perth, Middlesex and present day Lambton County, Ontario bordering on Lake Huron to the west and Lake Erie to the east. The tract was purchased by the Canada Company for resale to settlers. Influenced by William "Tiger" Dunlop, John Galt and other businessmen formed the Canada Company.[27] The Canada Company was the administrative agent for the Huron Tract.
Clergy Corporation[edit]
Main article: Clergy Corporation
The Clergy Corporation was incorporated in 1819 to manage the Clergy Reserves. After the Rev. John Strachan was appointed to the Executive Council, the advisory body to the Lieutenant Governor, in 1815, he began to push for the Church of England's autonomous control of the clergy reserves on the model of the Clergy Corporation created in Lower Canada in 1817. Although all clergymen in the Church of England were members of the body corporate, the act prepared in 1819 by Strachan's former student, Attorney General John Beverly Robinson, also appointed the Inspector General and the Surveyor General to the board, and made a quorum of three for meetings; these two public officers also sat on the Legislative Council with Strachan. These three were usually members of the Family Compact.[28]
List of major cities and towns of Upper Canada[edit]




Map of Upper Canada



York (now Toronto), capital of Upper Canada
Bytown (now Ottawa)
Sandwich (now Windsor)
Goderich, seat of the Canada Company's Huron Tract
Newark, now Niagara-on-the-Lake
Port Colborne
Dundas
Cobourg
Peterborough
Kingston
Cornwall

In Upper Canada, major cities with key forts were an essential for survival, defending the area from armed attacks and composing the local militia.
Population[edit]


Upper Canada


Year
Pop.
±%


1806
70,718
—    


1811
76,000
+7.5%


1814
95,000
+25.0%


1824
150,066
+58.0%


1825
157,923
+5.2%


1826
166,379
+5.4%


1827
177,174
+6.5%


1828
186,488
+5.3%


1829
197,815
+6.1%


1830
213,156
+7.8%


1831
236,702
+11.0%


1832
263,554
+11.3%


1833
295,863
+12.3%


1834
321,145
+8.5%


1835
347,359
+8.2%


1836
374,099
+7.7%


1837
397,489
+6.3%


1838
399,422
+0.5%


1839
409,048
+2.4%


1840
432,159
+5.6%


Source: Statistics Canada website Censuses of Canada 1665 to 1871.
See United Province of Canada for population after 1840.


Ethnic groups[edit]
Since the province is frequently referred to as "English Canada" after the Union of the Canadas,[by whom?] and its ethnic homogeneity said to be a factor in the Upper Canada Rebellion of 1837,[by whom?] it is interesting to note the range of ethnic groups in Upper Canada. However, due to the lack of a detailed breakdown, it is difficult to count each group, and this may be considered abuse of statistics. An idea of the ethnic breakdown can be had if one considers the religious census of 1842, which is helpfully provided below: Roman Catholics were 15% of the population, and adherents to this religion were, at the time, mainly drawn from the Irish and the French settlers. The Roman Catholic faith also numbered some votaries from amongst the Scottish settlers. The category of "other" religious adherents, somewhat under 5% of the population, included the Aboriginal and Metis culture.
First Nations[edit]
Main article: First Nations in Ontario
See above: Land Settlement

Anishinaabe or Anishinabe—or more properly (plural) Anishinaabeg or Anishinabek. The plural form of the word is the autonym often used by the Odawa, Ojibwe, and Algonquin peoples.
The Iroquois, also known as the Haudenosaunee or the "People of the Longhouse",[16]

Metis[edit]
Main article: Metis people (Canada)
Many British and French-Canadian fur traders married First Nations and Inuit women from the Cree, Ojibwa, or Saulteaux First Nations. The majority of these fur traders were Scottish and French and were Catholic.[29]
Canadiens/French-Canadians[edit]
Main articles: French Canadian and franco Ontarian
Early settlements in the region include the Mission of Sainte-Marie among the Hurons at Midland in 1649, Sault Ste. Marie in 1668, and Fort Pontchartrain du Détroit in 1701. Southern Ontario was part of the Pays d'en-haut (Upper Country) of New France, and later part of the province of Quebec until Quebec was split into Upper and Lower Canada in 1791. The first wave of settlement in the Detroit/Windsor area came in the 18th century during the French regime. A second wave came in the 19th and early 20th centuries to the areas of Eastern Ontario and Northeastern Ontario. In the Ottawa Valley, in particular, some families have moved back and forth across the Ottawa River for generations (the river is the border between Ontario and Quebec). In the city of Ottawa some areas such as Vanier and Orleans have a rich Franco-heritage where families often have members on both sides of the Ottawa River.
Loyalists/Later Loyalists[edit]
Main articles: United Empire Loyalist and Expulsion of the Loyalists
After an initial group of about 7,000 United Empire Loyalists were thinly settled across the province in the mid-1780s, a far larger number of "late-Loyalists" arrived in the late 1790s and were required to take an oath of allegiance to the Crown to obtain land if they came from the US. Their fundamental political allegiances were always considered dubious. By 1812, this had become acutely problematic since the American settlers outnumbered the original Loyalists by more than ten to one. Following the War of 1812, the colonial government under Lt. Governor Gore took active steps to prevent Americans from swearing allegiance, thereby making them ineligible to obtain land grants. The tensions between the Loyalists and late Loyalists erupted in the "Alien Question" crisis in 1820–21 when the Bidwells (Barnabas and his son Marshall) sought election to the provincial assembly. They faced opponents who claimed they could not hold elective office because of their American citizenship. If the Bidwells were aliens so were the majority of the province. The issue was not resolved until 1828 when the Colonial government retroactively granted them citizenship.
Freed slaves[edit]
The Act Against Slavery passed in Upper Canada on 9 July 1793. The 1793 "Act against Slavery" forbade the importation of any additional slaves and freed children. It did not grant freedom to adult slaves—they were finally freed by the British Parliament in 1833. As a consequence, many Canadian slaves fled south to New England and New York, where slavery was no longer legal. Many American slaves who had escaped from the South via the Underground Railroad or fleeing from the Black Codes in the Ohio Valley came north to Ontario, a good portion settling on land lots and began farming.[30] It is estimated that thousands of escaped slaves entered Upper Canada from the United States.[citation needed]
British[edit]
See also: Great Migration of Canada
The Great Migration from Britain from 1815 to 1850 has been numbered at 800,000. The population of Upper Canada in 1837 is documented at 409,000. Given the lack of detailed census data it is difficult to assess the relative size of the American and Canadian born "British" and the foreign born "British." By the time of the first census in 1841, only half of the population of Upper Canada were foreign born British.[31] References to "English Canada" can thus be confusing, and indicate little about individual ethnic identity.
Irish[edit]
Main article: Irish Canadian § Irish in Ontario
Scottish[edit]
Main article: Scottish Canadian § Ontario
English[edit]
Main article: English Canadian § Ontario
Religion[edit]


1842 Religion in Upper Canada


Year
Pop.


Baptists
16,411


Catholics
65,203


Anglican
107,791


Congregational
4,253


Jews
1,105


Lutherans
4,524


Methodists
82,923


Moravians
1,778


Presbyterians
97,095


Quakers
5,200


Others
19,422


Source: Statistics Canada website Censuses of Canada 1665 to 1871.
See United Province of Canada for population after 1840.


Church of England[edit]
Main articles: Anglican Church of Canada and John Strachan
The first Lt. Governor, Sir John Graves Simcoe, sought to make the Church of England the Established Church of the province. To that end, he created the Clergy Reserves, the revenues of which were to support the church. The Clergy Reserves proved to be a long-term political issue, as other denominations, particularly the Church of Scotland (Presbyterians) sought a proportional share of the revenues. The Church of England was never numerically dominant in the province, as it was in England, especially in the early years when most of the American born Later Loyalists arrived. The growth of the Church of England depended largely on later British emigration for growth.
The Church was led by the Rev. John Strachan (1778–1867), a pillar of the Family Compact. Strachan was part of the oligarchic ruling class of the province, and besides leading the Church of England, also sat on the Executive Council, the Legislative Council, helped found the Bank of Upper Canada, Upper Canada College, and the University of Toronto.
Catholic Church[edit]
Main articles: Roman Catholicism in Canada and Alexander Macdonell (bishop)
Father Alexander Macdonell was a Scottish Catholic priest who formed his evicted clan into The Glengarry Fencibles regiment, of which he served as chaplain. He was the first Catholic chaplain in the British Army since the Reformation. When the regiment was disbanded, Rev. Macdonell appealed to the government to grant its members a tract of land in Canada, and, in 1804, 160,000 acres (650 km²) were provided in what is now Glengarry County, Canada. In 1815, he began his service as the first Roman Catholic Bishop at St. Raphael's Church in the Highlands of Ontario.[32] In 1819 he was appointed Vicar Apostolic of Upper Canada, which in 1826 was erected into a suffrigan bishopric of the Archdiocese of Quebec. In 1826, he was appointed to the legislative council.[33]
Macdonell's role on the Legislative Council was one of the tensions with the Toronto congregation, led by Father William O'Grady. O'Grady, like Macdonell, had served as an army chaplain (to Connell James Baldwin's soldiers in Brazil). O'Grady followed Baldwin to Toronto Gore Township in 1828. From January 1829 he was pastor of St. Paul's church in York. Tensions between the Scottish and Irish came to a head when O'Grady was defrocked, in part for his activities in the Reform movement. He went on to edit a Reform newspaper in Toronto, the Canadian Correspondent.
Ryerson and the Methodists[edit]
Main articles: Egerton Ryerson and Methodist Episcopal Church
The undisputed leader of the highly fractious Methodists in Upper Canada was Egerton Ryerson, editor of their newspaper, The Christian Guardian. Ryerson (1803–1882) was an itinerant minister – or circuit rider – in the Niagara area for the Methodist Episcopal Church – an American branch of Methodism. As British immigration increased, Methodism in Upper Canada was torn between those with ties to the Methodist Episcopal Church and the British Wesleyan Methodists. Ryerson used the Christian Guardian to argue for the rights of Methodists in the province and, later, to help convince rank-and-file Methodists that a merger with British Wesleyans (effected in 1833) was in their best interest.
Presbyterians[edit]
Main article: Presbyterian Church in Canada
The earliest Presbyterian ministers in Upper Canada came from various denominations based in Scotland, Ireland, and the United States. The 'Presbytery of the Canadas' was formed in 1818 primarily by Scottish Secessionist missionaries, yet independently of their mother denomination in the hope of including Presbyterian ministers of all stripes in Upper and Lower Canada. Although successfully including members from Irish Secessionist, and American Presbyterian and Reformed denominations, the growing group of missionaries belonging to the Church of Scotland remained separate. Instead, in 1831, they formed their own 'Synod of the Presbyterian Church of Canada in Connection with the Established Church of Scotland'. That same year the 'Presbytery of the Canadas', having grown and been re-organized, became the 'United Synod of Upper Canada'. In its continued pursuit for Presbyterian unity (and a share of government funding from the Clergy Reserves for established churches) the United Synod sought a union with the Church of Scotland synod which it finally joined in 1840. However, some ministers had left the United Synod prior to this merger (including, notably, Rev. James Harris, Rev. William Jenkins, and Rev. Daniel Eastman). In the 1832 new Secessionist missionaries began to arrive, belonging to 'The United Associate Synod in Scotland' (after 1847, the United Presbyterian Church of Scotland). Committed to the voluntarist principle of rejecting government funding they decided against joining the 'United Synod of Upper Canada' and on Christmas Day 1834 formed the 'Missionary Presbytery of the Canadas'. Although this new presbytery was formed at Rev. James Harris' church in Toronto, he and his congregation remained independent from it. However, the voluntarist, Rev. Jenkins and his congregation in Richmond Hill joined the Missionary Presbytery a few years later. Rev. Eastman had left the United Synod in 1833 to form the 'Niagara Presbytery' of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. After this presbytery dissolved following the Rebellion of 1837, he rejoined the United Synod which then joined the Church of Scotland. Outside of these four Presbyterian denominations, only two others gained a foothold in the province. The small 'Stamford Presbytery' of the American Secessionist tradition was formed in 1835 in the Niagara region, and the Scottish Reformed Presbyterian or 'Covenanter' tradition was represented in the province to an even lesser extent. Despite the numerous denominations, by the late 1830s the Church of Scotland was the main expression of Presbyterianism in Upper Canada.
Mennonites, Tunkers, Quakers, and Children of Peace[edit]




The Sharon Temple, built by the Children of Peace


Main articles: Mennonite, Society of Friends (Upper Canada), and The Children of Peace
These groups of later Loyalists were proportionately larger in the early decades of the province's settlement. The Mennonites, Tunkers, Quakers and Children of Peace are the traditional Peace churches. The Mennonites and Tunkers were generally German speaking, and immigrated as Later Loyalists from Pennsylvania. Many of their descendants continue to speak a form of German called Pennsylvania German. The Quakers (Society of Friends) immigrated from New York, the New England States and Pennsylvania. The Children of Peace were founded during the War of 1812 after a schism in the Society of Friends in York County.[34] A further schism occurred in 1828, leaving two branches, "Orthodox" Quakers and "Hicksite" Quakers.
Poverty[edit]
See also: Imprisonment for debt (Upper Canada)
In the decade ending in 1837, the population of Upper Canada doubled, to 397,489, fed in large part by erratic spurts of displaced paupers, the "surplus population" of the British Isles. Historian Rainer Baehre estimated that between 1831 and 1835 a bare minimum of one fifth of all emigrants to the province arrived totally destitute, forwarded by their parishes in the United Kingdom.[35] The pauper immigrants arriving in Toronto were the excess agricultural workers and artisans whose growing ranks sent the cost of parish-based poor relief in England spiraling; a financial crisis that generated frenetic public debate and the overhaul of the Poor Laws in 1834. "Assisted emigration," a second solution to the problem touted by the Parliamentary Under-Secretary in the Colonial Office, Robert Wilmot Horton, would remove them permanently from the parish poor rolls.
The roots of Wilmot-Horton's "assisted emigration" policies began in April 1820, in the middle of an insurrection in Glasgow, where a young, already twice bankrupted William Lyon Mackenzie was setting sail for Canada on a ship called Psyche. After the week-long violence, the rebellion was easily crushed; the participants were driven less by treason than distress. In a city of 147,000 people without a regular parish system of poor relief, between ten and fifteen thousand were destitute. The Prime Minister agreed to provide free transportation from Quebec to Upper Canada, a 100-acre land grant, and a year's supply of provisions to any of the rebellious weavers who could pay their own way to Quebec. In all, in 1820 and 1821, a private charity helped 2,716 Lanarkshire and Glasgow emigrants to Upper Canada to take up their free grants, primarily in the Peterborough area.[36] A second project was the Petworth Emigration Committee organised by the Reverend Thomas Sockett, who chartered ships and sent emigrants from England to Canada in each of the six years between 1832 and 1837.[37] This area in the south of England was terrorised by the Captain Swing Riots, a series of clandestine attacks on large farmers who refused relief to unemployed agricultural workers. The area hardest hit – Kent – was the area where Sir Francis Bond Head, later Lt. Governor of Upper Canada in 1836, was the Assistant Poor Law Commissioner. One of his jobs was to force the unemployed into "Houses of Industry."
Trade, monetary policy, and financial institutions[edit]
Corporations[edit]
Main article: Corporations (Upper Canada)
There were two types of corporate actors at work in the Upper Canadian economy: the legislatively chartered companies and the unregulated joint stock companies. The joint stock company was popular in building public works, since it should be for general public benefit, as the benefit would otherwise be sacrificed to legislated monopolies with exclusive privileges. or lie dormant. An example of the legislated monopoly is found in the Bank of Upper Canada. However, it should be noted that the benefit of the joint-stock shareholders, as the risk takers, was whole and entire; and the general public benefitted only indirectly. As late as 1849, even the moderate reform politician Robert Baldwin was to complain that "unless a stop were made to it, there would be nothing but corporations from one end of the country to the other." Radical reformers, like William Lyon Mackenzie, who opposed all "legislated monopolies," saw joint stock associations as the only protection against "the whole property of the country... being tied up as an irredeemable appendage to incorporated institutions, and put beyond the reach of individual possession."[38] As a result, most of the joint stock companies formed in this period were created by political reformers who objected to the legislated monopolies granted to members of the Family Compact.
Currency and banking[edit]
Currency[edit]
See Coins of Upper Canada.
The government of Upper Canada never issued a provincial currency. A variety of coins, mainly of French, Spanish, English and American origin circulated. The government used the Halifax standard, where one pound Halifax equalled four Spanish dollars. One pound sterling equalled £1 2s 2¾d (until 1820), and £1 2s 6½d Halifax pounds after 1820.
Paper currency was issued primarily by the Bank of Upper Canada, although with the diversification of the banking system, each bank would issue its own distinctive notes.[39]
Bank of Upper Canada[edit]
Main article: Bank of Upper Canada




The Bank of Upper Canada, Toronto


The Bank of Upper Canada was "captured" from Kingston merchants by the York elite at the instigation of John Strachan in 1821, with the assistance of William Allan, a Toronto merchant and Executive Councillor. York was too small to warrant such an institution as indicated by the inability of its promoters to raise even the minimal 10% of the £200,000 authorised capital required for start-up. It succeeded where the Bank of Kingston had failed only because it had the political influence to have this minimum reduced by half, and because the provincial government subscribed for two thousand of its eight thousand shares. The administration appointed four of the bank's fifteen directors that, as with the Clergy Corporation, made for a tight bond between the nominally private company and the state. Forty-four men served as bank directors during the 1830s; eleven of them were executive councillors, fifteen of them were legislative councillors, and thirteen were magistrates in Toronto. More importantly, all 11 men who had ever sat on the Executive Council also sat on the board of the Bank at one time or another. 10 of these men also sat on the Legislative Council. The overlapping membership on the boards of the Bank of Upper Canada and on the Executive and Legislative Councils served to integrate the economic and political activities of church, state, and the "financial sector." These overlapping memberships reinforced the oligarchic nature of power in the colony and allowed the administration to operate without any effective elective check. The Bank of Upper Canada was a political sore point for the Reformers throughout the 1830s.[40]
Bank wars: the Scottish joint stock banks[edit]
Main article: Bank of the People
The difference between the chartered banks and the joint stock banks lay almost entirely on the issue of liability and its implications for the issuance of bank notes. The joint stock banks lacked limited liability, hence every partner in the bank was responsible for the bank's debts to the full extent of their personal property. The formation of new joint stock banks blossomed in 1835 in the aftermath of a parliamentary report by Dr Charles Duncombe, which established their legality here. Duncombe's report drew in large part on an increasingly dominant banking orthodoxy in the United Kingdom which challenged the English system of chartered banks. Duncombe's Select Committee on Currency offered a template for the creation of joint stock banks based on several successful British banks. Within weeks two Devonshire businessmen, Capt. George Truscott and John Cleveland Green, established the "Farmer's Bank" in Toronto. The only other successful bank established under this law was "The Bank of the People" which was set up by Toronto's Reformers. The Bank of the People provided the loan that allowed William Lyon Mackenzie to establish the newspaper The Constitution in 1836 in the lead up to the Rebellion of 1837. Mackenzie wrote at the time: “Archdeacon Strachan’s bank (the old one)... serve the double purpose of keeping the merchants in chains of debt and bonds to the bank manager, and the Farmer’s acres under the harrow of the storekeeper. You will be shewn how to break this degraded yoke of mortgages, ejectments, judgments and bonds. Money bound you – money shall loose you”.[41] During the financial panic of 1836, the Family Compact sought to protect its interests in the nearly bankrupt Bank of Upper Canada by making joint stock banks illegal.[42]
Trade[edit]
Main article: Metropolitan thesis
After the Napoleonic Wars, as industrial production in Britain took off, English manufacturers began dumping cheap goods in Montreal; this allowed an increasing number of shopkeepers in York to obtain their goods competitively from Montreal wholesalers. It was during this period that the three largest pre-war merchants who imported directly from Britain retired from business as a result; Quetton St. George in 1815, Alexander Wood in 1821, and William Allan in 1822. Toronto and Kingston then underwent a boom in the number of increasingly specialised shops and wholesalers.[43] The Toronto wholesale firm of Isaac Buchanan and Company were one of the largest of the new wholesalers. Isaac Buchanan was a Scots merchant in Toronto, in partnership with his brother Peter, who remained in Glasgow to manage the British end of the firm. They established their business in Toronto in 1835, having bought out Isaac's previous partners, William Guild and Co., who had established themselves in Toronto in 1832. As a wholesale firm, the Buchanan's had invested more than £10,000 in their business.[44]
Another of those new wholesale businesses was the Farmers' Storehouse Company. The Farmers Storehouse Company was formed in the Home District and is probably Canada's first Farmers' Cooperative. The Storehouse expedited the sale of farmer's wheat to Montreal, and provided them with cheaper consumer goods.[45]
Wheat and grains[edit]
Main articles: Agriculture in Upper Canada and Corn Laws
Upper Canada was in the unenviable position of having few exports with which to pay for all its imported manufactured needs. For the vast majority of those who settled in rural areas, debt could be paid off only through the sale of wheat and flour; yet, throughout much of the 1820s, the price of wheat went through periodic cycles of boom and bust depending upon the British markets that ultimately provided the credit upon which the farmer lived. In the decade 1830–39, exports of wheat averaged less than £1 per person a year (less than £6 per household), and in the 1820s just half that.[46]
Given the small amounts of saleable wheat and flour, and the rarity of cash, some have questioned how market oriented these early farmers were. Instead of depending on the market to meet their needs, many of these farmers depended on networks of shared resources and cooperative marketing. For example, rather than hire labour, they met their labour needs through "work bees." such farmers are said to be 'subsistence oriented' and not to respond to market cues; rather, they engage in a moral economy seeking 'subsistence insurance' and a 'just price'. The Children of Peace in the village of Hope (now Sharon) are a well documented example. They were the most prosperous agricultural community in Canada West by 1851.[47]
Timber[edit]
Main article: Ottawa River timber trade
The Ottawa River timber trade resulted from Napoleon's 1806 Continental Blockade in Europe. The United Kingdom required a new source of timber for its navy and shipbuilding. Later the UK's application of gradually increasing preferential tariffs increased Canadian imports. The trade in squared timber lasted until the 1850s. The transportation of raw timber by means of floating down the Ottawa River was proved possible in 1806 by Philemon Wright.[48] Squared timber would be assembled into large rafts which held living quarters for men on their six-week journey to Quebec City, which had large exporting facilities and easy access to the Atlantic Ocean.
The timber trade was Upper and Lower Canada's major industry in terms of employment and value of the product.[49] The largest supplier of square red and white pine to the British market was the Ottawa River[50] and the Ottawa Valley. They had "rich red and white pine forests."[51] Bytown (later called Ottawa), was a major lumber and sawmill centre of Canada.[52]
Transportation and communications[edit]




The complete First Welland Canal including the Feeder Canal and the extension to Port Colborne. The present-day canal is marked in pale grey


Canal system[edit]




The Rideau Canal in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, with Parliament Hill and the old "Union Station" visible in the background.


Main articles: First Welland Canal, Rideau Canal, and Desjardins Canal
The early nineteenth century was the age of canals. The Erie Canal, stretching from Buffalo to Albany, New York, threatened to divert all of the grain and other trade on the upper Great Lakes through the Hudson River to New York city after its completion in 1825. Upper Canadians sought to build a similar system that would tie this trade to the St Lawrence River and Montreal.
Rideau Canal[edit]
The Rideau Canal's purpose was military and hence was paid for by the British and not the local treasury. It was intended to provide a secure supply and communications route between Montreal and the British naval base in Kingston. The objective was to bypass the St. Lawrence River bordering New York; a route which would have left British supply ships vulnerable to an attack. Westward from Montreal, travel would proceed along the Ottawa River to Bytown (now Ottawa), then southwest via the canal to Kingston and out into Lake Ontario. Because the Rideau Canal was easier to navigate than the St. Lawrence River due to the series of rapids between Montreal and Kingston, it became a busy commercial artery from Montreal to the Great Lakes. The construction of the canal was supervised by Lieutenant-Colonel John By of the Royal Engineers. The work started in 1826, and was completed 6 years later in 1832 at a cost of £822,000.
Welland Canal[edit]
The Welland Canal was created to directly link Lake Erie with Lake Ontario, bypassing Niagara Falls and the Erie Canal. It was the idea of William Hamilton Merritt who owned a sawmill, grist mill and store on the Twelve Mile Creek. The Legislature authorised the joint-stock Welland Canal Company on 19 January 1824, with a capitalisation of $150,000, and Merritt as the agent. The canal was officially opened exactly five years later on 30 November 1829. However, the original route to Lake Erie followed the Welland and Niagara Rivers and was difficult and slow to navigate. The Welland Canal Company obtained a loan of 50,000 pounds from the Province of Upper Canada in March 1831 to cut a canal directly to Gravelly Bay (now Port Colborne) as the new Lake Erie terminus for the canal.[53]
By the time the canal was finished in 1837, it had cost the province £425,000 in loans and stock subscriptions. The Company was supposed to have been a private one using private capital; but the province had little private capital available, hence most of the original funds came from New York. To keep the canal in Upper Canadian hands, the province had passed a law barring Americans from the company's directorate. The company was thus controlled by the Family Compact, even though they had few shares. By 1834, it was clear the canal would never make money and that the province would be on the hook for the large loans; the canal and the canal company thus became a political issue, as local farmers argued the huge expense would ultimately only benefit American farmers in the west and the merchants who transported their grain.[54]
Desjardins Canal[edit]
The Desjardins Canal, named after its promoter Pierre Desjardins, was built to give Dundas, Ontario, easier access to Burlington Bay and Lake Ontario. Access to Lake Ontario from Dundas was made difficult by the topography of the area, which included a natural sand and gravel barrier, across Burlington Bay which allowed only boats with a shallow draft through. In 1823 a canal was dug through the sandbar. In 1826 the passage was completed, allowing schooners to sail to neighbouring Hamilton. Hamilton then became a major port and quickly expanded as a centre of trade and commerce. In 1826 a group of Dundas businessmen incorporated to compete with Hamilton and increase the value of their real estate holdings. The project to build Desjardins Canal continued for ten years, from 1827 to 1837, and required constant infusions of money from the province. In 1837, the year it opened, the company's income was £6,000, of which £5,000 was from a government loan and £166 was received from canal tolls.
Lake traffic: steamships[edit]
Main article: Great Lakes passenger steamers
There is disagreement as to whether the Canadian built Frontenac (170 feet), launched on 7 September 1816, at Ernestown, Ontario or the US built Ontario (110 feet), launched in the spring of 1817 at Sacketts Harbor, New York, was the first steamboat on the Great Lakes. While the Frontenac was launched first, the Ontario began active service first.[55] The first steamboat on the upper Great Lakes was the passenger carrying Walk-In-The-Water, built in 1818 to navigate Lake Erie.
In the years between 1809 and 1837 just over 100 steamboats were launched by Upper and Lower Canadians for the St. Lawrence River and Great Lakes trade, of which ten operated on Lake Ontario.[56] The single largest engine foundry in British North America before 1838 was the Eagle Foundry of Montreal, founded by John Dod Ward in the fall of 1819 which manufactured 33 of the steam engines. The largest Upper Canadian engine manufacturer was Sheldon & Dutcher of Toronto, who made three engines in the 1830s before being driven to Bankruptcy by the Bank of Upper Canada in 1837.[57]
The major owner-operators of steamships on Lake Ontario were Donald Bethune, John Hamilton, Hugh Richardson, and Henry Gildersleeve, each of whom would have invested a substantial fortune.[58]
Roads[edit]
Besides marine travel, Upper Canada had a few Post roads or footpaths used for transportation by horse or stagecoaches along the key settlements between London to Kingston.
The Governor's Road was built beginning in 1793 from Dundas to Paris and then to the proposed capital of London by 1794. The road was further extended eastward with new capital of York in 1795. his road was eventually known as Dundas Road.
A second route was known as Lakeshore Road or York Road which was built from York to Trent River from 1799 to 1900 and later extended eastwards to Kingston in 1817. This road was later renamed as Kingston Road.
United States relations[edit]
War of 1812 (1812–1815)[edit]
During the War of 1812 with the United States, Upper Canada was the chief target of the Americans, since it was weakly defended and populated largely by American immigrants. However, division in the United States over the war, a lackluster American militia, the incompetence of American military commanders, and swift and decisive action by the British commander, Sir Isaac Brock, kept Upper Canada part of British North America.
Detroit was captured by the British on 6 August 1812. The Michigan Territory was held under British control until it was abandoned in 1813. The Americans won the decisive Battle of Lake Erie (10 September 1813) and forced the British to retreat from the western areas. On the retreat they were intercepted at the Battle of the Thames (5 October 1813) and destroyed in a major American victory that killed Tecumseh and broke the power of Britain's Indian allies.[59]
Major battles fought on territory in Upper Canada included;

Battle of Queenston Heights, 13 October 1812
Burning and Battle of York, 27 April 1813
Battle of Fort George, 27 May 1813
Battle of Stoney Creek, 5 June 1813
Battle of Beaver Dams, 24 June 1813
Battle of Lake Erie, 10 September 1813
Battle of the Thames, 5 October 1813
Battle of Crysler's Farm, 11 November 1813
Burning of Newark, 10 December 1813
Battle of Chippewa, 5 July 1814
Battle of Lundy's Lane, 25 July 1814

Many other battles were fought in American territory bordering Upper Canada, including the Northwest Territory (most in modern-day Michigan), upstate New York and naval battles in the Great Lakes.
The Treaty of Ghent (ratified in 1815) ended the war and restored the status quo ante bellum.
1837 Rebellion and Patriot War[edit]
Main articles: Rebellions of 1837, Upper Canada Rebellion, and Patriot war
Mackenzie, Duncombe, John Rolph and 200 supporters fled to Navy Island in the Niagara River, where they declared themselves the Republic of Canada on 13 December. They obtained supplies from supporters in the United States, resulting in British reprisals (see Caroline affair). This incident has been used to establish the principle of "anticipatory self-defense" in international politics, which holds that it may be justified only in cases in which the "necessity of that self-defense is instant, overwhelming, and leaving no choice of means, and no moment for deliberation". This formulation is part of the Caroline test. The Caroline affair is also now invoked frequently in the course of the dispute around preemptive strike (or preemption doctrine).
On 13 January 1838, under attack by British armaments, the rebels fled. Mackenzie went to the United States where he was arrested and charged under the Neutrality Act.[60] The Neutrality Act of 1794 made it illegal for an American to wage war against any country at peace with the United States. Application of the Neutrality Act during the Patriot War led to the largest use of US government military force against its own citizens since the Whiskey Rebellion.[61]
The extended series of incidents comprising the Patriot War were finally settled by US Secretary of State Daniel Webster and Alexander Baring, 1st Baron Ashburton, in the course of their negotiations leading to the Webster–Ashburton Treaty of 1842.
Education[edit]
In 1807 the Grammar School Act allowed the government to take over various grammar schools across the province and incorporating them into a network of eight new, public grammar schools (secondary schools), one for each of the eight districts (Eastern, Johnstown, Midland, Newcastle, Home, Niagara, London, and Western).[62]
Of those, these were the better known ones[according to whom?]:

Eastern Grammar School in New Johnstown or current day Cornwall, Ontario – founded as Cornwall Grammar School and later became Cornwall Collegiate and Vocational School.
Home District Grammar School in York, Upper Canada, later becoming Royal Grammar School, Toronto High School and finally to the current name Jarvis Collegiate Institute.
Midland Grammar School – created to replace Kingston Grammar School established in 1792 and later became Kingston Collegiate and Vocational Institute
Western District Grammar School in Sandwich or current day Windsor, Ontario – grammar school is gone and is now the site of General Brock Public School.[63]

Canada West[edit]
Main articles: United Province of Canada and Ontario
Canada West was the western portion of the United Province of Canada from 10 February 1841, to 1 July 1867.[64] Its boundaries were identical to those of the former Province of Upper Canada. Lower Canada would also become Canada East.
The area was named the Province of Ontario under the British North America Act of 1867.
See also[edit]


Ontario portal
History of Canada portal



The Canadas
Lower Canada
Former colonies and territories in Canada
Timeline of Ontario history

References[edit]


^ a b "The emigrant's handbook of facts concerning Canada, New Zealand, Australia, Cape of Good Hope, &c". Open Library. pp. 10, 20. Retrieved 22 December 2013. 
^ McNairn, Jeffrey (2000). The Capacity to Judge: Public Opinion and Deliberative Democracy in Upper Canada 1791–1854. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp. 23–62. 
^ Amstrong, Frederick H. (1985). Handbook of Upper Canadian Chronology (Revised ed.). Toronto: Dundurn Press. pp. 8–12. 
^ Armstrong, Frederick H. (1985). Handbook of Upper Canadian Chronology (Revised ed.). Toronto: Dundurn Press. p. 39. 
^ Craig, Gerald (1963). Upper Canada: The Formative Years 1784–1841. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. p. 28. 
^ Craig, Gerald (1963). Upper Canada: The Formative Years 1784–1841. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. pp. 30–31. 
^ W.S.Wallace, The Family Compact, Toronto 1915.
^ "Canadian Encyclopedia". Family Compact. Retrieved 21 March 2011. 
^ Craig, Gerald (1963). Upper Canada: the Formative Years 1784–1841. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. pp. 93–99. 
^ Wilton, Carol (2000). Popular Politics and Political Culture in Upper Canada, 1800–1850. Montreal-Kingston: McGill-Queens University Press. pp. 146–7. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2009). Union is Strength: W.L. Mackenzie, the Children of Peace, and the Emergence of Joint Stock Democracy in Upper Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp. 181–4. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2009). Union is Strength: W.L. Mackenzie, the Children of Peace, and the Emergence of Joint Stock Democracy in Upper Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp. 192–9. 
^ Greer, Allan (1995). "1837–38: Rebellion Reconsidered". Canadian Historical Review. LXVII (1): 1–30. 
^ Careless, J.M.S. (1967). The Union of the Canadas: The Growth of Canadian Institutions 1841–1857. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. pp. 113–30. 
^ McKay, Ian (2000). "The Liberal Order Framework: A prospectus for a reconnaissance of Canadian History". Canadian Historical Review. 81 (4): 623. 
^ a b Haudenosaunee is /hɔːdɛnəˈʃɔːniː/ in English, Akunęhsyę̀niˀ in Tuscarora (Rudes, B., Tuscarora English Dictionary, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999), and Rotinonsionni in Mohawk.
^ Max M. Mintz, Seeds of Empire: The American Revolutionary Conquest of the Iroquois (New York University Press, 1999).
^ Gates, Lillian (1968). Land Policies of Upper Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
^ Calton is now within Glasgow itself.
^ Lucille H. Campey (2005). The Scottish pioneers of Upper Canada, 1784–1855: Glengarry and beyond. Dundurn Press Ltd. p. 52ff. ISBN 1-897045-01-8. 
^ Charles J. Humber, Allegiance: the Ontario Story (Mississauga, Ontario: Heirloom Pub.: 1991), 193
^ Craig, Gerald (1963). Upper Canada: The Formative Years 1784–1841. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. pp. 142–4. 
^ Craig, Gerald (1963). Upper Canada: The Formative Years 1784–1841. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. pp. 171–9. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2010). "The Gentlemanly Order & the Politics of Production in the Transition to Capitalism in the Home District, Upper Canada". Labour/Le Travail. 65 (1): 26–31. 
^ Lee, Robert C. (2004). The Canada Company and the Huron Tract, 1826–1853: Personalities, Profits and Politics. Toronto: Natural Heritage Books. pp. 98–148. 
^ Ankli, Robert E.; Duncan, Kenneth (1984). "Farm Making Costs in Early Ontario". Canadian Papers in Rural History. 4: 33–49. 
^ "What was the Huron Tract?". Retrieved 17 September 2010. 
^ Wilson, George A. (1959). The Political and Administrative History of the Upper Canada Clergy Reserves, 1790–1855. Toronto: PhD Thesis, Dept. of History, University of Toronto. pp. 133ff. 
^ "Complete History of the Canadian Metis Culturework=Metis nation of the North West". 
^ Afua Cooper, "Acts of Resistance: Black Men and Women Engage Slavery in Upper Canada, 1793–1803," Ontario History, Spring 2007, Vol. 99 Issue 1, pp 5–17
^ Wilton, Carol (2001). Popular Politics and Political Culture in Upper Canada, 1800–1850. Montreal & Kingston: McGill-Queens University Press. p. 9. 
^ "The Parish of St. Raphael Glengarry Emigration of 1786 Bishop Alexander Macdonell 1762–1840". ontarioplaques.com/. Retrieved 16 April 2012. 
^ "Bishop Alexander MacDonell". catholic-hierarchy.org. Retrieved 16 April 2012. 
^ Reaman, G. Elmore (1957). The Trail of the Black Walnut. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. pp. 40–124. 
^ Baehre, Rainer (1981). "Pauper Emigration to Upper Canada in the 1830s". Historie Sociale/Social History. XIV (28): 340. 
^ Johnston, H.J.M. (1972). British Emigration Policy 1815–1830: 'Shovelling Out the Paupers. Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. 51–4. 
^ Cameron, Wendy, Mary McDougall Maude (2000). Assisting Emigration to Upper Canada: The Petworth Project, 1832–1837. Montreal-Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2009). Union is Strength: W.L. Mackenzie, the Children of Peace, and the Emergence of Joint Stock Democracy in Upper Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. p. 21. 
^ McCalla, Douglas (1993). Planting the Province: The Economic History of Upper Canada 1784–1870. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp. 245–7. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2010). "The Gentlemanly Order & the Politics of Production in the Transition to Capitalism in the Home District, Upper Canada". Labour/Le Travail. 65: 22–6. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2011). ""Money bound you – money shall loose you": Micro-credit, Social Capital and the Meaning of Money in Upper Canada". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 52 (2): 24. doi:10.1017/s0010417511000077. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2009). Union is Strength: W.L. Mackenzie, the Children of Peace and the Emergence of Joint Stock Democracy in Upper Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp. 151–174. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2009). Union is Strength: W.L. Mackenzie, the Children of Peace and the Emergence of Joint Stock Democracy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. p. 107. 
^ McCalla, Douglas (1979). The Upper Canada Trade 1834–1872: A Study of the Buchanan's Business. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. p. 28. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2009). Union is Strength: W.L. Mackenzie, the Children of Peace and the Emergence of Joint Stock Democracy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp. 102–6. 
^ McCalla, Douglas (1993). Planting the Province: The Economic History of Upper Canada 1784–1783. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. p. 75. 
^ Schrauwers, Albert (2009). Union is Strength: W.L. Mackenzie, the Children of Peace, and the Emergence of Joint Stock Democracy in Upper Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. pp. 41–50. 
^ Woods, Shirley E. Jr (1980). Ottawa: The Capital of Canada,. Toronto: Doubleday Canada. p. 89. 
^ Greening 1961, pp. 111.
^ Greening, W.E. (1961). The Ottawa. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. p. 111. 
^ Bond, Courtney C.J. (1984). Where Rivers Meet: An Illustrated History of Ottawa. Windsor Publications. p. 43. 
^ Mika, Nick & Helma (1982). Bytown: The Early Days of Ottawa. Belleville, Ont.: Mika Publishing Company. p. 121. 
^ Craig, Gerald (1963). Upper Canada: the Formative Years 1784–1841. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. pp. 153–60. 
^ Aitken, Hugh G.T. (1953). "Yates and McIntyre: Lottery Managers". The Journal of Economic History. 13 (1): 36–57. 
^ The debate is addressed by Barlow Cumberland in Chapter 2 of A Century of Sail and Steam on the Niagara River. Retrieved 26 March 2011
^ McCalla, Douglas (1993). Planting the Province: the Economic History of Upper Canada 1784–1870. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. p. 119. 
^ Lewis, Walter (1997). "The First Generation of Marine Engines in Central Canadian Steamers, 1809–1837". The Northern Mariner. VII (2): II. 
^ McCalla, Douglas (1993). Planting the Province: the Economic History of Upper Canada 1784–1870. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. p. 120. 
^ Young, Bennett Henderson, The Battle of the Thames: In Which Kentuckians Defeated the British, French and Indians, 5 October 1813. Louisville, Ky.: Morton, 1903.
^ "MacKenzie, William Lyon". Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online. University of Toronto/Université Laval. 2000. 
^ Bonthius, Andrew (2003). "The Patriot War of 1837–1838: Locofocoism with a Gun?". Labour/Le Travail. 52 (2): 11–12. doi:10.2307/25149383. 
^ "Education in Upper Canada From 1783 To 1844". canada.yodelout.com. 
^ "Western District Grammar School – Southwestern Ontario Digital Archive". swoda.uwindsor.ca. 
^ J.M.S. Careless. "Province of Canada, 1841–67". Retrieved 16 June 2007. 


Further reading[edit]


Armstrong, Frederick H. Handbook of Upper Canadian Chronology Dundurn Press, 1985. ISBN 0-919670-92-X
Clarke, John. Land Power and Economics on the Frontier of Upper Canada McGill-Queen's University Press (2001) 747pp. (ISBN 0-7735-2062-7)
Craig, Gerald M. Upper Canada: the formative years 1784–1841 McClelland and Stewart, 1963, the standard history online edition
Di Mascio, Anthony. The Idea of Popular Schooling in Upper Canada: Print Culture, Public Discourse, and the Demand for Education (McGill-Queen's University Press; 2012) 248 pages; building a common system of schooling in the late-18th and early 19th centuries.
Dieterman, Frank. Government on fire: the history and archaeology of Upper Canada's first Parliament Buildings Eastendbooks, 2001.
Dunham, Eileen. Political unrest in Upper Canada 1815–1836 McClelland and Stewart, 1963.
Errington, Jane. The lion, the eagle, and Upper Canada: a developing colonial ideology McGill-Queen's University Press, 1987.
Grabb, Edward; Duncan, Jeff; Baer, Douglas (2000). "Defining Moments and Recurring Myths: Comparing Canadians and Americans after the American Revolution". The Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology. 37. 
Johnston, James Keith. Historical essays on Upper Canada McClelland and Stewart, 1975.
Kilbourn, William. The Firebrand: William Lyon Mackenzie and the Rebellion in Upper Canada (1956) online edition
Lewis, Frank, and M. C. Urquhart. Growth and standard of living in a pioneer economy: Upper Canada 1826–1851 Kingston, Ont. : Institute for Economic Research, Queen's University, 1997.
McCalla, Douglas. Planting the province: the economic history of Upper Canada 1784–1870 University of Toronto Press, 1993.
McNairn, Jeffrey L. The capacity to judge: public opinion and deliberative democracy in Upper Canada 1791–1854 University of Toronto Press, 2000.
Rea, J. Edgar. "Rebellion in Upper Canada, 1837" Manitoba Historical Society Transactions Series 3, Number 22, 1965–66 online, historiography
Schrauwers, Albert . Union is Strength: W.L. Mackenzie, the Children of Peace and the Emergence of Joint Stock Democracy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009.
Wilton, Carol. Popular Politics and Political Culture in Upper Canada, 1800–1850. McGill-Queen's University Press, (2000). 311pp
Winearls, Joan. Mapping Upper Canada 1780–1867: an annotated bibliography of manuscript and printed maps. University of Toronto Press, 1991.erdvrv
Moving Here, Staying Here: The Canadian Immigrant Experience at Library and Archives Canada


External links[edit]

Maritime History of the Great Lakes
Early Canadiana Online digital collections







v
t
e


 Former colonies and territories in Canada



Norse



Named Territories
Vinland

Markland
Helluland




Sites
L'Anse aux Meadows
Point Rosee





French



Claims
New France

Acadia
Isle St-Jean
Île Royale
Canada
Domaine du roy
Louisiana
Pays d'en Haut
Terre Neuve




Important sites
Port Royal
Quebec
Trois-Rivières
Montreal
Louisbourg
Plaisance
List of towns
List of Forts





Spanish



Claims
New Spain
Important sites
Fort San Miguel, Nootka Sound
Expeditions
Newfoundland
Pacific Northwest





Scottish



Claims
Nova Scotia (1621)
Sites
Port Royal Colony





Russian



Claims
Russian America





American



Claims
Oregon Country





English &
British



Claims
Newfoundland (1583)
New Albion (?)
Rupert's Land
Nova Scotia (1710)
Quebec
Lower and Upper Canada
New Brunswick
Prince Edward Island
Cape Breton
United Canada
New Caledonia
Columbia District
Queen Charlotte Islands
Vancouver Island
British Columbia (1858–66)
British Columbia (1866–71)
Stickeen
North-Western Territory
Red River
Important sites
Cuper's Cove
Avalon (1620)
York Factory
Halifax
Victoria
Fort Langley
List of HBC sites





Norwegian



Claims
Sverdrup Islands





Related



Territorial evolution after 1867
Areas disputed by Canada and the United States
Proposed provinces and territories of Canada
Population of Canada








 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


 British Empire







Legend
Current territory
Former territory
* Now a Commonwealth realm
Now a member of the Commonwealth of Nations
Historical flags of the British Empire











Europe






1542–1800 Ireland (integrated into UK)
1708–1757, 1763–1782 and 1798–1802 Minorca
Since 1713 Gibraltar
1800–1813 Malta (Protectorate)
1813–1964 Malta (Colony)
1807–1890 Heligoland
1809–1864 Ionian Islands
1878–1960 Cyprus
1921–1937 Irish Free State













North America







17th century and before
18th century
19th and 20th century





1579 New Albion
1583–1907 Newfoundland
1605–1979 *Saint Lucia
1607–1776 Virginia
Since 1619 Bermuda
1620–1691 Plymouth
1623–1883 Saint Kitts
1624–1966 *Barbados
1625–1650 Saint Croix
1627–1979 *Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
1628–1883 Nevis
1629–1691 Massachusetts Bay
1632–1776 Maryland
since 1632 Montserrat
1632–1860 Antigua
1635–1644 Saybrook
1636–1776 Connecticut
1636–1776 Rhode Island
1637–1662 New Haven






1643–1860 Bay Islands
Since 1650 Anguilla
1655–1850 Mosquito Coast
1655–1962 *Jamaica
1663–1712 Carolina
1664–1776 New York
1665–1674 and 1702–1776 New Jersey
Since 1666 Virgin Islands
Since 1670 Cayman Islands
1670–1973 *Bahamas
1670–1870 Rupert's Land
1671–1816 Leeward Islands
1674–1702 East Jersey
1674–1702 West Jersey
1680–1776 New Hampshire
1681–1776 Pennsylvania
1686–1689 New England
1691–1776 Massachusetts Bay






1701–1776 Delaware
1712–1776 North Carolina
1712–1776 South Carolina
1713–1867 Nova Scotia
1733–1776 Georgia
1754–1820 Cape Breton Island
1762–1974 *Grenada
1763–1978 Dominica
1763–1873 Prince Edward Island
1763–1791 Quebec
1763–1783 East Florida
1763–1783 West Florida
1784–1867 New Brunswick
1791–1841 Lower Canada
1791–1841 Upper Canada
Since 1799 Turks and Caicos Islands






1818–1846 Columbia District/Oregon Country1
1833–1960 Windward Islands
1833–1960 Leeward Islands
1841–1867 Canada
1849–1866 Vancouver Island
1853–1863 Queen Charlotte Islands
1858–1866 British Columbia
1859–1870 North-Western Territory
1860–1981 *British Antigua and Barbuda
1862–1863 Stickeen
1866–1871 British Columbia
1867–1931 *Dominion of Canada2
1871–1964 Honduras
1882–1983 *Saint Kitts and Nevis
1889–1962 Trinidad and Tobago
1907–1949 Newfoundland3
1958–1962 West Indies Federation












1. Occupied jointly with the United States.
2. In 1931, Canada and other British dominions obtained self-government through the Statute of Westminster. See Name of Canada.
3. Gave up self-rule in 1934, but remained a de jure Dominion until it joined Canada in 1949.













South America






1631–1641 Providence Island
1651–1667 Willoughbyland
1670–1688 Saint Andrew and Providence Islands4
1831–1966 Guiana
Since 1833 Falkland Islands5
Since 1908 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands5








4. Now a department of Colombia.
5. Occupied by Argentina during the Falklands War of April–June 1982.













Africa







17th and 18th centuries
19th century
20th century





Since 1658 Saint Helena14
1792–1961 Sierra Leone
1795–1803 Cape Colony






Since 1815 Ascension Island14
Since 1816 Tristan da Cunha14
1806–1910 Cape of Good Hope
1807–1808 Madeira
1810–1968 Mauritius
1816–1965 The Gambia
1856–1910 Natal
1862–1906 Lagos
1868–1966 Basutoland
1874–1957 Gold Coast
1882–1922 Egypt






1884–1900 Niger Coast
1884–1966 Bechuanaland
1884–1960 Somaliland
1887–1897 Zululand
1890–1962 Uganda
1890–1963 Zanzibar
1891–1964 Nyasaland
1891–1907 Central Africa
1893–1968 Swaziland
1895–1920 East Africa
1899–1956 Sudan






1900–1914 Northern Nigeria
1900–1914 Southern Nigeria
1900–1910 Orange River
1900–1910 Transvaal
1903–1976 Seychelles
1910–1931 South Africa
1914–1960 Nigeria
1915–1931 South-West Africa
1919–1961 Cameroons6
1920–1963 Kenya
1922–1961 Tanganyika6
1923–1965 and 1979–1980 Southern Rhodesia7
1924–1964 Northern Rhodesia












6. League of Nations mandate.
7. Self-governing Southern Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence in 1965 (as Rhodesia) and continued as an unrecognised state until the 1979 Lancaster House Agreement. After recognised independence in 1980, Zimbabwe was a member of the Commonwealth until it withdrew in 2003.













Asia







17th and 18th century
19th century
20th century





1685–1824 Bencoolen
1702–1705 Pulo Condore
1757–1947 Bengal
1762–1764 Manila and Cavite
1781–1784 and 1795–1819 Padang
1786–1946 Penang
1795–1948 Ceylon
1796–1965 Maldives






1811–1816 Java
1812–1824 Banka and Billiton
1819–1826 Malaya
1824–1948 Burma
1826–1946 Straits Settlements
1839–1967 Aden
1839–1842 Afghanistan
1841–1997 Hong Kong
1841–1946 Sarawak
1848–1946 Labuan
1858–1947 India
1874–1963 Borneo






1879–1919 Afghanistan (protectorate)
1882–1963 North Borneo
1885–1946 Unfederated Malay States
1888–1984 Brunei
1891–1971 Muscat and Oman
1892–1971 Trucial States
1895–1946 Federated Malay States
1898–1930 Weihai
1878–1960 Cyprus






1907–1949 Bhutan (protectorate)
1918–1961 Kuwait
1920–1932 Mesopotamia8
1921–1946 Transjordan8
1923–1948 Palestine8
1945–1946 South Vietnam
1946–1963 North Borneo
1946–1963 Sarawak
1946–1963 Singapore
1946–1948 Malayan Union
1948–1957 Federation of Malaya
Since 1960 Akrotiri and Dhekelia (before as part of Cyprus)
Since 1965 British Indian Ocean Territory (before as part of Mauritius and the Seychelles)










8 League of Nations mandate. Iraq's mandate was not enacted and replaced by the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty











Oceania







18th and 19th centuries
20th century





1788–1901 New South Wales
1803–1901 Van Diemen's Land/Tasmania
1807–1863 Auckland Islands9
1824–1980 New Hebrides
1824–1901 Queensland
1829–1901 Swan River/Western Australia
1836–1901 South Australia
since 1838 Pitcairn Islands






1841–1907 New Zealand
1851–1901 Victoria
1874–1970 Fiji10
1877–1976 Western Pacific Territories
1884–1949 Papua
1888–1901 Rarotonga/Cook Islands9
1889–1948 Union Islands9
1892–1979 Gilbert and Ellice Islands11
1893–1978 Solomon Islands12






1900–1970 Tonga
1900–1974 Niue9
1901–1942 *Australia
1907–1953 *New Zealand
1919–1942 and 1945–1968 Nauru
1919–1949 New Guinea
1949–1975 Papua and New Guinea13












9. Now part of the *Realm of New Zealand.
10. Suspended member.
11. Now Kiribati and *Tuvalu.
12. Now the *Solomon Islands.
13. Now *Papua New Guinea.













Antarctica and South Atlantic






Since 1658 Saint Helena14
Since 1815 Ascension Island14
Since 1816 Tristan da Cunha14
Since 1908 British Antarctic Territory15
1841–1933 Australian Antarctic Territory (transferred to the Commonwealth of Australia)
1841–1947 Ross Dependency (transferred to the Realm of New Zealand)








14. Since 2009 part of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha; Ascension Island (1922–) and Tristan da Cunha (1938–) were previously dependencies of Saint Helena.
15. Both claimed in 1908; territories formed in 1962 (British Antarctic Territory) and 1985 (South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands).









Coordinates: 44°N 80°W﻿ / ﻿44°N 80°W﻿ / 44; -80



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 140253636
LCCN: n80026218
GND: 4075553-8











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Upper_Canada&oldid=812256696"					Categories: Former countries in North AmericaFormer British coloniesStates and territories established in 1791States and territories disestablished in 18411841 disestablishments in CanadaUpper CanadaHistory of Ontario by locationBritish North AmericaFormer British colonies and protectorates in the Americas1791 establishments in the British Empire1841 disestablishments in the British Empire1791 establishments in North America1791 establishments in CanadaHidden categories: EngvarB from November 2017Use dmy dates from November 2017Former country articles requiring maintenancePages using infobox former country with unknown parametersArticles containing French-language textArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2013All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2015Coordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers