



Partizánske in Slovakia – an example of a typical planned European industrial city founded in 1938 together with a shoemaking factory in which practically all adult inhabitants of the city were employed.


Urban planning is a technical and political process concerned with the development and use of land, planning permission, protection and use of the environment, public welfare, and the design of the urban environment, including air, water, and the infrastructure passing into and out of urban areas, such as transportation, communications, and distribution networks.[1] Urban planning is also referred to as urban and regional planning, regional planning, town planning, city planning, rural planning, urban development or some combination in various areas worldwide. It is considered an interdisciplinary field that includes social, engineering and design sciences. Urban planning is closely related to the field of urban design and some urban planners provide designs for streets, parks, buildings and other urban areas.[2]
Urban planning guides orderly development in urban, suburban and rural areas. Although predominantly concerned with the planning of settlements and communities, urban planning is also responsible for the planning and development of water use and resources, rural and agricultural land, parks and conserving areas of natural environmental significance. Practitioners of urban planning are concerned with research and analysis, strategic thinking, architecture, urban design, public consultation, policy recommendations, implementation and management.[3]
Urban planners work with the cognate fields of architecture, landscape architecture, civil engineering, and public administration to achieve strategic, policy and sustainability goals. Early urban planners were often members of these cognate fields. Today urban planning is a separate, independent professional discipline. The discipline is the broader category that includes different sub-fields such as land-use planning, zoning, economic development, environmental planning, and transportation planning.[4]



Contents


1 History
2 Theories
3 Technical aspects
4 Urban planners
5 See also
6 References

6.1 Bibliography


7 Further reading
8 External links

8.1 Library guides for urban planning





History[edit]
Further information: History of urban planning
There is evidence of urban planning and designed communities dating back to the Mesopotamian, Indus Valley, Minoan, and Egyptian civilizations in the third millennium BCE. Archeologists studying the ruins of cities in these areas find paved streets that were laid out at right angles in a grid pattern.[5] The idea of a planned out urban area evolved as different civilizations adopted it. Beginning in the 8th century BCE, Greek city states were primarily centered on orthogonal (or grid-like) plans.[6] The ancient Romans, inspired by the Greeks, also used orthogonal plans for their cities. City planning in the Roman world was developed for military defense and public convenience. The spread of the Roman Empire subsequently spread the ideas of urban planning. As the Roman Empire declined, these ideas slowly disappeared. However, many cities in Europe still held onto the planned Roman city center. Cities in Europe from the 9th to 14th centuries, often grew organically and sometimes chaotically. But many hundreds of new towns were newly built according to preconceived plans, and many others were enlarged with newly planned extensions. Most of these were realized from the 12th to 14th centuries, with a peak-period at the end of the 13th.[7] From the 15th century on, much more is recorded of urban design and the people that were involved. In this period, theoretical treatises on architecture and urban planning start to appear in which theoretical questions are addressed and designs of towns and cities are described and depicted. During the Enlightenment period, several European rulers ambitiously attempted to redesign capital cities. During the Second French Republic, Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann, under the direction of Napoleon III, redesigned the city of Paris into a more modern capital, with long, straight, wide boulevards.[8]
Planning and architecture went through a paradigm shift at the turn of the 20th century. The industrialized cities of the 19th century grew at a tremendous rate. The pace and style of this industrial construction was largely dictated by the concerns of private business. The evils of urban life for the working poor were becoming increasingly evident as a matter for public concern. The laissez-faire style of government management of the economy, in fashion for most of the Victorian era, was starting to give way to a New Liberalism that championed intervention on the part of the poor and disadvantaged. Around 1900, theorists began developing urban planning models to mitigate the consequences of the industrial age, by providing citizens, especially factory workers, with healthier environments.
Urban planning started to become professionalized during this time. The Town and Country Planning Association was founded in 1899 and the first academic course in Great Britain on urban planning was offered by the University of Liverpool in 1909.[9] In the 1920s, the ideas of modernism and uniformity began to surface in urban planning, and lasted until the 1970s. Many planners started to believe that the ideas of modernism in urban planning led to higher crime rates and social problems.[10] Urban planners now focus more on individualism and diversity in urban centers.
Theories[edit]
Further information: Theories of urban planning
Planning theory is the body of scientific concepts, definitions, behavioral relationships, and assumptions that define the body of knowledge of urban planning. There are eight procedural theories of planning that remain the principal theories of planning procedure today: the rational-comprehensive approach, the incremental approach, the transactive approach, the communicative approach, the advocacy approach, the equity approach, the radical approach, and the humanist or phenomenological approach.[11]
Technical aspects[edit]
Further information: Technical aspects of urban planning
Technical aspects of urban planning involve the applying scientific, technical processes, considerations and features that are involved in planning for land use, urban design, natural resources, transportation, and infrastructure. Urban planning includes techniques such as: predicting population growth, zoning, geographic mapping and analysis, analyzing park space, surveying the water supply, identifying transportation patterns, recognizing food supply demands, allocating healthcare and social services, and analyzing the impact of land use.
In order to predict how cities will develop and estimate the effects of their interventions, planners use various models. These models can be used to indicate relationships and patterns in demographic, geographic, and economic data. They might deal with short-term issues such as how people move through cities, or long-term issues such as land use and growth.[12]
Building codes and other regulations dovetail with urban planning by governing how cities are constructed and used from the individual level.[13]
Urban planners[edit]
Further information: Urban planner
An urban planner is a professional who works in the field of urban planning for the purpose of optimizing the effectiveness of a community's land use and infrastructure. They formulate plans for the development and management of urban and suburban areas, typically analyzing land use compatibility as well as economic, environmental and social trends. In developing the plan for a community (whether commercial, residential, agricultural, natural or recreational), urban planners must also consider a wide array of issues such as sustainability, air pollution, traffic congestion, crime, land values, legislation and zoning codes.
The importance of the urban planner is increasing throughout the 21st century, as modern society begins to face issues of increased population growth, climate change and unsustainable development. An urban planner could be considered a green collar professional.[clarification needed]
Some researchers suggest that Urban planners around the world work in different "planning cultures", adapted to their local cities and cultures.[14] However, there are several basic knowledge, skills and abilities that are universalizable to the urban planning profession even amongst planners in different countries and regions.[15][16][17]
See also[edit]


Architecture portal




Development studies
Distinguished Canadian Planners
Index of urban planning articles
List of planned cities
List of planning journals
List of urban planners
List of urban theorists
Regional planning
Rural development
Urban history
Urban informatics


References[edit]



^ "What is Urban Planning". Retrieved April 24, 2015. 
^ Van Assche, K., Beunen, R., Duineveld, M., & de Jong, H. (2013). Co-evolutions of planning and design: Risks and benefits of design perspectives in planning systems. Planning Theory, 12(2), 177-198.
^ Taylor, Nigel (2007). Urban Planning Theory since 1945, London, Sage.
^ "What Is Planning?". www.planning.org. Retrieved 2015-09-28. 
^ Davreu, Robert (1978). "Cities of Mystery: The Lost Empire of the Indus Valley". The World’s Last Mysteries. (second edition). Sydney: Readers’ Digest. pp. 121-129. ISBN 0-909486-61-1.
^ Kolb, Frank (1984). Die Stadt im Altertum. München: Verlag C.H. Beck. pp. 51-141: Morris, A.E.J. (1972). History of Urban Form. Prehistory to the Renaissance. London. pp. 22-23.
^ Boerefijn, Wim (2010). The foundation, planning and building of new towns in the 13th and 14th centuries in Europe. An architectural-historical research into urban form and its creation. Phd. thesis Universiteit van Amsterdam. ISBN 978-90-9025157-8. 
^ Jordan, David (1992). "Baron Haussmann and Modern Paris". American Scholar. 61 (1): 99. 
^ "urban planning". 
^ Smith Morris et al. British Town Planning and Urban Design, 1997, ISBN 0-582-23496-4, Longman, Singapore.
^ "How Planners Use Planning Theory". Retrieved April 24, 2015. 
^ John D. Landis, "Modeling Urban Systems"; in Weber & Crane (2012).
^ Eran Ben-Joseph, "Codes and Standards"; in Weber & Crane (2012), p. 352: "Codes, rules, and standards are part of a matrix of relations that influence the practice of urban planning and design. These forms of regulation provide an important and inescapable framework for development, from the laying out of subdivisions to the control of stormwater runoff. The subject of regulations leads to the source of how communities are designed and constructed—defining how they can and can't be built—and how codes, rules, and standards continue to shape the physical space where we live and work."
^ John Friedman, "Varieties of Planning Experience: Toward a Globalized Planning Culture?"; in Weber & Crane (2012).
^ "American Institutes of Certified Planners Certification". American Planning Association. American Planning Association. Retrieved 20 July 2017. 
^ "Professional standards". Royal Institute of Town Planners. Royal Town Planning Institute. Retrieved 20 July 2017. 
^ "About ISOCARP". International Society of City and Regional Planners. Retrieved 20 July 2017. 



Bibliography[edit]

Weber, Rachel, and Randall Crane (2012). The Oxford Handbook of Urban Planning. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-537499

Further reading[edit]

Pennington, Mark (2008). "Urban planning". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 517–18. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n316. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 

External links[edit]

Find more aboutUrban planningat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Learning resources from Wikiversity
Data from Wikidata



Urban planning at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
American Planning Association

Library guides for urban planning[edit]

Libraries. "Urban Planning Resources". Research Guides. USA: Arizona State University. 
Library. "Urban Planning". Research Guides. University of California, Los Angeles. 
Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library. "Urban Planning". Research Guides. New York: Columbia University. 
Library. "Urban & Regional Policy". Research Guides. USA: Georgia Tech. 
Harvard University Graduate School of Design. "Urban Planning and Design". Research Guides. Massachusetts: Harvard Library. 
Hunter College Libraries. "Urban Affairs & Planning". Topic Guides. New York City: CUNY Hunter College. 
University Library. "City Planning". LibGuides. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
MIT Libraries. "Urban Studies & Planning". Research Guides. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
"Urban & Regional Planning". Research Guides. USA: University of Michigan. 
Library. "Urban Studies & Planning". Research Guides. Oregon, USA: Portland State University. 







v
t
e


Urban planning



General



Land use
Planning
Planning and zoning commission
Growth management
Development economics
Social sciences
Public policy





Major
branches




Urban



Land-use planning
Comprehensive planning (US)
Spatial planning (Eur)
Planned cities
Planned community / Model village
Redevelopment
Urban design
Urbanism





Rural



Conservation development
Preservation development
Rural housing
Village design statement (UK)





Regional



Regional Planning Association of America





Environmental



Environmental design
Environmental impact assessment
Environmental planning
Recreation resource planning
Sustainable development





Transportation planning



Transportation forecasting
Trip distribution
Rational planning model
Transit-oriented development
Professional transportation planner
Urban freight distribution





Economic Development



Community economic development








Concepts/
theories




Movements



Athens Charter
Car-free movement
City Beautiful movement
Dark-sky movement
Garden city movement
Indigenous planning
New Urbanism
Settlement movement
Smart Growth
Structuralism
Transition towns





Theories



Collaborative planning
Context theory
Ekistics
Intelligent urbanism
Livable streets
Market urbanism
Radical planning
Urban acupuncture
Urban renewal





Concepts



Affordable housing
Cityscape
Cluster development
Creative city
Company town
Complete Communities
Eminent domain (US)
Gentrification / Brusselization
Infill
Healthy cities / Healthy community design
LEED-ND
Mixed-use development
Model cities
New town
Placemaking
Planned community
Planning gain
Planning Permission (U.K.)
Suburbia
Temporary use
Third place
Tract housing
Urban decay
Urban sprawl
Urbanization
Verticalization / High-rise urbanism
Zoning








People




Theorists/
practitioners



Thomas Adams
Donald Appleyard
Edmund Bacon
Guy Benveniste
Colin Buchanan
Daniel Burnham
Peter Calthorpe
Konstantinos Doxiadis
Andrés Duany
Patrick Geddes
Ebenezer Howard
Kevin A. Lynch
Ian McHarg
Clarence Perry
James Rouse
Clarence Stein
Raymond Unwin
List of urban theorists
List of urban planners








Critics



Elizabeth Farrelly
Jane Jacobs
James Howard Kunstler
Lewis Mumford
Randal O'Toole








Related
disciplines



Architecture
Civil engineering
Urban ecology
Geography
Land development
Landscape architecture
Marine spatial planning
Public health
Real estate development








 Category
Index of urban planning articles
List of planned cities
List of planning journals
 Commons












v
t
e


Land use



General



Degradation
Development/Conversion
Planning
Conflict
Land management

Sustainable land management


Landscaping

Integrated landscape management


Land grabbing
Land consumption
Land loss

Habitat loss


Illegal construction
Land reclamation
Land rehabilitation
Landscape ecology
Rangeland management
Environmental planning

Leopold matrix
Watertable control


Developed environments

Built-up area







Property



Property

Subdivision (land)
Real estate developer


Land development bank
Land (economics)
Customary land





Related fields



Soil

Soil science
Soil compaction
Soil pollution


Overpopulation
Pollution
Deforestation
Urban planning

Infrastructure
Urban renewal


Agriculture

Permaculture
Drainage system (agriculture)
Sustainable agriculture










 Categories: Land use












v
t
e


Social sciences



Primary



Anthropology

archaeology
cultural
linguistics
social


Economics

microeconomics
macroeconomics


Geography

human
integrative


History

cultural
economic
military
political
social


Law

jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems


Political science

international relations
psephology
public administration
public policy


Psychology

abnormal
biological
cognitive
developmental
personality
social


Sociology

criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban







Interdisciplinary



Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Media studies
Philosophy of science

economics
history
psychology
social science


Planning

land use
regional
urban


Political ecology
Political economy
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies

historical


Social work





Other categorizations



Humanities
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science








Index
Journals
Outline
Wikiversity









Authority control



GND: 4056754-0
NDL: 00573354











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urban_planning&oldid=813136694"					Categories: Urban planningHidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2015Use American English from April 2015All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishWikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2015Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers