This article is about Modern Standard Urdu. For other uses, see Urdu (disambiguation).


Urdu


اُردُو‬



Urdu in Nastaʿlīq script



Pronunciation
[ˈʊrd̪u] ( listen)


Region
South Asia, Middle East


Ethnicity
Hindustani people, Deccani Muslims and Muhajirs



Native speakers

65 million in India (2007)[1]
Second language: 94 million in Pakistan (1999).[2]



Language family


Indo-European

Indo-Iranian

Indo-Aryan

Central Zone (Hindi)

Western Hindi

Hindustani[3]

Khariboli[3]

Urdu


















Writing system




Urdu alphabet
Urdu Braille






Signed forms




Indian Signing System (ISS)[4]
Signed Urdu[5]





Official status



Official language in


 Pakistan(National & Official)
 India(Official as per the 8th schedule of the constitution & in the following states/union territories) Official:

Jammu and Kashmir
Telangana

Secondary Official:

National Capital Territory of Delhi
Bihar
Uttar Pradesh
Jharkhand
West Bengal





Recognised minority
language in


 United Arab Emirates[6]

(as a recognized national language)
 Guyana[7]
(as Guyanese Hindustani)
 Mauritius[8](as ancestral language)
 Suriname[7] (as Sarnami Hindoestani)
 Trinidad and Tobago[7]
(as Trinidadian Hindustani)



Language codes


ISO 639-1
ur


ISO 639-2
urd


ISO 639-3
urd


Glottolog
urdu1245[9]


Linguasphere
59-AAF-q




  Areas where Urdu is either official or co-official
  Areas where Urdu is neither official nor co-official




This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.





This article contains Urdu text. Without proper rendering support, you may see unjoined letters running left to right or other symbols instead of Urdu script.


Urdu (/ˈʊərduː/;[10] Urdu: اُردُو‬‎ ALA-LC: Urdū [ˈʊrd̪uː] ( listen), or Modern Standard Urdu) is a Persianised and standardised register language of the Hindustani language.[11][12] It is the official national language and lingua franca of Pakistan. In India, it is one of the 22 official languages recognized in the Constitution of India, having official status in the five states of Jammu and Kashmir, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Jharkhand, as well as the national capital territory of Delhi.
Apart from specialized vocabulary, Urdu is mutually intelligible with Standard Hindi, another recognized register of Hindustani. The Urdu variant of Hindustani received recognition and patronage under British rule when the British replaced the local official languages with English and Hindustani written in Nastaʿlīq script, as the official language in North and Northwestern India.[13][14][15] Religious, social, and political factors pushed for a distinction between Urdu and Hindi in India, leading to the Hindi–Urdu controversy.[16]



Contents


1 Origin
2 Speakers and geographic distribution
3 Cultural identity and Islam

3.1 Colonial India
3.2 Pakistan


4 Official status
5 Dialects

5.1 Code switching


6 Comparison with Modern Standard Hindi
7 Phonology

7.1 Consonants
7.2 Vowels


8 Vocabulary

8.1 Levels of formality


9 Writing system
10 Literature

10.1 Prose

10.1.1 Religious
10.1.2 Literary


10.2 Poetry

10.2.1 Terminology
10.2.2 Urdu poetry example

10.2.2.1 Transliteration
10.2.2.2 Translation






11 Sample text

11.1 Urdu text
11.2 Transliteration (ALA-LC)
11.3 IPA transcription
11.4 Gloss (word-for-word)
11.5 Translation (grammatical)


12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Origin[edit]
Main article: History of Hindustani
Urdu, like Hindi, is a form of Hindustani.[17] It evolved from the medieval (6th to 13th century) Apabhraṃśa register of the preceding Shauraseni language, a Middle Indo-Aryan language that is also the ancestor of other modern Indo-Aryan languages, including the Punjabi dialects. Urdu developed under the influence of the Persian and Arabic languages, both of which have contributed a significant amount of vocabulary to formal speech.[18][19][20][21][22][23] Around 99% of Urdu verbs have their roots in Sanskrit and Prakrit.[24]
Although the word Urdu is derived from the Turkic word ordu (army) or orda, from which English horde is also derived,[25] Turkic borrowings in Urdu are minimal[26] and Urdu is also not genetically related to the Turkic languages. Urdu words originating from Chagatai and Arabic were borrowed through Persian and hence are Persianized versions of the original words. For instance, the Arabic ta' marbuta ( ة ) changes to he ( ه‬ ) or te ( ت‬ ).[27] [note 1] Nevertheless, contrary to popular belief, Urdu did not borrow from the Turkish language, but from Chagatai, a Turkic language from Central Asia. Urdu and Turkish borrowed from Arabic and Persian, hence the similarity in pronunciation of many Urdu and Turkish words.[28]
Arabic influence in the region began with the late first-millennium Muslim conquests of the Indian subcontinent. The Persian language was introduced into the subcontinent a few centuries later by various Persianized Central Asian Turkic and Afghan dynasties including that of Mahmud of Ghazni.[29][30] The Turko-Afghan Delhi Sultanate established Persian as its official language, a policy continued by the Mughal Empire, which extended over most of northern South Asia from the 16th to 18th centuries and cemented Persian influence on the developing Hindustani.[citation needed]
With the advent of the British Raj, Persian was no longer the language of administration but Hindustani, still written in the Persian script, continued to be used by both Hindus and Muslims.[citation needed] The name Urdu was first used by the poet Ghulam Hamadani Mushafi around 1780.[31][32](p18) From the 13th century until the end of the 18th century Urdu was commonly known as Hindi.[32](p1) The language was also known by various other names such as Hindavi and Dehlavi.[32](pp21–22) The communal nature of the language lasted until it replaced Persian as the official language in 1837 and was made co-official, along with English. Urdu was promoted in British India by British policies to counter the previous emphasis on Persian.[33] This triggered a Brahman backlash in northwestern India, which argued that the language should be written in the native Devanagari script. Thus a new literary register, called "Hindi", replaced traditional Hindustani as the official language of Bihar in 1881, establishing a sectarian divide of "Urdu" for Muslims and "Hindi" for Hindus, a divide that was formalized with the division of India and Pakistan after independence (though there are Hindu poets who continue to write in Urdu to this day, with post-independence examples including Gopi Chand Narang and Gulzar).
There have been attempts to "purify" Urdu and Hindi, by purging Urdu of Sanskrit loanwords, and Hindi of Persian loan words, and new vocabulary draws primarily from Persian and Arabic for Urdu and from Sanskrit for Hindi. English has exerted a heavy influence on both as a co-official language.[34]
Speakers and geographic distribution[edit]
See also: Languages of Pakistan and Languages of India




The phrase Zabān-i Urdū-yi Muʿallā ("The language of the exalted camp") written in Nastaʿlīq script.


There are over 100 million native speakers of Urdu in India (more than 80% of it) and Pakistan together: there were 52 million and 80.5 million Urdu speakers in India some 5% and 6.5% of the total population of India as per the 2001 and 2011 censuses respectively;[35] approximately 10 million in Pakistan or 7.57% as per the 1998 census and 16 million in 2006 estimates;[36] and several hundred thousand in the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, United States, and Bangladesh (where it is called "Bihari").[37] However, a knowledge of Urdu allows one to speak with far more people than that, because Hindustani, of which Urdu is one variety, is the third most commonly spoken language in the world, after Mandarin and English .[38] Because of the difficulty in distinguishing between Urdu and Hindi speakers in India and Pakistan, as well as estimating the number of people for whom Urdu is a second language, the estimated number of speakers is uncertain and controversial.[citation needed]
Owing to interaction with other languages, Urdu has become localized wherever it is spoken, including in Pakistan. Urdu in Pakistan has undergone changes and has incorporated and borrowed many words from regional languages like Pashto, Punjabi, Sindhi and Balti, thus allowing speakers of the language in Pakistan to distinguish themselves more easily and giving the language a decidedly Pakistani flavour. Similarly, the Urdu spoken in India can also be distinguished into many dialects like Dakhni (Deccan) of South India, and Khariboli of the Punjab region. Because of Urdu's similarity to Hindi, speakers of the two languages can easily understand one another if both sides refrain from using specialized vocabulary. The syntax (grammar), morphology, and the core vocabulary are essentially identical. Thus linguists usually count them as one single language and contend that they are considered as two different languages for socio-political reasons.[39]
In Pakistan, Urdu is mostly learned as a second or a third language as nearly 93% of Pakistan's population has a native language other than Urdu. Despite this, Urdu was chosen as a token of unity and as a lingua franca so as not to give any native Pakistani language preference over the other. Urdu is therefore spoken and understood by the vast majority in some form or another, including a majority of urban dwellers in such cities as Karachi, Lahore, Okara District, Sialkot, Rawalpindi, Islamabad, Multan, Faisalabad, Hyderabad, Peshawar, Quetta, Jhang, Sargodha and Skardu. It is written, spoken and used in all provinces/territories of Pakistan although the people from differing provinces may have different indigenous languages, as from the fact that it is the "base language" of the country. For this reason, it is also taught as a compulsory subject up to higher secondary school in both English and Urdu medium school systems. This has produced millions of Urdu speakers from people whose native language is one of the State languages of Pakistan such as Standard Punjabi, Pashto, Sindhi, Balochi, Potwari, Hindko, Pahari, Saraiki, Balti, and Brahui who can read and write only Urdu. It is absorbing many words from the regional languages of Pakistan. This variation of Urdu is sometimes referred to as Pakistani Urdu.[citation needed]
Although most of the population is conversant in Urdu, it is the first language of only an estimated 7% of the population who are mainly Muslim immigrants (known as Muhajir in Pakistan) from different parts of South Asia. The regional languages are also being influenced by Urdu vocabulary. There are millions of Pakistanis whose native language is not Urdu, but because they have studied in Urdu medium schools, they can read and write Urdu along with their native language. Most of the nearly five million Afghan refugees of different ethnic origins (such as Pashtun, Tajik, Uzbek, Hazarvi, and Turkmen) who stayed in Pakistan for over twenty-five years have also become fluent in Urdu. With such a large number of people(s) speaking Urdu, the language has acquired a peculiar Pakistani flavour further distinguishing it from the Urdu spoken by native speakers and diversifying the language even further.
Many newspapers are published in Urdu in Pakistan, including the Daily Jang, Nawa-i-Waqt, Millat, among many others (see List of newspapers in Pakistan#Urdu language Newspapers).
In India, Urdu is spoken in places where there are large Muslim minorities or cities that were bases for Muslim Empires in the past. These include parts of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra (Marathwada), Karnataka and cities such as Lucknow, Delhi, Bareilly, Meerut, Saharanpur, Muzaffarnagar, Roorkee, Deoband, Moradabad, Azamgarh, Bijnor, Najibabad, Rampur, Aligarh, Allahabad, Gorakhpur, Agra, Kanpur, Badaun, Bhopal, Hyderabad, Aurangabad, Bangalore, Kolkata, Mysore, Patna, Gulbarga, Parbhani, Nanded, Malegaon, Bidar, Ajmer, and Ahmedabad.[40] Some Indian schools teach Urdu as a first language and have their own syllabi and exams. Indian madrasahs also teach Arabic as well as Urdu. India has more than 3,000 Urdu publications, including 405 daily Urdu newspapers. Newspapers such as Neshat News Urdu, Sahara Urdu, Daily Salar, Hindustan Express, Daily Pasban, Siasat Daily, The Munsif Daily and Inqilab are published and distributed in Bangalore, Malegaon, Mysore, Hyderabad, and Mumbai (see List of newspapers in India).
Outside South Asia, it is spoken by large numbers of migrant South Asian workers in the major urban centres of the Persian Gulf countries. Urdu is also spoken by large numbers of immigrants and their children in the major urban centres of the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Germany, Norway, and Australia. Along with Arabic, Urdu is among the immigrant languages with the most speakers in Catalonia, leading to fears of linguistic ghettos.[41]
Cultural identity and Islam[edit]
Colonial India[edit]
Religious and social atmospheres in early nineteenth century India played significant roles in the development of the Urdu register. In addition to Islam, India was characterized by a number of tribal religions which each represented different spiritual outlooks and maintained different languages. These tribal religions were later categorized by British colonialists as Hinduism. Under British rule, the dispersed tribes associated with Hinduism pushed for unification by means of a common language. Hindi became the distinct register spoken by those who sought to construct a Hindu identity in the face of colonial rule.[16] As Hindi separated from Hindustani to create a distinct spiritual identity, Urdu, which was originally spoken by both Hindu and Muslim elites, was employed to create a definitive Islamic identity for the Muslim population in India.[42]
As Urdu and Hindi became means of religious and social construction for Muslims and Hindus respectively, each register developed its own script. According to Islamic tradition, Arabic, the language spoken by the prophet Muhammad and uttered in creation of the Qur'an, holds spiritual significance and power.[43] Because Urdu was intentioned as means of unification for Muslims in Northern India and later Pakistan, it adopted an Arabic script.[44][16]







Pakistan[edit]
Urdu continued its role in developing a Muslim identity as the Islamic Republic of Pakistan was established with the intent to construct a homeland for Islamic believers. Several languages and dialects spoken throughout the regions of Pakistan produced an imminent need for a uniting language. Because Urdu was the symbol of Islamic identity in Northern India, it was selected as the national language for Pakistan. While Urdu and Islam together played important roles in developing the national identity of Pakistan, disputes in the 1950s challenged the necessity for Urdu as a national symbol and its practicality as the lingua franca. The significance of Urdu as a national symbol was downplayed by these disputes when English and Bengali were also accepted as official languages. In addition to the disagreements over the value of Urdu as a national language in Pakistan, recent Muslims in Asia question the necessity for the Urdu script to be distinctly different from the Hindi script. While early nineteenth century Muslims saw the Arabic script as part of their identity, certain modern Muslims choose to use a modified Hindi script in writing Urdu. Although Urdu was a distinct identity marker for Muslims in colonialist ruled India and a national symbol for Pakistan, its necessity has been put into question by modern Muslims in both India and Pakistan.
Official status[edit]




A trilingual signboard in Arabic, English and Urdu in the UAE






A multilingual New Delhi railway station board


Urdu is the national and one of the two official languages of Pakistan, along with English, and is spoken and understood throughout the country, whereas the state-by-state languages (languages spoken throughout various regions) are the provincial languages. Only 7.57% of Pakistanis have Urdu as their first language,[45] but Urdu is mostly understood and spoken all over Pakistan as a second or third language. It is used in education, literature, office and court business.[46] It holds in itself a repository of the cultural and social heritage of the country.[47] Although English is used in most elite circles, and Punjabi has a plurality of native speakers, Urdu is the lingua franca and national language of Pakistan. In practice English is used instead of Urdu in the higher echelons of government.[48]
Urdu is also one of the officially recognized languages in India and the official language of Jammu and Kashmir, one of the two official languages of Telangana and also has the status of "additional official language" in the Indian states of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and the national capital, New Delhi.[49]
In Jammu and Kashmir, section 145 of the Kashmir Constitution provides: "The official language of the State shall be Urdu but the English language shall unless the Legislature by law otherwise provides, continue to be used for all the official purposes of the State for which it was being used immediately before the commencement of the Constitution."[50]
Dialects[edit]
Urdu has a few recognised dialects, including Dakhni, Rekhta, and Modern Vernacular Urdu (based on the Khariboli dialect of the Delhi region). Dakhni (also known as Dakani, Deccani, Desia, Mirgan) is spoken in Deccan region of southern India. It is distinct by its mixture of vocabulary from Marathi and Konkani, as well as some vocabulary from Arabic, Persian and Chagatai that are not found in the standard dialect of Urdu. Dakhini is widely spoken in all parts of Maharashtra, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. Urdu is read and written as in other parts of India. A number of daily newspapers and several monthly magazines in Urdu are published in these states. In terms of pronunciation, the easiest way to recognize native speakers is by their pronunciation of the letter "qāf" (ق‬) as "k̲h̲e" (خ‬).
Code switching[edit]
Many bilingual or multi-lingual Urdu speakers, being familiar with both Urdu and English, display code-switching (referred to as "Urdish") in certain localities and between certain social groups.
On 14 August 2015, the Government of Pakistan launched the Ilm Pakistan movement, with a uniform curriculum in Urdish. Ahsan Iqbal, Federal Minister of Pakistan, said, "Now the government is working on a new curriculum to provide a new medium to the students which will be the combination of both Urdu and English and will name it Urdish."[51][52][53]
Comparison with Modern Standard Hindi[edit]




Urdu and Hindi on a road sign in India


Further information: Hindi–Urdu controversy, Hindustani phonology, and Hindustani grammar
Standard Urdu is often contrasted with Standard Hindi.[54] Apart from religious associations, the differences are largely restricted to the standard forms: Standard Urdu is conventionally written in the Nastaliq style of the Persian alphabet and relies heavily on Persian and Arabic as a source for technical and literary vocabulary,[55] whereas Standard Hindi is conventionally written in Devanāgarī and draws on Sanskrit.[56] However, both have large numbers of Arabic, Persian and Sanskrit words, and most linguists consider them to be two standardised forms of the same language,[57][58] and consider the differences to be sociolinguistic,[59] though a few classify them separately.[60] Old Urdu dictionaries also contain most of the Sanskrit words now present in Hindi.[61][62] Mutual intelligibility decreases in literary and specialized contexts that rely on educated vocabulary. Further, it is quite easy in a longer conversation to distinguish differences in vocabulary and pronunciation of some Urdu phonemes. As a result of religious nationalism since the partition of British India and continued communal tensions, native speakers of both Hindi and Urdu frequently assert them to be distinct languages, despite the numerous similarities between the two in a colloquial setting.
The barrier created between Hindi and Urdu is eroding: Hindi speakers are comfortable with using Persian-Arabic borrowed words[63] and Urdu speakers are also comfortable with using Sanskrit terminology.[64][65]
Phonology[edit]
Main article: Hindustani phonology
Consonants[edit]

Urdu consonant phonemes[66][67]


Bilabial
Dental/
Alveolar
Retroflex
Palatal
Velar
Uvular
Glottal


Nasal
plain
m
n


ŋ




voiced aspirated
(mʱ)
(nʱ)







Plosive/
Affricate
voiceless
p
t̪
ʈ
tʃ
k
q
(ʔ)


voiceless aspirated
pʰ
t̪ʰ
ʈʰ
tʃʰ
kʰ




voiced
b
d̪
ɖ
dʒ
ɡ
ɢ



voiced aspirated
bʱ
d̪ʱ
ɖʱ
dʒʱ
ɡʱ




Fricative
voiceless
f
s

ʃ
x

(h)


voiced
v
z

ʒ
ɣ

ɦ


Flap
plain

ɾ
ɽ






voiced aspirated

(ɾʱ)
ɽʱ






Approximant
plain
ʋ
l

j





voiced aspirated

(lʱ)








Notes


Marginal and non-universal phonemes are in parentheses.
/ɣ/ is post-velar.[68]

Vowels[edit]




The oral vowel phonemes of Urdu according to Ohala (1999:102)



Urdu vowels[66][67]


Front
Central
Back


short
long
short
long
short
long


Close
oral
ɪ
iː


ʊ
uː


nasal
ɪ̃
ĩː


ʊ̃
ũː


Close-mid
oral
(e)
eː
ə

(o)
oː


nasal

ẽː
ə̃


õː


Open-mid
oral
(ɛ)
ɛː


(ɔ)
ɔː


nasal

ɛ̃ː



ɔ̃ː


Open
oral

æː



ɑː


nasal





ɑ̃ː


Diphthongs
oral
ɪeː   ɪɑː   iːoː   iːɑː
ʊiː   ʊeː   ʊoː   ʊɑː
eːoː   əiː   əuː   əeː
oiː   oeː   oːɪ   oːiː   oːeː   oːɑː
ɑːɪ   ɑːiː   ɑːʊ   ɑːuː   ɑːeː   ɑːoː


nasal
ɪũː   iːũː   ɪːɑ̃ː
ʊĩː   ʊõː   ʊɑ̃ː   əĩː
oːĩː   oːũː   oːẽː
ɑːĩː   ɑːũː   ɑːẽː   ɑːõː


Triphthongs
oral
oəiː   oəuː   oːiːeː   ɑːiːeː


nasal
ʊɑːẽː   ʊɑːõ



Note


Marginal and non-universal vowels are in parentheses.

Vocabulary[edit]
See also: Hindustani etymology

Etymological origin of basic Urdu words

Arabic
29.9%[69]


Sanskrit
25.2%[70]


Persian
21.7%[69]


English
7.8%


Prakrit
6.1%[70]


Urdu's vocabulary has borrowings from various languages. A corpus-based quantitative survey of the etymological origins of basic Urdu vocabulary is shown in the adjacent table. Many of the words of Arabic origin have been adopted through Persian and have different pronunciations and nuances of meaning and usage than they do in Arabic. There are also a smaller number of borrowings from Chagatai, and Portuguese.
Levels of formality[edit]
Urdu in its less formalised register has been referred to as a rek̤h̤tah (ریختہ‬, [reːxt̪aː]), meaning "rough mixture". The more formal register of Urdu is sometimes referred to as zabān-i Urdū-yi muʿallá (زبانِ اُردُوئے معلّٰى‬ [zəbaːn eː ʊrd̪u eː moəllaː]), the "Language of the Exalted Camp", referring to the Imperial army.[71]
The etymology of the word used in the Urdu language for the most part decides how polite or refined one's speech is. For example, Urdu speakers would distinguish between پانی‬ pānī and آب‬ āb, both meaning "water"; the former is used colloquially and has older Indic origins, whereas the latter is used formally and poetically, being of Persian origin.
If a word is of Persian or Arabic origin, the level of speech is considered to be more formal and grand. Similarly, if Persian or Arabic grammar constructs, such as the izafat, are used in Urdu, the level of speech is also considered more formal and grand. If a word is inherited from Sanskrit, the level of speech is considered more colloquial and personal.[72] This distinction is similar to the division in English between words of Latin, French and Old English origins.[citation needed]
Writing system [edit]
Main articles: Urdu alphabet and Urdu braille
Further information: Hindustani orthography




The Urdu Nastaʿliq alphabet, with names in the Devanāgarī and Latin alphabets


Urdu is written right-to left in an extension of the Persian alphabet, which is itself an extension of the Arabic alphabet. Urdu is associated with the Nastaʿlīq style of Persian calligraphy, whereas Arabic is generally written in the Naskh or Ruq'ah styles. Nasta’liq is notoriously difficult to typeset, so Urdu newspapers were hand-written by masters of calligraphy, known as kātib or khush-nawīs, until the late 1980s.[citation needed] One handwritten Urdu newspaper, The Musalman, is still published daily in Chennai.[73]
Urdu has also historically been written in the Kaithi script. A highly Persianized and technical form of Urdu was the lingua franca of the law courts of the British administration in Bengal, Bihar, and the North-West Provinces & Oudh. Until the late 19th century, all proceedings and court transactions in this register of Urdu were written officially in the Persian script. In 1880, Sir Ashley Eden, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal abolished the use of the Persian alphabet in the law courts of Bengal and Bihar and ordered the exclusive use of Kaithi, a popular script used for both Urdu and Hindi.[74] Kaithi's association with Urdu and Hindi was ultimately eliminated by the political contest between these languages and their scripts, in which the Persian script was definitively linked to Urdu.
More recently in India, Urdu speakers have adopted Devanagari for publishing Urdu periodicals and have innovated new strategies to mark Urdu in Devanagari as distinct from Hindi in Devanagari. Such publishers have introduced new orthographic features into Devanagari for the purpose of representing the Perso-Arabic etymology of Urdu words. One example is the use of अ (Devanagari a) with vowel signs to mimic contexts of ع‬ (‘ain), in violation of Hindi orthographic rules. For Urdu publishers, the use of Devanagari gives them a greater audience, whereas the orthographic changes help them preserve a distinct identity of Urdu.[75]
Literature[edit]
Main article: Urdu literature
Urdu has become a literary language only in recent centuries, as Persian was formerly the idiom of choice for the Muslim courts of North India. However, despite its relatively late development, Urdu literature boasts of some world-recognised artists and a considerable corpus.
Prose[edit]
Urdu afsana is a kind of Urdu prose in which many experiments have been done by short story writers from Munshi Prem Chand to Naeem Baig.
Religious[edit]
Urdu holds the largest collection of works on Islamic literature and Sharia.[citation needed] These include translations and interpretation of the Qur'an as well as commentary on Hadith, Fiqh, history, and Sufism. A great number of classical texts from Arabic and Persian have also been translated into Urdu. Relatively inexpensive publishing, combined with the use of Urdu as a lingua franca among Muslims of South Asia, has meant that Islam-related works in Urdu far outnumber such works in any other South Asian language. Popular Islamic books are also written in Urdu.
It is interesting to note that a treatise on Astrology was penned in Urdu by Pandit Roop Chand Joshi in the eighteenth century. The book, known as Lal Kitab, is widely popular in North India among astrologers.
Literary[edit]
Secular prose includes all categories of widely known fiction and non-fiction work, separable into genres. The dāstān, or tale, a traditional story that may have many characters and complex plotting. This has now fallen into disuse.
The afsāna or short story is probably the best-known genre of Urdu fiction. The best-known afsāna writers, or afsāna nigār, in Urdu are Munshi Premchand, Saadat Hasan Manto, Rajinder Singh Bedi, Krishan Chander, Qurratulain Hyder (Qurat-ul-Ain Haider), Ismat Chughtai, Ghulam Abbas, and Ahmad Nadeem Qasimi. Towards the end of last century Paigham Afaqui's novel Makaan appeared with a reviving force for Urdu novel resulting into writing of novels getting a boost in Urdu literature and a number of writers like Ghazanfer, Abdus Samad, Sarwat Khan and Musharraf Alam Zauqi have taken the move forward. Munshi Premchand, became known as a pioneer in the afsāna, though some contend that his were not technically the first as Sir Ross Masood had already written many short stories in Urdu. Novels form a genre of their own, in the tradition of the English novel. Other genres include saférnāma (travel story), mazmoon (essay), sarguzisht (account/narrative), inshaeya (satirical essay), murasela (editorial), and khud navvisht (autobiography).
Poetry[edit]
Main article: Urdu poetry
Further information: Urdu poets




Mir Taqi Mir (1723–1810) (Urdu: میر تقی میر‬‎) was the leading Urdu poet of the 18th century in the courts of Mughal Empire and Nawabs of Awadh






An illustrated manuscript of one of Amir Khusrau's (1253–1325 CE) Persian poems






Allama Muhammad Iqbal, the national poet of Pakistan


Urdu has been one of the premier languages of poetry in South Asia for two centuries, and has developed a rich tradition in a variety of poetic genres. The Ghazal in Urdu represents the most popular form of subjective music and poetry, whereas the Nazm exemplifies the objective kind, often reserved for narrative, descriptive, didactic or satirical purposes. Under the broad head of the Nazm we may also include the classical forms of poems known by specific names such as Masnavi (a long narrative poem in rhyming couplets on any theme: romantic, religious, or didactic), Marsia (an elegy traditionally meant to commemorate the martyrdom of Husayn ibn Ali, grandson of Muhammad, and his comrades of the Karbala fame), or Qasida (a panegyric written in praise of a king or a nobleman), for all these poems have a single presiding subject, logically developed and concluded. However, these poetic species have an old world aura about their subject and style, and are different from the modern Nazm, supposed to have come into vogue in the later part of the nineteenth century. Probably the most widely recited, and memorised genre of contemporary Urdu poetry is nāt—panegyric poetry written in praise of Muhammad. Nāt can be of any formal category, but is most commonly in the ghazal form. The language used in Urdu nāt ranges from the intensely colloquial to a highly persified formal language. The great early 20th century scholar Ala Hazrat, Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi, who wrote many of the most well known nāts in Urdu (the collection of his poetic work is Hadaiq-e-Baqhshish), epitomised this range in a ghazal of nine stanzas (bayt) in which every stanza contains half a line each of Arabic, Persian, formal Urdu, and colloquial Hindi.
Another important genre of Urdu prose are the poems commemorating the martyrdom of Husayn ibn Ali at the Battle of Karbala, called noha (نوحہ) and marsia. Anees and Dabeer are famous in this regard.
Terminology[edit]
As̱ẖʿār (اشعار‬, verse, couplets): It consists of two hemistiches (lines) called Miṣraʿ (مصرع‬); first hemistich (line) is called مصرعِ اولٰی‬ (Miṣraʿ-i ūlá) and the second is called (مصرعِ ثانی‬) (Miṣraʿ-i s̱ānī). Each verse embodies a single thought or subject (singular) شِعر‬ shiʿr.
In the Urdu poetic tradition, most poets use a pen name called the takhalluṣ. This can be either a part of a poet's given name or something else adopted as an identity. The traditional convention in identifying Urdu poets is to mention the takhalluṣ at the end of the name. Thus Ghalib, whose official name and title was Mirza Asadullah Beg Khan, is referred to formally as Mirza Asadullah Khan Ghalib, or in common parlance as just Mirza Ghalib. Because the takhalluṣ can be a part of their actual name, some poets end up having that part of their name repeated, such as Faiz Ahmad Faiz.
The word takhalluṣ is derived from Arabic, meaning "ending". This is because in the ghazal form, the poet would usually incorporate his or her pen name into the final couplet (maqt̤aʿ) of each poem as a type of "signature".
Urdu poetry example[edit]
This is Ghalib's famous couplet in which he compares himself to his great predecessor, the master poet Mir:[76]


         

ریختے کے تمہیں استاد نہیں ہو غالبؔ‬

         

؎‬




کہتے ہیں اگلے زمانے میں کوئی میرؔ بھی تھا‬



Transliteration[edit]

Reḵẖtah ke tumhī ustād nahīṉ ho G̱ẖālib
Kahte haiṉ Agle zamāne meṉ ko'ī Mīr bhī thā

Translation[edit]

You are not the only master of Rekhta,[note 2] Ghalib
(They) say that in the past there also was someone (named) Mir.

Sample text[edit]
See also: Hindi § Sample text
The following is a sample text in Urdu, of the Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (by the United Nations):
Urdu text[edit]


دفعہ ۱: تمام انسان آزاد اور حقوق و عزت کے اعتبار سے برابر پیدا ہوئے ہیں۔ انہیں ضمیر اور عقل ودیعت ہوئی ہے۔ اس لئے انہیں ایک دوسرے کے ساتھ بھائی چارے کا سلوک کرنا چاہئے۔

‬

Transliteration (ALA-LC)[edit]

Dafʿah 1: Tamām insān āzād aur ḥuqūq o ʿizzat ke iʿtibār se barābar paidā hūʾe haiṉ. Unheṉ ẓamīr aur ʿaql wadīʿat hūʾī hai. Is liʾe unheṉ ek dūsre ke sāth bhāʾī cāre kā sulūk karnā cāhiʾe.

IPA transcription[edit]

d̪əfɑː eːk: t̪əmɑːm ɪnsɑːn ɑːzɑːd̪ ɔːr hʊquːq oː ɪzzət̪ keː et̪ɪbɑːr seː bərɑːbər pɛːd̪ɑː ɦuːeː ɦɛ̃ː. ʊnɦẽː zəmiːr ɔːr əql ʋəd̪iːət̪ huːiː hɛː. ɪs lieː ʊnɦẽː eːk d̪uːsreː keː sɑːt̪ʰ bʱaːiː t͡ʃɑːreː kɑː sʊluːk kərnɑː t͡ʃɑːɦieː.

Gloss (word-for-word)[edit]

Article 1: All humans free[,] and rights and dignity *('s) consideration from equal born are. Them to conscience and intellect endowed is. This for, they one another *('s) with brotherhood *('s) treatment do should.

Translation (grammatical)[edit]

Article 1: All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience. Therefore, they should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

Note: *('s) represents a possessive case that, when written, is preceded by the possessor and followed by the possessed, unlike the English "of".
See also[edit]


Urdu portal



Hindi–Urdu controversy
List of Urdu-language poets
List of Urdu-language writers
National Translation Mission (NTM)
Persian and Urdu
States of India by Urdu speakers
Urdu in the United Kingdom
Uddin and Begum Hindustani Romanisation
Urdu Digest
Urdu in Aurangabad
Urdu Informatics
Urdu keyboard
Glossary of the British Raj

Notes[edit]



^ An example can be seen in the word "need" in Urdu. Urdu uses the Persian version ضرورت rather than the original Arabic ضرورة. See: John T. Platts "A dictionary of Urdu, classical Hindi, and English" (1884) Page 749. Urdu also use Persian pronunciation – for instance rather than pronouncing ض as "ḍ" an emphatic consonant, the original sound in Arabic, Urdu uses the Persian pronunciation "z". See: John T. Platts "A dictionary of Urdu, classical Hindi, and English" (1884) Page 748
^ Rekhta was the name for the Urdu language in Ghalib's days.



References[edit]


^ Mikael Parkvall, "Världens 100 största språk 2007" (The World's 100 Largest Languages in 2007), in Nationalencyklopedin
^ Urdu at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015)
^ a b Hindustani (2005). Keith Brown, ed. Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (2 ed.). Elsevier. ISBN 0-08-044299-4. 
^ Gaurav Takkar. "Short Term Programmes". punarbhava.in. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ "Indo-Pakistani Sign Language", Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics
^ "The World Fact Book". Central Intelligence Agency. 
^ a b c [1]
^ Eisenlohr, Patrick (2006). Little India: Diaspora, Time, and Ethnolinguistic Belonging in Hindu Mauritius. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520248793. [2]
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Urdu". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ "Urdu". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ "NIST 2007 Language Recognition Evaluation" (PDF). Alvin F. Martin, Audrey N. Le. Speech Group, Information Access Division, Information Technology Laboratory National Institute of Standards and Technology, USA. 
^ Rao, Chaitra, et al. "Orthographic characteristics speed Hindi word naming but slow Urdu naming: evidence from Hindi/Urdu biliterates." Reading and Writing 24.6 (2011): 679–695.
^ Brass, Paul R. (2005). Language, religion and politics in North India. Lincoln, NE: IUniverse. ISBN 978-0-595-34394-2. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 September 2012. Retrieved 5 December 2012. 
^ Mohanty, Panchanan. "British language policy in 19th century India and the Oriya language movement." Language Policy 1.1 (2002): 53–73.
^ a b c Ahmad, Rizwan (2008-07-01). "Scripting a new identity: The battle for Devanagari in nineteenth century India". Journal of Pragmatics. 40 (7): 1163–1183. doi:10.1016/j.pragma.2007.06.005. 
^ Maria Isabel Maldonado Garcia (2015). Urdu Evolution and Reforms. Punjab University Department of Press and Publications, Lahore, Pakistan. p. 223. 
^ Rauf Parekh. "Literary Notes: Common misconceptions about Urdu". dawn.com. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ "Two Languages or One?". hindiurduflagship.org. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ Hamari History, Hamari Boli
^ Dua, Hans R. (1992). Hindi-Urdu as a pluricentric language. In M. G. Clyne (Ed.), Pluricentric languages: Differing norms in different nations. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-012855-1.
^ Salimuddin S et al. (2013). "Oxford Urdu-English Dictionary ". Pakistan: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-597994-7 (Introduction Chapter)
^ Kachru, Yamuna (2008), Braj Kachru; Yamuna Kachru; S. N. Sridhar, eds., Hindi-Urdu-Hindustani, Language in South Asia, Cambridge University Press, p. 82, ISBN 978-0-521-78653-9 
^ "Urdu's origin: it's not a "camp language"". dawn.com. Retrieved 5 July 2015. 
^ Peter Austin (1 September 2008). One thousand languages: living, endangered, and lost. University of California Press. pp. 120–. ISBN 978-0-520-25560-9. Retrieved 29 December 2011. 
^ InpaperMagazine. "Language: Urdu and the borrowed words". dawn.com. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ John R. Perry, "Lexical Areas and Semantic Fields of Arabic" in Éva Ágnes Csató, Eva Agnes Csato, Bo Isaksson, Carina Jahani, Linguistic convergence and areal diffusion: case studies from Iranian, Semitic and Turkic, Routledge, 2005. pg 97: "It is generally understood that the bulk of the Arabic vocabulary in the central, contiguous Iranian, Turkic and Indic languages was originally borrowed into literary Persian between the ninth and thirteenth centuries"
^ Maldonado Garcia, Maria Isabel (2014) "Common Vocabulary in Urdu and Turkish Languages. A Case of Historical Onomasiology" Journal of Pakistan Vision. Volume 15.1. Access-date 20 March 2016
^ Sigfried J. de Laet. History of Humanity: From the seventh to the sixteenth century UNESCO, 1994. ISBN 9231028138 p 734
^ "South Asian Sufis: Devotion, Deviation, and Destiny". Retrieved 2 January 2015. 
^ Faruqi, Shamsur Rahman (2003), Sheldon Pollock, ed., A Long History of Urdu Literary Culture Part 1, Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions From South Asia, University of California Press, p. 806, ISBN 0-520-22821-9 
^ a b c Rahman, Tariq (2001). From Hindi to Urdu: A Social and Political History (PDF). Oxford University Press. pp. 1–22. ISBN 978-0-19-906313-0. 
^ Rahman, Tariq (2000). "The Teaching of Urdu in British India" (PDF). The Annual of Urdu Studies. 15: 55. 
^ Rahman, Tariq (2014), Pakistani English (PDF), Quaid-i-Azam University=Islamabad, p. 9 
^ "Statement – 1: Abstract of speakers' strength of languages and mother tongues – 2001". Government of India. 2001. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Retrieved 4 October 2016. 
^ "Government of Pakistan: Population by Mother Tongue" (PDF). Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. 
^ "Lewis, M. Paul (ed.), 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Sixteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: SIL International. Online version". Ethnologue.org. Retrieved 31 January 2012. 
^ "Hindustani". Columbia University press. encyclopedia.com. 
^ e.g. Gumperz (1982:20)
^ Top Communications. "Holy Places — Ajmer". India Travelite. Retrieved 31 January 2012. 
^ "Árabe y urdu aparecen entre las lenguas habituales de Catalunya, creando peligro de guetos". Europapress.es. 29 June 2009. Retrieved 18 December 2011. 
^ Rahman, Tariq (1997). "The Urdu-English Controversy in Pakistan". Modem Asian Studies: p. 177–207 – via National Institute of Pakistan Studies, Qu.aid-i-Az.am University. CS1 maint: Extra text (link)
^ Schimmel, Annemarie (1992). Islam: an introduction. Albany, New York: State U of New York Press. 
^ Ahmad, Rizwan (2011). "Urdu in Devanagari: Shifting orthographic practices and Muslim identity in Delhi". Language in Society. 
^ "Government of Pakistan: Population by Mother Tongue" (PDF). Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. 
^ In the lower courts in Pakistan, despite the proceedings taking place in Urdu, the documents are in English, whereas in the higher courts, i.e. the High Courts and the Supreme Court, both documents and proceedings are in English.
^ Zia, Khaver (1999), "A Survey of Standardisation in Urdu". 4th Symposium on Multilingual Information Processing, (MLIT-4), Yangon, Myanmar. CICC, Japan
^ Rahman, Tariq (2010). Language Policy, Identity and Religion (PDF). Islamabad: Quaid-i-Azam University. p. 59. 
^ Wasey, Akhtarul (16 July 2014). "50th Report of the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities in India (July 2012 to June 2013)" (PDF). Retrieved 20 October 2016. 
^ "The Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 May 2012. 
^ "Learning In 'Urdish'". Retrieved 10 October 2015. 
^ Yousafzai, Fawad. "Govt to launch 'Ilm Pakistan' on August 14: Ahsan". Retrieved 10 October 2015. 
^ Mustafa, Zubeida. "Over to 'Urdish'". Retrieved 10 October 2015. 
^ "Hindi and Urdu are classified as literary registers of the same language". 
^ "Bringing Order to Linguistic Diversity: Language Planning in the British Raj". Language in India. Retrieved 20 May 2008. 
^ "A Brief Hindi — Urdu FAQ". sikmirza. Archived from the original on 2 December 2007. Retrieved 20 May 2008. 
^ "Hindi/Urdu Language Instruction". University of California, Davis. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015. Retrieved 3 January 2015. 
^ "Ethnologue Report for Hindi". Ethnologue. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ "Urdu and its Contribution to Secular Values". South Asian Voice. Archived from the original on 11 November 2007. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ The Annual of Urdu studies, number 11, 1996, "Some notes on Hindi and Urdu", pp. 203–208.
^ Shakespear, John (1834), A dictionary, Hindustani and English (PDF), Black, Kingsbury, Parbury and Allen 
^ Fallon, S. W. (1879), A new Hindustani-English dictionary, with illustrations from Hindustani literature and folk-lore, Banāras: Printed at the Medical Hall Press 
^ "Urdu: Language of the Aam Aadmi". The Times of India. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ "'Vishvas': A word that threatens Pakistan". The Express Tribune. 18 September 2012. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ "Kids have it right: boundaries of Urdu and Hindi are blurred". Firstpost. Retrieved 29 March 2015. 
^ a b "Urdu Phonetic Inventory" (PDF). Center for Language Engineering. Retrieved 10 October 2015. 
^ a b Naim, C.M. (1999). Introductory Urdu (Volume One). Chicago: South Asia Language & Area Center, University of Chicago. Retrieved 11 October 2015. 
^ Kachru (2006:20)
^ a b Maldonado Garcia, Maria Isabel (2015). "A Corpus Based Quantitative Survey of the Persian and Arabic Elements in the Basic Vocabulary of Urdu Language" (PDF). Journal of Pakistan Vision. Pakistan Study Centre. 16 (1). Retrieved 20 March 2016. 
^ a b Maldonado Garcia, Maria Isabel (2016). "A Corpus Based Quantitative Survey of the Sanskrit and Prakrit Elements in the Basic Vocabulary of Urdu Language". Pakistan Annual Research Journal. University of Peshawar. 51: 1–17.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Colin P. Masica, The Indo-Aryan languages. Cambridge Language Surveys (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993). 466.
^ "About Urdu". Afroz Taj (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ India: The Last Handwritten Newspaper in the World · Global Voices. Globalvoices.org (2012-03-26). Retrieved on 2013-07-12.
^ King, 1994.
^ Ahmad, R., 2006.
^ "Columbia University: Ghazal 36, Verse 11". Columbia.edu. Retrieved 31 January 2012. 


Further reading[edit]


Henry Blochmann (1877). English and Urdu dictionary, romanized (8 ed.). CALCUTTA: Printed at the Baptist mission press for the Calcutta school-book society. p. 215. Retrieved 6 July 2011. the University of Michigan
John Dowson (1908). A grammar of the Urdū or Hindūstānī language (3 ed.). LONDON: K. Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., ltd. p. 264. Retrieved 6 July 2011. the University of Michigan
John Dowson (1872). A grammar of the Urdū or Hindūstānī language. LONDON: Trübner & Co. p. 264. Retrieved 6 July 2011. Oxford University
John Thompson Platts (1874). A grammar of the Hindūstānī or Urdū language. Volume 6423 of Harvard College Library preservation microfilm program. LONDON: W.H. Allen. p. 399. Retrieved 6 July 2011. Oxford University
John Thompson Platts (1892). A grammar of the Hindūstānī or Urdū language. LONDON: W.H. Allen. p. 399. Retrieved 6 July 2011. the New York Public Library
John Thompson Platts (1884). A dictionary of Urdū, classical Hindī, and English (reprint ed.). LONDON: H. Milford. p. 1259. Retrieved 6 July 2011. Oxford University
Ahmad, Rizwan. 2006. "Voices people write: Examining Urdu in Devanagari"
Alam, Muzaffar. 1998. "The Pursuit of Persian: Language in Mughal Politics." In Modern Asian Studies, vol. 32, no. 2. (May, 1998), pp. 317–349.
Asher, R. E. (Ed.). 1994. The Encyclopedia of language and linguistics. Oxford: Pergamon Press. ISBN 0-08-035943-4.
Azad, Muhammad Husain. 2001 [1907]. Aab-e hayat (Lahore: Naval Kishor Gais Printing Works) 1907 [in Urdu]; (Delhi: Oxford University Press) 2001. [In English translation]
Azim, Anwar. 1975. Urdu a victim of cultural genocide. In Z. Imam (Ed.), Muslims in India (p. 259).
Bhatia, Tej K. 1996. Colloquial Hindi: The Complete Course for Beginners. London, UK & New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-11087-4 (Book), 0415110882 (Cassettes), 0415110890 (Book & Cassette Course)
Bhatia, Tej K. and Koul Ashok. 2000. "Colloquial Urdu: The Complete Course for Beginners." London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-13540-0 (Book); ISBN 0-415-13541-9 (cassette); ISBN 0-415-13542-7 (book and casseettes course)
Chatterji, Suniti K. 1960. Indo-Aryan and Hindi (rev. 2nd ed.). Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Dua, Hans R. 1992. "Hindi-Urdu as a pluricentric language". In M. G. Clyne (Ed.), Pluricentric languages: Differing norms in different nations. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. ISBN 3-11-012855-1.
Dua, Hans R. 1994a. Hindustani. In Asher, 1994; pp. 1554.
Dua, Hans R. 1994b. Urdu. In Asher, 1994; pp. 4863–4864.
Durrani, Attash, Dr. 2008. Pakistani Urdu.Islamabad: National Language Authority, Pakistan.
Gumperz, J.J. (1982). "Discourse Strategies". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hassan, Nazir and Omkar N. Koul 1980. Urdu Phonetic Reader. Mysore: Central Institute of Indian Languages.
Syed Maqsud Jamil (16 June 2006). "The Literary Heritage of Urdu". Daily Star. 
Kelkar, A. R. 1968. Studies in Hindi-Urdu: Introduction and word phonology. Poona: Deccan College.
Khan, M. H. 1969. Urdu. In T. A. Sebeok (Ed.), Current trends in linguistics (Vol. 5). The Hague: Mouton.
King, Christopher R. 1994. One Language, Two Scripts: The Hindi Movement in Nineteenth Century North India. Bombay: Oxford University Press.
Koul, Ashok K. 2008. Urdu Script and Vocabulary. Delhi: Indian Institute of Language Studies.
Koul, Omkar N. 1994. Hindi Phonetic Reader. Delhi: Indian Institute of Language Studies.
Koul, Omkar N. 2008. Modern Hindi Grammar. Springfield: Dunwoody Press.
Narang, G. C. and D. A. Becker. 1971. Aspiration and nasalization in the generative phonology of Hindi-Urdu. Language, 47, 646–767.
Ohala, M. 1972. Topics in Hindi-Urdu phonology. (PhD dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles).
"A Desertful of Roses", a site about Ghalib's Urdu ghazals by Dr. Frances W. Pritchett, Professor of Modern Indic Languages at Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
Phukan, S. 2000. The Rustic Beloved: Ecology of Hindi in a Persianate World, The Annual of Urdu Studies, vol 15, issue 5, pp. 1–30
The Comparative study of Urdu and Khowar. Badshah Munir Bukhari National Language Authority Pakistan 2003.
Rai, Amrit. 1984. A house divided: The origin and development of Hindi-Hindustani. Delhi: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-561643-X.
Snell, Rupert Teach yourself Hindi: A complete guide for beginners. Lincolnwood, IL: NTC
Pimsleur, Dr. Paul, "Free Urdu Audio Lesson"
The poisonous potency of script: Hindi and Urdu, ROBERT D. KING


External links[edit]



Urdu edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Urdu





Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Urdu.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Urdu.



Directory of Urdu websites.
Urdu's origin: it's not a ‘camp language’ Dawn News
Urdu Scholarship-Maldonado Garcia







v
t
e


Urdu






History
Alphabet
Grammar
Phonology
Vocabulary
Nastaliq
Braille





Varieties




Dialects



Standard Urdu
Dakhini
Hyderabadi
Rekhta





Forms



Aurangabad Urdu
British Urdu
Roman Urdu








Politics



Urdu movement
Hindi-Urdu controversy





Arts



Awards
Literature
Informatics
Cinema
Poetry
Music
Writers
Poets
Progressive Writers' Movement
Uddin & Begum Romanisation










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Modern Indo-Aryan languages



Dardic



Dameli
Domaaki
Gawar-Bati
Kalami
Kalash
Kashmiri
Khowar
Kohistani
Mankiyali
Nangalami
Palula
Pashayi
Shina
Shumashti
Torwali
Ushoji





Northern




Eastern



Doteli
Jumli
Nepali
Palpa





Central



Garhwali
Kumaoni





Western



Dogri
Kangri
Mandeali








North-
western




Punjabi



Punjabi

dialects







Lahnda



Hindko
Khetrani
Pothwari
Saraiki





Sindhi



Jadgali
Kutchi
Luwati
Memoni
Sindhi








Western




Gujarati



Aer
Gujarati
Jandavra
Koli
Lisan ud-Dawat
Parkari Koli
Saurashtra
Vaghri





Bhil



Bhili
Gamit
Kalto
Vasavi





Rajasthani



Bagri
Goaria
Gujari
Jaipuri
Malvi
Marwari
Mewari
Dhatki





Others



Domari
Khandeshi
Romani








Central




Western



Braj Bhasha
Bundeli
Haryanvi
Hindustani

Hindi

Bombay Hindi


Urdu

Dakhini
Hyderabadi Urdu
Rekhta




Khari Boli
Kannauji
Sansi





Eastern



Awadhi
Bagheli
Chhattisgarhi
Fiji Hindi





Others



Danwar
Parya








Eastern




Bihari



Angika
Bhojpuri
Caribbean Hindustani
Vajjika
Magahi
Maithili
Majhi
Sadri





Bengali–
Assamese



Assamese
Bengali

dialects


Bishnupriya Manipuri
Chakma
Chittagonian
Goalpariya
Hajong
Kamrupi
Kharia Thar
Kurmukar
Rangpuri
Rohingya
Sylheti
Tanchangya





Odia



Odia
Kosli
Bodo Parja
Kupia
Reli





Halbic



Halbi
Bhatri
Kamar
Mirgan
Nahari





Others



Mal Paharia








Southern




Marathi–Konkani



Konkani
Kukna
Marathi
others..





Insular



Maldivian
Sinhalese








Pidgins/
creoles



Andaman Creole Hindi
Haflong Hindi
Nagamese
Nefamese
Vedda





See also



Old and Middle Indo-Aryan
Indo-Iranian languages
Nuristani languages
Iranian languages












v
t
e


 Languages of India



Official
languages




Union-level



Hindi
English





8th schedule to the
Constitution of India



Assamese
Bengali
Bodo
Dogri
Gujarati
Hindi
Kannada
Kashmiri
Konkani
Maithili
Malayalam
Meitei (Manipuri)
Marathi
Nepali
Odia
Punjabi
Sanskrit
Sindhi
Santali
Tamil
Telugu
Urdu





State-level only



Garo
Gurung
Khasi
Kokborok
Lepcha
Limbu
Mangar
Mizo
Newari
Rai
Sherpa
Sikkimese
Sunwar
Tamang








Major
unofficial
languages




Over 1 million
speakers



Angika
Awadhi
Bagheli
Bagri
Bajjika
Bhili
Bhojpuri
Bundeli
Chhattisgarhi
Dhundhari
Garhwali
Gondi
Harauti
Haryanvi
Ho
Kangri
Khandeshi
Khortha
Kumaoni
Kurukh
Lambadi
Magahi
Malvi
Marwari
Mewari
Mundari
Nimadi
Rajasthani
Sadri
Surjapuri
Tulu
Wagdi
Varhadi





100,000 – 1 million
speakers



Adi
Angami
Ao
Dimasa
Halbi
Karbi
Kharia
Kodava
Kolami
Konyak
Korku
Koya
Kui
Kuvi
Ladakhi
Lotha
Malto
Mishing
Nishi
Phom
Rabha
Sema
Sora
Tangkhul
Thadou















v
t
e


 Languages of Pakistan



Official languages



Urdu
English





Provincial languages



Punjabi
Pashto
Sindhi
Balochi





Minority languages
(by administrative unit)




Azad Kashmir



Dogri
Gujari
Kashmiri
Kundal Shahi
Pothohari





Balochistan



Brahui
Dehwari
Hazaragi
Jadgali
Khetrani
Wanetsi





FATA



Ormuri
Wazir





Gilgit-Baltistan‎



Balti
Purgi
Burushaski
Domaaki
Khowar
Munji
Shina
Wakhi





‎Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa



Burushaski
Badeshi
Bateri
Chilisso
Dameli
Gawar-Bati
Gowro
Hindko
Kalami
Kalasha
Kalkoti
Kamviri
Khowar
Indus Kohistani
Mankiyali
Palula
Torwali
Ushoji
Yidgha





Punjab



Bagri
Dogri
Pothohari
Punjabi dialects
Saraiki
Rajasthani





Sindh



Aer
Bagri
Bhaya
Dhatki
Goaria
Gujarati
Jandavra
Jogi
Koli

Parkari


Kutchi
Loarki
Marwari
Memoni
Mewari
Od
Rajasthani
Vaghri








Related topics



Indo-Aryan languages
Dardic languages
Iranic languages
Pakistani Sign Language
Arabic
Persian
Persian and Urdu
Chagatai












v
t
e


National symbols of Pakistan



Main symbols



Qaumi Taranah (national anthem)
State emblem of Pakistan
Flag of Pakistan
Iman, Ittihad, Nazm (motto)
Lahore Resolution (national document)
Urdu (national language)





People



Muhammad Ali Jinnah (Father of the Nation)
Muhammad Iqbal (National poet)
Fatima Jinnah (Mother of the Nation)





Other symbols



Cedrus deodara (national tree)
Chukar partridge (national bird)
Jasminum officinale (national flower)
Markhor (national animal)





Structures



Bab-e-Khyber (monument)
Faisal Mosque
Mazar-e-Quaid (mausoleum)
Minar-e-Pakistan (monument)
Pakistan Monument (monument)
Quaid-e-Azam Residency












v
t
e


 Languages of South Africa






Pan South African Language Board
Commission for Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Community Rights
Department of Arts and Culture





Official




West Germanic



Afrikaans
English





Southern Bantu




Sotho-Tswana



Northern Sotho (Sesotho sa Leboa)
Southern Sotho (Sesotho)
Tswana (Setswana)





Nguni



Southern Ndebele (isiNdebele)
Swazi (siSwati)
Xhosa (isiXhosa)
Zulu (isiZulu)





Tswa-Ronga



Tsonga (Xitsonga)





Venda



Venda (Tshivenḓa)











Recognised
unofficial languages
mentioned in the
1996 constitution




Indigenous



Bhaca
Khoi
Lala
Lozi
Nama
Nhlangwini
Northern Ndebele
Phuthi
San
Tuu





Foreign



German
Greek
Gujarati
Hindi
Portuguese
Malay (historical)
Tamil
Telugu
Urdu





Religious



Arabic
Hebrew
Sanskrit








Other




LGBT slang



Gayle
IsiNgqumo





Other



Tsotsitaal and Camtho
Oorlams Creole
Fanagalo
Pretoria Sotho
Scamto
SA Sign Language

















Authority control



GND: 4062117-0











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urdu&oldid=818315474"					Categories: Hindustani languageUrduFusional languagesIndo-Aryan languagesDialects of UrduLanguage versus dialectOfficial languages of IndiaLanguages of IndiaLanguages of PakistanHidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 18CS1 maint: Extra textPages using citations with accessdate and no URLUse dmy dates from March 2013Use Indian English from March 2017All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishArticles containing Urdu-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeArticles citing NationalencyklopedinArticles containing Arabic-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017Articles with unsourced statements from November 2013Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers