"USN" redirects here. For other uses, see USN (disambiguation).


United States Navy



Emblem of the United States Navy



Founded
13 October 1775; 242 years ago (1775-10-13)[1]


Country
 United States of America


Type
Navy


Role
Naval warfare, power projection, nuclear deterrence and sealift.


Size
324,460 active duty personnel[2]
106,622 reserve personnel[2]
279 deployable ships[2]
430 total ships
3,700+ aircraft[2]


Part of

U.S. Department of Defense

Dept. of the Navy (since 1798)




Headquarters
The Pentagon
Arlington County, Virginia, U.S.


Motto(s)
"Semper Fortis" (English: "Always Courageous"), (official)
"Non sibi sed patriae" (English: "Not for self but for country") (unofficial)


Colors
Blue, Gold          [3][4]


March
"Anchors Aweigh"  Play (help·info)


Equipment
see Equipment section below


Engagements


See list

American Revolutionary War
Quasi-War
First Barbary War
War of 1812
Second Barbary War
West Indies Anti-Piracy Operations
Seminole Wars
African Anti-Slavery Operations
Aegean Sea Anti-Piracy Operations
First Sumatran expedition
United States exploration expedition
Patriot War
Second Sumatran expedition
Ivory Coast Expedition
Capture of Monterey
Mexican–American War
Bombardment of Greytown
Battle of Ty-ho Bay
First Fiji expedition
Filibuster War
Second Opium War
Second Fiji expedition
Reform War
Paraguay expedition
American Civil War
Bombardment of Qui Nhon
Shimonoseki Campaign
Formosa expedition
United States expedition to Korea
Egyptian Expedition (1882)
Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations
Kingdom of Hawaii overthrowal
Second Samoan Civil War
Banana Wars

Spanish–American War
Negro Rebellion
Occupation of Nicaragua
Occupation of Haiti
Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916)

Philippine–American War
Boxer Rebellion
World War I
Bombardment of Samsun
World War II
Korean War
1958 Lebanon crisis
Vietnam War
Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965)
Iranian Hostage Rescue
Multinational Force in Lebanon
Invasion of Grenada
Bombing of Libya (1986)
Tanker War

Earnest Will
Prime Chance
Eager Glacier
Nimble Archer
Praying Mantis

Invasion of Panama
Gulf War
Iraqi no-fly zones
Somali Civil War
Bosnian War
Kosovo War
International Force for East Timor
Operation Enduring Freedom

Afghanistan (2001–2014)
Philippines
Horn of Africa
Pankisi Gorge
Trans Sahara
Caribbean and Central America

Iraq War
Operation Burnt Frost
Operation Odyssey Dawn
2014 Intervention against ISIL
Operation Inherent Resolve
War in Afghanistan (2015–present)
2017 Shayrat missile strike





Decorations

Presidential Unit Citation

Navy Unit Commendation

Meritorious Unit Commendation


Website
www.navy.mil


Commanders


Commander-in-Chief
President Donald Trump


Secretary of Defense
James Mattis


Secretary of the Navy
Richard V. Spencer


Chief of Naval Operations
ADM John M. Richardson


Vice Chief of Naval Operations
ADM William F. Moran


Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
MCPON Steven S. Giordano


Insignia


Flag



Seal of the Department of the Navy



Jack



Pennant



Roundel



Anchor, Constitution, and Eagle



The United States Navy (USN) is the naval warfare service branch of the United States Armed Forces and one of the seven uniformed services of the United States. The U.S. Navy is the largest and thought to be the most capable navy in the world,[5][6][7] with the highest combined battle fleet tonnage.[8][9] The U.S. Navy has the world's largest aircraft carrier fleet, with eleven in service, and two new carriers under construction.[10] With 322,421 personnel on active duty and 107,577 in the Navy Reserve, the Navy is the third largest of the service branches. It has 276 deployable combat vessels and more than 3,700 operational aircraft as of June 2017[update].[2][11]
The U.S. Navy traces its origins to the Continental Navy, which was established during the American Revolutionary War and was effectively disbanded as a separate entity shortly thereafter. The U.S. Navy played a major role in the American Civil War by blockading the Confederacy and seizing control of its rivers. It played the central role in the World War II defeat of Imperial Japan. The 21st century U.S. Navy maintains a sizable global presence, deploying in strength in such areas as the Western Pacific, the Mediterranean, and the Indian Ocean. It is a blue-water navy with the ability to project force onto the littoral regions of the world, engage in forward deployments during peacetime and rapidly respond to regional crises, making it a frequent actor in U.S. foreign and military policy.
The Navy is administratively managed by the Department of the Navy, which is headed by the civilian Secretary of the Navy. The Department of the Navy is itself a division of the Department of Defense, which is headed by the Secretary of Defense. The Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) is the most senior naval officer serving in the Department of the Navy.[12]



Contents


1 Mission
2 History

2.1 Origins
2.2 From re-establishment to the Civil War
2.3 20th century

2.3.1 World War I and interwar years
2.3.2 World War II
2.3.3 Cold War


2.4 21st century


3 Organization

3.1 Operating forces
3.2 Shore establishments
3.3 Relationships with other service branches

3.3.1 United States Marine Corps
3.3.2 United States Coast Guard




4 Personnel

4.1 Uniforms

4.1.1 Commissioned officers
4.1.2 Commissioned warrant officer ranks
4.1.3 Enlisted
4.1.4 Badges of the United States Navy




5 Bases

5.1 Eastern United States
5.2 Western United States and Hawaii
5.3 United States territories
5.4 Foreign countries


6 Equipment

6.1 Ships

6.1.1 Aircraft carriers
6.1.2 Amphibious warfare vessels
6.1.3 Cruisers
6.1.4 Destroyers
6.1.5 Frigates and Littoral combat ships
6.1.6 Mine countermeasures ships
6.1.7 Patrol boats
6.1.8 Submarines


6.2 Aircraft
6.3 Weapons


7 Naval jack
8 Notable sailors
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Mission[edit]

The mission of the Navy is to maintain, train and equip combat-ready Naval forces capable of winning wars, deterring aggression and maintaining freedom of the seas.
— Mission statement of the United States Navy[13]

The U.S. Navy is a seaborne branch of the military of the United States. The Navy's three primary areas of responsibility:[14]

The preparation of naval forces necessary for the effective prosecution of war.
The maintenance of naval aviation, including land-based naval aviation, air transport essential for naval operations, and all air weapons and air techniques involved in the operations and activities of the Navy.
The development of aircraft, weapons, tactics, technique, organization, and equipment of naval combat and service elements.

U.S. Navy training manuals state that the mission of the U.S. Armed Forces is "to prepare and conduct prompt and sustained combat operations in support of the national interest. "As part of that establishment, the U.S. Navy's functions comprise sea control, power projection and nuclear deterrence, in addition to "sealift" duties.[15]
History[edit]
Main article: History of the United States Navy
Origins[edit]

It follows then as certain as that night succeeds the day, that without a decisive naval force we can do nothing definitive, and with it, everything honorable and glorious.
— George Washington[16]

The Navy was rooted in the colonial seafaring tradition, which produced a large community of sailors, captains, and shipbuilders.[17] In the early stages of the American Revolutionary War, Massachusetts had its own Massachusetts Naval Militia. The rationale for establishing a national navy was debated in the Second Continental Congress. Supporters argued that a navy would protect shipping, defend the coast, and make it easier to seek out support from foreign countries. Detractors countered that challenging the British Royal Navy, then the world's preeminent naval power, was a foolish undertaking. Commander in Chief George Washington resolved the debate when he commissioned the ocean-going schooner USS Hannah to interdict British merchant ships, and reported the captures to the Congress. On 13 October 1775, the Continental Congress authorized the purchase of two vessels to be armed for a cruise against British merchant ships; this resolution created the Continental Navy and is considered the first establishment of the U.S. Navy.[18] The Continental Navy achieved mixed results; it was successful in a number of engagements and raided many British merchant vessels, but it lost twenty-four of its vessels[19] and at one point was reduced to two in active service.[20] In August 1785, after the Revolutionary War had drawn to a close, Congress had sold Alliance, the last ship remaining in the Continental Navy due to a lack of funds to maintain the ship or support a navy.[21][22]
In 1972, the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Elmo Zumwalt, authorized the Navy to celebrate its birthday on 13 October to honor the establishment of the Continental Navy in 1775.[23][18]
From re-establishment to the Civil War[edit]




USS Constellation vs L'Insurgente during the Quasi-War


The United States was without a navy for nearly a decade, a state of affairs that exposed U.S. maritime merchant ships to a series of attacks by the Barbary pirates. The sole armed maritime presence between 1790 and the launching of the U.S. Navy's first warships in 1797 was the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service (USRCS), the primary predecessor of the U.S. Coast Guard. Although the USRCS conducted operations against the pirates, their depredations far outstripped its abilities and Congress passed the Naval Act of 1794 that established a permanent standing navy on 27 March 1794.[24] The Naval Act ordered the construction and manning of six frigates and, by October 1797,[19] the first three were brought into service: USS United States, USS Constellation, and USS Constitution. Due to his strong posture on having a strong standing Navy during this period, John Adams is "often called the father of the American Navy".[25] In 1798–99 the Navy was involved in an undeclared Quasi-War with France.[26] From 1801 to 1805, in the First Barbary War, the U.S. Navy defended U.S. ships from the Barbary pirates, blockaded the Barbary ports and executed attacks against the Barbary' fleets.
The U.S. Navy saw substantial action in the War of 1812, where it was victorious in eleven single-ship duels with the Royal Navy. It drove all significant British forces off Lake Erie and Lake Champlain and prevented them from becoming British-controlled zones. The result was a major defeat for the British invasion of New York state, and the defeat of the military threat from the Native American allies of the British. Despite this, the U.S. Navy was unable to prevent the British from blockading its ports and landing troops.[27] After the war, the U.S. Navy again focused its attention on protecting American shipping assets, sending squadrons to the Caribbean, the Mediterranean where it participated in the Second Barbary War that ended piracy in the region, South America, Africa, and the Pacific.[19] From 1819 to the outbreak of the Civil War, the Africa Squadron operated to suppress the slave trade, seizing 36 slave ships, although its contribution was smaller than that of the much larger British Royal Navy.




USS Constitution vs HMS Guerriere during the War of 1812


During the Mexican–American War the U.S. Navy blockaded Mexican ports, capturing or burning the Mexican fleet in the Gulf of California and capturing all major cities in Baja California peninsula. In 1846–1848 the Navy successfully used the Pacific Squadron under Commodore Robert Stockton and its marines and blue-jackets to facilitate the capture of California with large scale land operations coordinated with the local militia organized in the California Battalion. The Navy conducted the U.S. military's first large-scale amphibious joint operation by successfully landing 12,000 army troops with their equipment in one day at Veracruz, Mexico. When larger guns were needed to bombard Veracruz, Navy volunteers landed large guns and manned them in the successful bombardment and capture of the city. This successful landing and capture of Veracruz opened the way for the capture of Mexico City and the end of the war.[27] The U.S. Navy established itself as a player in United States foreign policy through the actions of Commodore Matthew Perry in Japan, which resulted in the Convention of Kanagawa in 1854.
Naval power played a significant role during the American Civil War, in which the Union had a distinct advantage over the Confederacy on the seas.[27] A Union blockade on all major ports shut down exports and the coastal trade, but blockade runners (mostly owned and operated by British companies) provided a thin lifeline. The brown-water Navy's control of the river systems made internal travel difficult for Confederates and easy for the Union. The war saw ironclad warships in combat for the first time at the Battle of Hampton Roads in 1862, which pitted USS Monitor against CSS Virginia.[28] For two decades after the war, however, the U.S. Navy's fleet was neglected and became technologically obsolete.[citation needed]
20th century[edit]




The Great White Fleet demonstrates U.S. naval power in 1907; it was proof that the U.S. Navy had blue-water capability.



Our ships are our natural bulwarks.
— Woodrow Wilson[16]

A modernization program beginning in the 1880s when the first steel hulled warships stimulated the American steel industry, and "the new steel navy" was born.[29] This rapid expansion of the U.S. Navy and its easy victory over the Spanish Navy in 1898 brought a new respect for American technical quality. Rapid building of at first pre-dreadnoughts, then dreadnoughts brought the U.S. in line with the navies of countries such as Britain and Germany. In 1907, most of the Navy's battleships, with several support vessels, dubbed the Great White Fleet, were showcased in a 14-month circumnavigation of the world. Ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt, it was a mission designed to demonstrate the Navy's capability to extend to the global theater.[19] By 1911, the U.S. had begun building the super-dreadnoughts at a pace to eventually become competitive with Britain.[30]




Columbia, personification of the United States, wearing a warship bearing the words "World Power" as her "Easter bonnet" on the cover of Puck, 6 April 1901.


World War I and interwar years[edit]
The U.S. Navy saw little action during World War I. It concentrated on mine laying operations against German U-Boats. Hesitation by the senior command meant that naval forces were not contributed until late 1917. Battleship Division Nine was dispatched to Britain and served as the Sixth Battle Squadron of the British Grand Fleet. Its presence allowed the British to decommission some older ships and reuse the crews on smaller vessels. Destroyers and U.S. Naval Air Force units contributed to the anti-submarine operations. The strength of the United States Navy grew under an ambitious ship building program associated with the Naval Act of 1916.
Naval construction, especially of battleships was limited by the Washington Naval Conference of 1921–22. The aircraft carriers USS Saratoga (CV-3) and USS Lexington (CV-2) were built on the hulls of partially built battle cruisers that had been canceled by the treaty. The New Deal used Public Works Administration funds to build warships, such as USS Yorktown (CV-5) and USS Enterprise (CV-6). By 1936, with the completion of USS Wasp (CV-7), the U.S. Navy possessed a carrier fleet of 165,000 tonnes displacement, although this figure was nominally recorded as 135,000 tonnes to comply with treaty limitations. Franklin Roosevelt, the number two official in the Navy Department during World War I, appreciated the Navy and gave it strong support. In return, senior leaders were eager for innovation and experimented with new technologies, such as magnetic torpedoes, and developed a strategy called War Plan Orange for victory in the Pacific in a hypothetical war with Japan that would eventually become reality.[31]
World War II[edit]
Main article: United States Navy in World War II




The battleship USS Idaho shells Okinawa on 1 April 1945


The U.S. Navy grew into a formidable force in the years prior to World War II, with battleship production being restarted in 1937, commencing with USS North Carolina (BB-55). Though ultimately unsuccessful, Japan attempted to neutralize this strategic threat with the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941. Following American entry into the war, the U.S. Navy grew tremendously as the United States was faced with a two-front war on the seas. It achieved notable acclaim in the Pacific Theater, where it was instrumental to the Allies' successful "island hopping" campaign.[20] The U.S. Navy participated in many significant battles, including the Battle of the Coral Sea, the Battle of Midway, the Solomon Islands Campaign, the Battle of the Philippine Sea, the Battle of Leyte Gulf, and the Battle of Okinawa. By war's end in 1945, the U.S. Navy had added hundreds of new ships, including 18 aircraft carriers and 8 battleships, and had over 70% of the world's total numbers and total tonnage of naval vessels of 1,000 tons or greater.[32][33] At its peak, the U.S. Navy was operating 6,768 ships on V-J Day in August 1945.[34]
Doctrine had significantly shifted by the end of the war. The U.S. Navy had followed in the footsteps of the navies of Great Britain and Germany which favored concentrated groups of battleships as their main offensive naval weapons.[35] The development of the aircraft carrier and its devastating utilization by the Japanese against the U.S. at Pearl Harbor, however, shifted U.S. thinking. The Pearl Harbor attack destroyed or took out of action a significant number of U.S. Navy battleships. This placed much of the burden of retaliating against the Japanese on the small number of aircraft carriers.[36]
Cold War[edit]




USS George Washington (SSBN-598), a ballistic missile submarine


The potential for armed conflict with the Soviet Union during the Cold War pushed the U.S. Navy to continue its technological advancement by developing new weapons systems, ships, and aircraft. U.S. naval strategy changed to that of forward deployment in support of U.S. allies with an emphasis on carrier battle groups.[37]
The navy was a major participant in the Vietnam War, blockaded Cuba during the Cuban Missile Crisis, and, through the use of ballistic missile submarines, became an important aspect of the United States' nuclear strategic deterrence policy. The U.S. Navy conducted various combat operations in the Persian Gulf against Iran in 1987 and 1988, most notably Operation Praying Mantis. The Navy was extensively involved in Operation Urgent Fury, Operation Desert Shield, Operation Desert Storm, Operation Deliberate Force, Operation Allied Force, Operation Desert Fox and Operation Southern Watch.
The U.S. Navy has also been involved in search and rescue/search and salvage operations, sometimes in conjunction with vessels of other countries as well as with U.S. Coast Guard ships. Two examples are the 1966 Palomares B-52 crash incident and the subsequent search for missing hydrogen bombs, and Task Force 71 of the Seventh Fleet's operation in search for Korean Air Lines Flight 007, shot down by the Soviets on 1 September 1983.
21st century[edit]

When a crisis confronts the nation, the first question often asked by policymakers is: 'What naval forces are available and how fast can they be on station?'
— Admiral Carlisle A. H. Trost[38]

The U.S. Navy continues to be a major support to U.S. interests in the 21st century. Since the end of the Cold War, it has shifted its focus from preparations for large-scale war with the Soviet Union to special operations and strike missions in regional conflicts.[39] The navy participated in Operation Enduring Freedom, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and is a major participant in the ongoing War on Terror, largely in this capacity. Development continues on new ships and weapons, including the Gerald R. Ford-class aircraft carrier and the Littoral combat ship. Because of its size, weapons technology, and ability to project force far from U.S. shores, the current U.S. Navy remains a potent asset for the United States. Moreover, it is the principal means through which the U.S. maintains international global order, namely by safeguarding global trade and protecting allied nations.[40]
In 2007, the U.S. Navy joined with the U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Coast Guard to adopt a new maritime strategy called A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower that raises the notion of prevention of war to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war. The strategy was presented by the Chief of Naval Operations, the Commandant of the Marine Corps, and Commandant of the Coast Guard at the International Sea Power Symposium in Newport, RI on 17 October 2007.[41] The strategy recognized the economic links of the global system and how any disruption due to regional crises (man-made or natural) can adversely impact the U.S. economy and quality of life. This new strategy charts a course for the Navy, Coast Guard, and Marine Corps to work collectively with each other and international partners to prevent these crises from occurring or reacting quickly should one occur to prevent negative impacts on the U.S.
In 2010, Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Gary Roughead, noted that demands on the Navy have grown as the fleet has shrunk and that in the face of declining budgets in the future, the U.S. Navy must rely even more on international partnerships.[42]
In its 2013 budget request, the navy focused on retaining all eleven big deck carriers, at the expense of cutting numbers of smaller ships and delaying the SSBN replacement.[43] By the next year the USN found itself unable to maintain eleven aircraft carriers in the face of the expiration of budget relief offered by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 and CNO Jonathan Greenert said that a ten ship carrier fleet would not be able to sustainably support military requirements.[44] The British First Sea Lord George Zambellas said that [45] the USN had switched from "outcome-led to resource-led" planning.[46]
One significant change in U.S. policymaking that is having a major effect on naval planning is the Pivot to East Asia. In response this, Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus has stated that 60 percent of the total U.S. fleet will be deployed to the Pacific by the year 2020.[47] The Navy's most recent 30-year shipbuilding plan, published in 2016, calls for a future fleet of 350 ships in order to meet the challenges of an increasingly competitive international environment.[45]







U.S. Navy officers aboard the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN-72) monitor defense systems during early 2010s maritime security operations exercises.









The USS America Amphibious assault ship, launched in 2012.









U.S. Navy patrol boat near Kuwait Naval Base in 2009




Organization[edit]
Main article: Structure of the United States Navy




Simplified flowchart of U.S. Navy command structure


The U.S. Navy falls under the administration of the Department of the Navy, under civilian leadership of the Secretary of the Navy (SECNAV). The most senior naval officer is the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO), a four-star admiral who is immediately under and reports to the Secretary of the Navy. At the same time, the Chief of Naval Operations is one of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which is the second-highest deliberatory body of the armed forces after the United States National Security Council, although it only plays an advisory role to the President and does not nominally form part of the chain of command. The Secretary of the Navy and Chief of Naval Operations are responsible for organizing, recruiting, training, and equipping the Navy so that it is ready for operation under the command of the unified combat command commanders.
Operating forces[edit]
Main article: List of units of the United States Navy
There are nine components in the operating forces of the U.S. Navy: the United States Fleet Forces Command (formerly United States Atlantic Fleet), United States Pacific Fleet, United States Naval Forces Central Command, United States Naval Forces Europe, Naval Network Warfare Command, Navy Reserve, United States Naval Special Warfare Command, Operational Test and Evaluation Force, and Military Sealift Command. Fleet Forces Command controls a number of unique capabilities, including Military Sealift Command, Naval Expeditionary Combat Command, and Navy Cyber Forces.
The United States Navy has six active numbered fleets – Third, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh Fleet and Tenth Fleets are each led by a vice admiral, and the Fourth Fleet is led by a rear admiral. These six fleets are further grouped under Fleet Forces Command (the former Atlantic Fleet), Pacific Fleet, Naval Forces Europe-Africa, and Naval Forces Central Command, whose commander also doubles as Commander Fifth Fleet; the first three commands being led by four-star admirals. The United States First Fleet existed after the Second World War from 1947, but it was redesignated the Third Fleet in early 1973. In early 2008, the navy reactivated the United States Fourth Fleet to control operations in the area controlled by Southern Command, which consists of US assets in and around Central and South America.[48]
Shore establishments[edit]




USS Kitty Hawk (CV-63) docks at the U.S. Navy base in Yokosuka, Japan.


Shore establishments exist to support the mission of the fleet through the use of facilities on land. Among the commands of the shore establishment, as of April 2011[update], are the Naval Education and Training Command, the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command, the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command, the Naval Facilities Engineering Command, the Naval Supply Systems Command, the Naval Air Systems Command, the Naval Sea Systems Command, the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, the Bureau of Naval Personnel, the United States Naval Academy, the Naval Safety Center, the Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center, and the United States Naval Observatory.[49] Official Navy websites list the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations and the Chief of Naval Operations as part of the shore establishment, but these two entities effectively sit superior to the other organizations, playing a coordinating role.[citation needed]
Relationships with other service branches[edit]
United States Marine Corps[edit]




A Marine F/A-18 from VMFA-451 prepares to launch from USS Coral Sea (CV-43)


Main article: United States Marine Corps
In 1834, the United States Marine Corps came under the Department of the Navy.[50] Historically, the Navy has had a unique relationship with the USMC, partly because they both specialize in seaborne operations. Together the Navy and Marine Corps form the Department of the Navy and report to the Secretary of the Navy. However, the Marine Corps is a distinct, separate service branch[51] with its own uniformed service chief – the Commandant of the Marine Corps, a four-star general.
The Marine Corps depends on the Navy for medical support (dentists, doctors, nurses, medical technicians known as corpsmen) and religious support (chaplains). Thus Navy officers and enlisted sailors fulfill these roles. When attached to Marine Corps units deployed to an operational environment they generally wear Marine camouflage uniforms, but otherwise they wear Navy dress uniforms unless they opt to conform to Marine Corps grooming standards.[citation needed]
In the operational environment, as an expeditionary force specializing in amphibious operations, Marines often embark on Navy ships to conduct operations from beyond territorial waters. Marine units deploying as part of a Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) operate under the command of the existing Marine chain of command. Although Marine units routinely operate from amphibious assault ships, the relationship has evolved over the years much as the Commander of the Carrier Air Group/Wing (CAG) does not work for the carrier commanding officer, but coordinates with the ship's CO and staff. Some Marine aviation squadrons, usually fixed-wing assigned to carrier air wings train and operate alongside Navy squadrons; they fly similar missions and often fly sorties together under the cognizance of the CAG. Aviation is where the Navy and Marines share the most common ground, since aircrews are guided in their use of aircraft by standard procedures outlined in series of publications known as NATOPS manuals.
United States Coast Guard[edit]




A U.S. Coast Guard helicopter prepares to land on the flight deck of the amphibious assault ship USS Wasp (LHD-1).


Main article: United States Coast Guard
The United States Coast Guard, in its peacetime role with the Department of Homeland Security, fulfills its law enforcement and rescue role in the maritime environment. It provides Law Enforcement Detachments (LEDETs) to Navy vessels, where they perform arrests and other law enforcement duties during naval boarding and interdiction missions. In times of war, the Coast Guard operates as a service in the Navy.[52] At other times, Coast Guard port security units are sent overseas to guard the security of ports and other assets. The Coast Guard also jointly staffs the Navy's naval coastal warfare groups and squadrons (the latter of which were known as harbor defense commands until late-2004), which oversee defense efforts in foreign littoral combat and inshore areas.
Personnel[edit]
Main article: Personnel of the United States Navy




Navy SEALs at one of the entrances Zhawar Kili cave complex.


The United States Navy has nearly 500,000 personnel, approximately a quarter of whom are in ready reserve. Of those on active duty, more than eighty percent are enlisted sailors, and around fifteen percent are commissioned officers; the rest are midshipmen of the United States Naval Academy and midshipmen of the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps at over 180 universities around the country and officer candidates at the Navy's Officer Candidate School.[2]
Enlisted sailors complete basic military training at boot camp and then are sent to complete training for their individual careers.[53]
Sailors prove they have mastered skills and deserve responsibilities by completing Personnel Qualification Standards (PQS) tasks and examinations. Among the most important is the "warfare qualification", which denotes a journeyman level of capability in Surface Warfare, Aviation Warfare, Information Dominance Warfare, Naval Aircrew, Special Warfare, Seabee Warfare, Submarine Warfare or Expeditionary Warfare. Many qualifications are denoted on a sailor's uniform with U.S. Navy badges and insignia.
Uniforms[edit]
See also: Uniforms of the United States Navy
The uniforms of the U.S. Navy have evolved gradually since the first uniform regulations for officers were issued in 1802 on the formation of the Navy Department. The predominant colors of U.S. Navy uniforms are navy blue and white. U.S. Navy uniforms were based on Royal Navy uniforms of the time, and have tended to follow that template.[54]
Commissioned officers[edit]
See also: United States Navy officer rank insignia and Ranks and insignia of NATO navies officers
The commissioned officer ranks of the U.S. Navy are divided into three categories: junior officers, senior officers, and flag officers. Junior officers are those officers in pay grades O-1 to O-4, while senior officers are those in pay grades O-5 and O-6, and flag officers are those in pay grades of O-7 and above.[55]


Pay
grade
Student Officer
O-1
O-2
O-3
O-4
O-5
O-6
O-7
O-8
O-9
O-10
O-11 (Special)



US
Navy
(Edit)














Midshipman
-
Officer Candidate
Ensign
Lieutenant (junior grade)
Lieutenant
Lieutenant Commander
Commander
Captain
Rear Admiral (lower half)
Rear Admiral
Vice Admiral
Admiral
Fleet Admiral


Abbrv.
MIDN / OC
ENS
LTJG
LT
LCDR
CDR
CAPT
RDML
RADM
VADM
ADM
FADM1





1 Rank in abeyance. Appointments no longer made to this rank in peacetime.
Note: Pin-on insignia for paygrades O-3, O-2, and O-1 shown above are incorrectly depicted as U.S. Army / U.S. Air Force insignia; the U.S. Naval Services (Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard) use insignia that do not have beveled edges and the O-3 insignia have the connecting links near the ends of the bars rather than towards the center. (See the illustration at Lieutenant rank insignia (Navy) for correct depiction of bars)





Commissioned warrant officer ranks[edit]


Pay grade
W-2
W-3
W-4
W-5


Insignia






Title
Chief Warrant Officer Two
Chief Warrant Officer Three
Chief Warrant Officer Four
Chief Warrant Officer Five


Abbreviation
CWO-2
CWO-3
CWO-4
CWO-5


Enlisted[edit]
See also: List of United States Navy enlisted rates and Ranks and insignia of NATO navies enlisted
Sailors in pay grades E-1 through E-3 are considered to be in apprenticeships.[56] They are divided into five definable groups, with colored group rate marks designating the group to which they belong: Seaman, Fireman, Airman, Constructionman, and Hospitalman. E-4 to E-6 are non-commissioned officers (NCOs), and are specifically called Petty Officers in the Navy.[57] Petty Officers perform not only the duties of their specific career field but also serve as leaders to junior enlisted personnel. E-7 to E-9 are still considered Petty Officers, but are considered a separate community within the Navy. They have separate berthing and dining facilities (where feasible), wear separate uniforms, and perform separate duties.
After attaining the rate of Master Chief Petty Officer, a service member may choose to further his or her career by becoming a Command Master Chief Petty Officer (CMC). A CMC is considered to be the senior-most enlisted service member within a command, and is the special assistant to the Commanding Officer in all matters pertaining to the health, welfare, job satisfaction, morale, utilization, advancement and training of the command's enlisted personnel.[58][59] CMCs can be Command level (within a single unit, such as a ship or shore station), Fleet level (squadrons consisting of multiple operational units, headed by a flag officer or commodore), or Force level (consisting of a separate community within the Navy, such as Subsurface, Air, Reserves).[60]
CMC insignia are similar to the insignia for Master Chief, except that the rating symbol is replaced by an inverted five-point star, reflecting a change in their rating from their previous rating (i.e., MMCM) to CMDCM. The stars for Command Master Chief are silver, while stars for Fleet or Force Master Chief are gold. Additionally, CMCs wear a badge, worn on their left breast pocket, denoting their title (Command/Fleet/Force).[59][61]


Pay grade
E-1
E-2
E-3
E-4
E-5
E-6
E-7
E-8
E-9



US Navy
(Edit)
No Insignia














Seaman Recruit
Seaman Apprentice
Seaman
Petty Officer Third Class
Petty Officer Second Class
Petty Officer First Class
Chief Petty Officer
Senior Chief Petty Officer
Command Senior Chief Petty Officer
Master Chief Petty Officer
Command Master Chief Petty Officer
Fleet/
Force Master Chief Petty Officer
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy


Badges of the United States Navy[edit]
See also: Badges of the United States Navy
Insignia and badges of the United States Navy are military "badges" issued by the United States Department of the Navy to naval service members who achieve certain qualifications and accomplishments while serving on both active and reserve duty in the United States Navy. Most naval aviation insignia are also permitted for wear on uniforms of the United States Marine Corps.
As described in Chapter 5 of U.S. Navy Uniform Regulations,[62] "badges" are categorized as breast insignia (usually worn immediately above and below ribbons) and identification badges (usually worn at breast pocket level).[63] Breast insignia are further divided between command and warfare and other qualification.[64]
Insignia come in the form of metal "pin-on devices" worn on formal uniforms and embroidered "tape strips" worn on work uniforms. For the purpose of this article, the general term "insignia" shall be used to describe both, as it is done in Navy Uniform Regulations. The term "badge", although used ambiguously in other military branches and in informal speak to describe any pin, patch, or tab, is exclusive to identification badges[65] and authorized marksmanship awards[66] according to the language in Navy Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5. Below are just a few of the many badges maintained by the Navy. The rest can be seen in the article cited at the top of this section:








Naval Aviator Badge









Submarine Officer and Enlisted









Surface Warfare Officer Insignia





Bases[edit]
Main article: List of United States Navy installations




Map of Navy bases in the United States


The size, complexity, and international presence of the United States Navy requires a large number of navy installations to support its operations. While the majority of bases are located inside the United States itself, the navy maintains a significant number of facilities abroad, either in U.S.-controlled territories or in foreign countries under a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA).
Eastern United States[edit]
The second largest concentration of installations is at Hampton Roads, Virginia, where the navy occupies over 36,000 acres (15,000 ha) of land. Located at Hampton Roads are Naval Station Norfolk, homeport of the Atlantic Fleet; Naval Air Station Oceana, a Master Jet Base; Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek; and Training Support Center Hampton Roads as well as a number of Navy and commercial shipyards that service navy vessels. The Aegis Training and Readiness Center is located at the Naval Support Activity South Potomac in Dahlgren, Virginia. Maryland is home to NAS Patuxent River, which houses the Navy's Test Pilot School. Also located in Maryland is the United States Naval Academy, situated in Annapolis. NS Newport in Newport, Rhode Island is home to many schools and tenant commands, including the Officer Candidate School, Naval Undersea Warfare Center, and more, and also maintains inactive ships.[clarification needed]
There is also a naval base in Charleston, South Carolina. This is home to the Nuclear A-School, and the Nuclear Field Power school, and one of two nuclear 'Prototype' Schools. The state of Florida is the location of three major bases, NS Mayport, the Navy's fourth largest, in Jacksonville, Florida; NAS Jacksonville, a Master Air Anti-submarine Warfare base; and NAS Pensacola; home of the Naval Education and Training Command, the Naval Air Technical Training Center that provides specialty training for enlisted aviation personnel and is the primary flight training base for Navy and Marine Corps Naval Flight Officers and enlisted Naval Aircrewmen. There is also NSA Panama City, Florida which is home to the Navy Diving and Salvage Training Center.
The main U.S. Navy submarine bases on the east coast are located in Naval Submarine Base New London in Groton, Connecticut and NSB Kings Bay in Kings Bay, Georgia. The Portsmouth Naval Shipyard near Portsmouth, New Hampshire,[67] which repairs naval submarines.[2] NS Great Lakes, north of Chicago, Illinois is the home of the Navy's boot camp for enlisted sailors.
The Washington Navy Yard in Washington, DC is the Navy's oldest shore establishment and serves as a ceremonial and administrative center for the U.S. Navy, home to the Chief of Naval Operations, and is headquarters for numerous commands.
Western United States and Hawaii[edit]




Underwater Demolition Team members using the casting technique from a speeding boat.






Combat Camera Underwater Photo Team – A US Navy diver during underwater photography training off the coast of Guantanamo Bay.


The navy's largest complex is Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake, California, which covers 1.1 million acres (4,500 km2) of land, or approximately 1/3 of the United States Navy's total land holdings.[2]
Naval Base San Diego, California, is the main homeport of the Pacific Fleet (although its headquarters is located in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii). NAS North Island is located on the north side of Coronado, and is home to Headquarters for Naval Air Forces and Naval Air Force Pacific, the bulk of the Pacific Fleet's helicopter squadrons, and part of the West Coast aircraft carrier fleet. NAB Coronado is located on the southern end of the Coronado Island and is home to the navy's west coast SEAL teams and special boat units. NAB Coronado is also home to the Naval Special Warfare Center, the primary training center for SEALs.
The other major collection of naval bases on the west coast is in Puget Sound, Washington. Among them, NS Everett is one of the newer bases and the navy states that it is its most modern facility.[68]
NAS Fallon, Nevada serves as the primary training ground for navy strike aircrews, and is home to the Naval Strike Air Warfare Center. Master Jet Bases are also located at NAS Lemoore, California and NAS Whidbey Island, Washington, while the carrier-based airborne early warning aircraft community and major air test activities are located at NAS Point Mugu, California. The naval presence in Hawaii is centered on NS Pearl Harbor, which hosts the headquarters of the Pacific Fleet and many of its subordinate commands.
United States territories[edit]




USS Carl Vinson (CVN-70) pier side in Apra Harbor, Guam.


Guam, an island strategically located in the Western Pacific Ocean, maintains a sizable U.S. Navy presence, including NB Guam. The westernmost U.S. territory, it contains a natural deep water harbor capable of harboring aircraft carriers in emergencies.[69] Its naval air station was deactivated[70] in 1995 and its flight activities transferred to nearby Andersen Air Force Base.
Puerto Rico in the Caribbean formerly housed NS Roosevelt Roads, which was shut down in 2004 shortly after the controversial closure of the live ordnance training area on nearby Vieques Island.[2]
Foreign countries[edit]
The largest overseas base is the United States Fleet Activities Yokosuka, Japan,[71] which serves as the home port for the navy's largest forward-deployed fleet and is a significant base of operations in the Western Pacific.
European operations revolve around facilities in Italy (NAS Sigonella and Naval Computer and Telecommunications Station Naples) with NSA Naples as the homeport for the Sixth Fleet and Command Naval Region Europe, Africa, Southwest Asia (CNREURAFSWA), and additional facilities in nearby Gaeta. There is also NS Rota in Spain and NSA Souda Bay in Greece.
In the Middle East, naval facilities are located almost exclusively in countries bordering the Persian Gulf, with NSA Bahrain serving as the headquarters of U.S. Naval Forces Central Command and U.S. Fifth Fleet.
NS Guantanamo Bay in Cuba is the oldest overseas facility and has become known in recent years as the location of a detention camp for suspected al-Qaeda operatives.[72]
Equipment[edit]
Main article: Equipment of the United States Navy
As of 2018[update], the navy operates over 460 ships, including vessels operated by the Military Sealift Command (MSC) crewed by a combination of civilian contractors and a small number of uniformed Naval personnel, 3,650+ aircraft, 50,000 non-combat vehicles and owns 75,200 buildings on 3,300,000 acres (13,000 km2).
Ships[edit]
Main articles: List of United States Navy ships and List of current ships of the United States Navy
See also: List of currently active United States military watercraft, United States Navy ships, and United States ship naming conventions
The names of commissioned ships of the U.S. Navy are prefixed with the letters "USS", designating "United States Ship".[73] Non-commissioned, civilian-manned vessels of the navy have names that begin with "USNS", standing for "United States Naval Ship" The names of ships are officially selected by the secretary of the navy, often to honor important people or places.[74] Additionally, each ship is given a letter-based hull classification symbol (for example, CVN or DDG) to indicate the vessel's type and number. All ships in the navy inventory are placed in the Naval Vessel Register, which is part of "the Navy List" (required by article 29 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea).[dubious – discuss] The register tracks data such as the current status of a ship, the date of its commissioning, and the date of its decommissioning. Vessels that are removed from the register prior to disposal are said to be stricken from the register. The navy also maintains a reserve fleet of inactive vessels that are maintained for reactivation in times of need.
The U.S. Navy was one of the first to install nuclear reactors aboard naval vessels;[75] today, nuclear energy powers all active U.S. aircraft carriers and submarines. In the case of the Nimitz-class carrier, two naval reactors give the ship almost unlimited range and provide enough electrical energy to power a city of 100,000 people.[76] The U.S. Navy previously operated nuclear-powered cruisers, but all have been decommissioned.
The U.S. Navy had identified a need for 313 combat ships in early 2010s, but under its plans at the time could only afford 232 to 243.[77] In March 2014, the Navy started counting self-deployable support ships such as minesweepers, surveillance craft, and tugs in the "battle fleet" in order to reach a count of 272 as of October 2016,[78][79] and it includes ships that have been put in "shrink wrap".[80]
Aircraft carriers[edit]




USS Nimitz (CVN-68), a Nimitz-class aircraft carrier.


Main article: List of aircraft carriers of the United States Navy
An aircraft carrier is typically deployed along with a host of additional vessels, forming a carrier strike group. The supporting ships, which usually include three or four Aegis-equipped cruisers and destroyers, a frigate, and two attack submarines, are tasked with protecting the carrier from air, missile, sea, and undersea threats as well as providing additional strike capabilities themselves. Ready logistics support for the group is provided by a combined ammunition, oiler, and supply ship. Modern carriers are named after American admirals and politicians, usually presidents.
The Navy has a statutory requirement for a minimum of 11 aircraft carriers.[81] Currently there are 10 that are deployable and one, the USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78), is currently undergoing extensive systems and technologies testing until around 2021.[82]
Amphibious warfare vessels[edit]




USS Bataan (LHD-5), a Wasp-class amphibious assault ship.






USS San Antonio (LPD-17), a San Antonio-class amphibious transport dock.


Main article: List of United States Navy amphibious warfare ships
Amphibious assault ships are the centerpieces of US amphibious warfare and fulfill the same power projection role as aircraft carriers except that their striking force centers on land forces instead of aircraft. They deliver, command, coordinate, and fully support all elements of a 2,200-strong Marine Expeditionary Unit in an amphibious assault using both air and amphibious vehicles. Resembling small aircraft carriers, amphibious assault ships are capable of V/STOL, STOVL, VTOL, tiltrotor, and rotary wing aircraft operations. They also contain a well deck to support the use of Landing Craft Air Cushion (LCAC) and other amphibious assault watercraft. Recently, amphibious assault ships have begun to be deployed as the core of an expeditionary strike group, which usually consists of an additional amphibious transport dock and dock landing ship for amphibious warfare and an Aegis-equipped cruiser and destroyer, frigate, and attack submarine for group defense. Amphibious assault ships are typically named after World War II aircraft carriers.
Amphibious transport docks are warships that embark, transport, and land Marines, supplies, and equipment in a supporting role during amphibious warfare missions. With a landing platform, amphibious transport docks also have the capability to serve as secondary aviation support for an expeditionary group. All amphibious transport docks can operate helicopters, LCACs, and other conventional amphibious vehicles while the newer San Antonio class of ships has been explicitly designed to operate all three elements of the Marines' "mobility triad": Expeditionary Fighting Vehicles (EFVs), the V-22 Osprey tiltrotor aircraft, and LCACs. Amphibious transport docks are typically named after U.S. cities.
The dock landing ship is a medium amphibious transport that is designed specifically to support and operate LCACs, though it is able to operate other amphibious assault vehicles in the United States inventory as well. Dock landing ships are normally deployed as a component of an expeditionary strike group's amphibious assault contingent, operating as a secondary launch platform for LCACs. All dock landing ships are named after cities or important places in U.S. and U.S. Naval history.
Cruisers[edit]
Main article: List of cruisers of the United States Navy




USS Port Royal (CG-73), a Ticonderoga-class cruiser.


Cruisers are large surface combat vessels that conduct anti-air/anti-missile warfare, surface warfare, anti-submarine warfare, and strike operations independently or as members of a larger task force. Modern guided missile cruisers were developed out of a need to counter the anti-ship missile threat facing the United States Navy. This led to the development of the AN/SPY-1 phased array radar and the Standard missile with the Aegis combat system coordinating the two. Ticonderoga-class cruisers were the first to be equipped with Aegis and were put to use primarily as anti-air and anti-missile defense in a battle force protection role. Later developments of vertical launch systems and the Tomahawk missile gave cruisers additional long-range land and sea strike capability, making them capable of both offensive and defensive battle operations. The Ticonderoga class is the only active class of cruiser. All cruisers in this class are named after battles.
Destroyers[edit]
Main article: List of destroyers of the United States Navy




USS Zumwalt (DDG-1000), a Zumwalt -class stealth guided missile destroyer.


Destroyers are multi-mission medium surface ships capable of sustained performance in anti-air, anti-submarine, anti-ship, and offensive strike operations. Like cruisers, guided missile destroyers are primarily focused on surface strikes using Tomahawk missiles and fleet defense through Aegis and the Standard missile. Destroyers additionally specialize in anti-submarine warfare and are equipped with VLA rockets and LAMPS Mk III Sea Hawk helicopters to deal with underwater threats. When deployed with a carrier strike group or expeditionary strike group, destroyers and their fellow Aegis-equipped cruisers are primarily tasked with defending the fleet while providing secondary strike capabilities. With very few exceptions, destroyers are named after U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard heroes.
Frigates and Littoral combat ships[edit]
Main article: List of frigates of the United States Navy
See also: Littoral combat ship




USS Independence (LCS-2), a Littoral combat ship.






USS Freedom (LCS-1) underway in special naval camouflage.


Modern U.S. frigates mainly perform anti-submarine warfare for carrier and expeditionary strike groups and provide armed escort for supply convoys and merchant shipping. They are designed to protect friendly ships against hostile submarines in low to medium threat environments, using torpedoes and LAMPS helicopters. Independently, frigates are able to conduct counterdrug missions and other maritime interception operations. As in the case of destroyers, frigates are named after U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard heroes. As of autumn 2015, the U.S. Navy has retired its most recent class of frigates, and expects that by 2020 the Littoral Combat Ships (LCS) will assume many of the duties the frigate had with the fleet. The LCS is a class of relatively small surface vessels intended for operations in the littoral zone (close to shore). It was "envisioned to be a networked, agile, stealthy surface combatant capable of defeating anti-access and asymmetric threats in the littorals". They have the capabilities of a small assault transport, including a flight deck and hangar for housing two helicopters, a stern ramp for operating small boats, and the cargo volume and payload to deliver a small assault force with fighting vehicles to a roll-on/roll-off port facility. The ship is easy to reconfigure for different roles, including anti-submarine warfare, mine countermeasures, anti-surface warfare, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, homeland defense, maritime intercept, special operations, and logistics, all by swapping mission-specific modules as needed. The LCS program is still relatively new as of 2018 with only ten active ships, but the navy has announced plans for up to 32 ships. (See: List of littoral combat ships) The navy has announced that a further 20 vessels to be built after that will be redesignated as 'frigates'.[83]

In addition, USS Constitution, commissioned in 1797 and one of the original six frigates of the United States Navy, remains in commission at the Charlestown Navy Yard in Boston. She serves as a tribute to the heritage of the Navy, and occasionally sails for commemorative events such as Independence Day and various victories during the War of 1812. Constitution is currently the oldest commissioned warship afloat. HMS Victory is older, and in commission, but is in permanent drydock.

Mine countermeasures ships[edit]
Main article: List of mine warfare vessels of the United States Navy




USS Warrior (MCM-10) in port


Mine countermeasures vessels are a combination of minehunters, a naval vessel that actively detects and destroys individual naval mines, and minesweepers, which clear mined areas as a whole, without prior detection of the mines. The navy has approximately a dozen of these in active service, but the mine countermeasure (MCM) role is also being assumed by the incoming classes of littoral combat ships. MCM vessels have mostly legacy names of previous US Navy ships, especially WWII-era minesweepers.
Patrol boats[edit]
Main article: List of patrol vessels of the United States Navy




USS Typhoon (PC-5) departing Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek in Virginia.


A patrol boat is a relatively small naval vessel generally designed for coastal defense duties. There have been many designs for patrol boats, though the navy currently only has a single class. They may be operated by a nation's navy or coast guard, and may be intended for marine ("blue water") and/or estuarine or river ("brown water") environments. The Navy has approximately a dozen in active service, which are mainly used in the littoral regions of the Persian Gulf, but have also been used for home port patrols and drug interdiction missions. The navy's current class of patrol boats have names based on weather phenomena.
Submarines[edit]
Main article: Submarines in the United States Navy




USS Kentucky (SSBN-737), an Ohio-class ballistic missile submarine.






USS Virginia (SSN-774), a Virginia -class attack submarine.


All current and planned U.S. Navy submarines are nuclear-powered, as only nuclear propulsion allows for the combination of stealth and long duration, high-speed sustained underwater movement that makes modern nuclear submarines so vital to a modern blue-water navy. The U.S. Navy operates three types: ballistic missile submarines, guided missile submarines, and attack submarines. U.S. Navy (nuclear) ballistic missile submarines carry the stealthiest leg of the U.S. strategic triad (the other legs are the land-based U.S. strategic missile force and the air-based U.S. strategic bomber force). These submarines have only one mission: to carry and, if called upon, to launch the Trident nuclear missile. The primary missions of attack and guided missile submarines in the U.S. Navy are peacetime engagement, surveillance and intelligence, special operations, precision strikes, and control of the seas.[84] To these, attack submarines also add the battlegroup operations mission. Attack and guided missile submarines have several tactical missions, including sinking ships and other subs, launching cruise missiles, gathering intelligence, and assisting in special operations.
As with other classes of naval vessels, most U.S. submarines (or "boats") are named according to specific conventions. The boats of the current U.S. ballistic missile submarine class, Ohio-class, are named after U.S. states. As the four current U.S. guided missile submarines are converted Ohio-class boats, they have retained their U.S. state names. The members of the oldest currently-commissioned attack submarine class, the Los Angeles class, are typically named for cities. The follow-on Seawolf-class' three submarines—Seawolf, Connecticut and Jimmy Carter—share no consistent naming scheme. With the current Virginia-class class attack submarines, the U.S. Navy has extended the Ohio class' state-based naming scheme to these submarines. Attack submarines prior to the Los Angeles class were named for denizens of the deep, while pre-Ohio-class ballistic missile submarines were named for famous Americans and foreigners with notable connections to the United States.
Aircraft[edit]




Four Navy F/A-18F Super Hornets.


Main articles: List of United States naval aircraft and List of military aircraft of the United States (naval)
See also: List of United States Navy aircraft squadrons and List of active United States military aircraft
Carrier-based aircraft are able to strike air, sea, and land targets far from a carrier strike group while protecting friendly forces from enemy aircraft, ships, and submarines. In peacetime, aircraft's ability to project the threat of sustained attack from a mobile platform on the seas gives United States leaders significant diplomatic and crisis-management options. Aircraft additionally provide logistics support to maintain the navy's readiness and, through helicopters, supply platforms with which to conduct search and rescue, special operations, anti-submarine warfare (ASW), and anti-surface warfare (ASuW).
The U.S. Navy began to research the use of aircraft at sea in the 1910s, with Lieutenant Theodore G. "Spuds" Ellyson becoming the first naval aviator on 28 January 1911, and commissioned its first aircraft carrier, USS Langley (CV-1), in 1922.[85] United States naval aviation fully came of age in World War II, when it became clear following the Attack on Pearl Harbor, the Battle of the Coral Sea, and the Battle of Midway that aircraft carriers and the planes that they carried had replaced the battleship as the greatest weapon on the seas. Leading navy aircraft in World War II included the Grumman F4F Wildcat, the Grumman F6F Hellcat, the Chance Vought F4U Corsair, the Douglas SBD Dauntless, and the Grumman TBF Avenger. Navy aircraft also played a significant role in conflicts during the following Cold War years, with the F-4 Phantom II and the F-14 Tomcat becoming military icons of the era. The navy's current primary fighter and attack airplanes are the multi-mission F/A-18C/D Hornet and its newer cousin, the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet. The F-35 Lightning II is presently under development and was scheduled to replace the C and D versions of the Hornet beginning in 2012.[86] Initial operational capability of the F-35C is now expected to be February 2019.[87] The Navy is also looking to eventually replace its F/A-18E/F Super Hornets with the F/A-XX program.
The Aircraft Investment Plan sees naval aviation growing from 30 percent of current aviation forces to half of all procurement funding over the next three decades.[88]
Weapons[edit]
Main article: List of United States Navy weapons
Current U.S. Navy shipboard weapons systems are almost entirely focused on missiles, both as a weapon and as a threat. In an offensive role, missiles are intended to strike targets at long distances with accuracy and precision. Because they are unmanned weapons, missiles allow for attacks on heavily defended targets without risk to human pilots. Land strikes are the domain of the BGM-109 Tomahawk, which was first deployed in the 1980s and is continually being updated to increase its capabilities. For anti-ship strikes, the navy's dedicated missile is the Harpoon Missile. To defend against enemy missile attack, the navy operates a number of systems that are all coordinated by the Aegis combat system. Medium-long range defense is provided by the Standard Missile 2, which has been deployed since the 1980s. The Standard missile doubles as the primary shipboard anti-aircraft weapon and is undergoing development for use in theater ballistic missile defense. Short range defense against missiles is provided by the Phalanx CIWS and the more recently developed RIM-162 Evolved Sea Sparrow Missile. In addition to missiles, the navy employs Mark 46 and Mark 50 torpedoes and various types of naval mines.




Aviation Ordnancemen loading GBU-12 bombs in 2005.


Naval fixed-wing aircraft employ much of the same weapons as the United States Air Force for both air-to-air and air-to-surface combat. Air engagements are handled by the heat-seeking Sidewinder and the radar guided AMRAAM missiles along with the M61 Vulcan cannon for close range dogfighting. For surface strikes, navy aircraft utilize a combination of missiles, smart bombs, and dumb bombs. On the list of available missiles are the Maverick, SLAM-ER and JSOW. Smart bombs include the GPS-guided JDAM and the laser-guided Paveway series. Unguided munitions such as dumb bombs and cluster bombs make up the rest of the weapons deployed by fixed-wing aircraft.
Rotary aircraft weapons are focused on anti-submarine warfare (ASW) and light to medium surface engagements. To combat submarines, helicopters use Mark 46 and Mark 50 torpedoes. Against small watercraft, they utilize Hellfire and Penguin air to surface missiles. Helicopters also employ various types of mounted anti-personnel machine guns, including the M60, M240, GAU-16/A, and GAU-17/A.
Nuclear weapons in the U.S. Navy arsenal are deployed through ballistic missile submarines and aircraft. The Ohio-class submarine carries the latest iteration of the Trident missile, a three-stage, submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) with MIRV capability; the current Trident II (D5) version is expected to be in service past 2020.[89] The navy's other nuclear weapon is the air-deployed B61 nuclear bomb. The B61 is a thermonuclear device that can be dropped by strike aircraft such as the F/A-18 Hornet and Super Hornet at high speed from a large range of altitudes. It can be released through free-fall or parachute and can be set to detonate in the air or on the ground.
Naval jack[edit]




U.S. Naval Jack






  Former U.S. Naval Jack


The current naval jack of the United States is the First Navy Jack, traditionally regarded as having been used during the American Revolutionary War. On 31 May 2002, Secretary of the Navy Gordon R. England directed all U.S. naval ships to fly the First Navy Jack for the duration of the "War on Terror". Many ships chose to shift colors later that year on the first anniversary of the September 11, 2001 attacks. The previous naval jack was a blue field with 50 white stars, identical to the canton of the ensign (the flag of the United States) both in appearance and size, and remains in use with vessels of the U.S. Coast Guard and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. A jack of similar design was used in 1794, though with 13 stars arranged in a 3–2–3–2–3 pattern. When a ship is moored or anchored, the jack is flown from the bow of the ship while the ensign is flown from the stern. When underway, the ensign is raised on the mainmast. The First Naval Jack, however, has always been flown on the oldest ship in the active American fleet, which is currently USS Blue Ridge (LCC-19).
Notable sailors[edit]
Main article: List of United States Navy people
Many past and present United States historical figures have served in the navy. Notable officers include John Paul Jones, John Barry (Continental Navy officer and first flag officer of the United States Navy),[90] Edward Preble, James Lawrence (whose last words "don't give up the ship" are memorialized in Bancroft Hall at the United States Naval Academy), Stephen Decatur, Jr., David Farragut, David Dixon Porter, Oliver Hazard Perry, Commodore Matthew Perry (whose Black Ships forced the opening of Japan), George Dewey (the only person in the history of the United States to have attained the rank of Admiral of the Navy)), and the officers who attained the rank of Fleet Admiral during World War II: William D. Leahy, Ernest J. King, Chester W. Nimitz, and William F. Halsey, Jr..
The first American president who served in the navy was John F. Kennedy (who commanded the famous PT-109). Others included Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, and George H. W. Bush. Both Theodore Roosevelt and Franklin D. Roosevelt were the assistant secretary of the navy prior to their presidencies. Many members of Congress served in the navy, notably U.S. Senators Bob Kerrey, John McCain, and John Kerry. Other notable former members of the U.S. Navy include astronauts, entertainers, authors and professional athletes.[citation needed]

See also[edit]


Military of the United States portal
United States Navy portal



Disestablished commands of the United States Navy
Ohio Replacement Submarine
Spearhead-class expeditionary fast transport
Bibliography of early American naval history
Modern United States Navy carrier air operations
Naval militia
Women in the United States Navy

References[edit]


^ "Establishment of the Navy, 13 October 1775". Naval History and Heritage Command. Retrieved 6 July 2017. 
^ a b c d e f g h i "The U.S. Navy". U.S. Navy. 30 June 2017. Retrieved 11 October 2017. 
^ US Navy web staff. "The U.S. Navy". 
^ Carlos Cabo. "Pantone colors. Convert Pantone colors to RAL, CMYK, RGB, Hex, HSL, HSB, JSON". 
^ "Carl Lavo: The gigantic advantage the U.S. Navy has over all others". carllavo.blogspot.de. Retrieved 12 November 2015. 
^ "If More Money Buys a Smaller Fleet, What Will Less Money Buy?". Time. 3 December 2012. 
^ "Speech View". defense.gov. Archived from the original on 21 May 2010. Retrieved 12 November 2015. 
^ Gates, Robert M. (January–February 2009). "A Balanced Strategy: Reprogramming the Pentagon for a New Age". Foreign Affairs. Council on Foreign Relations. (Subscription required (help)). 
^ "The Russian Navy Is Aiming To Be Much Larger Than The US Navy". Business Insider. 24 September 2014. Retrieved 12 November 2015. 
^ See USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79) and USS Enterprise (CVN-80)
^ https://www.globalsecurity.org/military/agency/end-strength.htm
^ "Responsibilities". Chief of Naval Operations. United States Navy. Retrieved 15 June 2013. 
^ "Mission of the Navy". Navy Organization. U.S. Navy. Retrieved 29 November 2008. 
^ 10 U.S.C. § 5062
^ Basic Military Requirements (PDF). United States Navy. February 2002. pp. 20–7. NAVEDTRA 14325. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-09-27. 
^ a b "Famous Navy Quotes: Who Said Them ... and When". Naval History & Heritage Command. Retrieved 20 June 2015. 
^ Dull, Jonathan R. (2012). American Naval History, 1607–1865: Overcoming the Colonial Legacy. U. of Nebraska Press. pp. 1–16. ISBN 978-0-8032-4471-9. 
^ a b "Establishment of the Navy, 13 October 1775". Naval History & Heritage Command. US Navy. Archived from the original on 4 February 1999. Retrieved 5 November 2009. 
^ a b c d Love, Robert W., Jr. (1992). History of the US Navy. Volume One: 1775–1941. Harrisburg: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-1862-2. 
^ a b Howarth, Steven (1991). To Shining Sea: A history of the United States Navy 1776–1991. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-394-57662-4. 
^ "Alliance". Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships. Navy Department, Naval History and Heritage Command. Retrieved 31 August 2009. 
^ Abbot 1896, Volume I Part I Chapter XV
^ "Origins of the Navy". Naval History & Heritage Command. Naval History & Heritage Command. Retrieved 1 July 2017. 
^ "Launching the New U.S. Navy, 27 March 1794". National Archives. National Archives and Records Administration Center for Legislative Archives Records of the U.S. Senate Record Group 46. Retrieved 1 July 2017. 
^ "John Adams I (Frigate) 1799–1867". USA.gov. Retrieved 22 August 2015. 
^ Randal Rust. "Quasi-War". R.Squared Communications. Retrieved 5 April 2017. 
^ a b c Palmer, Michael A. "The Navy: The Continental Period, 1775–1890". Naval History & Heritage Command. Retrieved 20 June 2015. 
^ McPherson, James M. (2012). War on the Waters: The Union and Confederate Navies, 1861–1865. University of North Carolina Press. pp. 3–4. ISBN 978-0-8078-3588-3. 
^ Hacker, Barton C.; Vining, Margaret (2007). American Military Technology. The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-8018-8772-7. 
^ O'Brien, Phillips P. (1998). British and American Naval Power: Politics and Policy, 1900–1936. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 7, 154–156. ISBN 978-0-275-95898-5. 
^ Holwitt, Joel I. (January 2012). "Reappraising the Interwar US Navy". Journal of Military History (Book review). 76 (1): 193–210. 
^ Burbach, David T.; Devore, Marc; Sapolsky, Harvey M.; Van Evera, Stephen (1 December 2001). "Weighing the US Navy". Defense Analysis. 17 (3): 259–265. doi:10.1080/07430170120093382. 
^ King, Ernest J., USN (3 December 1945). US Navy at War 1941–1945: Official Report to the Secretary of the Navy. Retrieved 8 April 2006. 
^ "U.S. Navy Active Ship Force Levels, 1886–present". Naval History & Heritage Command. U.S. Navy. 20 June 2015. 
^ Hone, Trent (October 2003). "The Evolution of Fleet Tactical Doctrine in the U.S. Navy, 1922–1941". The Journal of Military History. Society for Military History. 67 (4): 1107–1148. doi:10.1353/jmh.2003.0300. JSTOR 3396884. 
^ Dater, Henry M. (1950). "Tactical Use of Air Power in World War II: The Navy Experience". Military Affairs. Society for Military History. 14 (4): 192–200. doi:10.2307/1982840. JSTOR 1982840. 
^ Palmer, Michael A. "The Navy: The Transoceanic Period, 1945–1992". Naval History & Heritage Command. U.S. Navy. Retrieved 20 June 2015. 
^ Chief of Naval Operations (15 May 1991). "The United States Navy in Operations "Desert Storm" / "Desert Shield"". Naval History & Heritage Command. U.S. Navy. 
^ "Forward ... From the Sea". Department of the Navy. March 1997. Retrieved 25 July 2006. 
^ Farley, Robert. "A US Navy With 350 Ships... But What For?". thediplomat.com. The Diplomat. Retrieved 22 November 2016. 
^ Garamone, Jim (17 October 2007). "Sea Services Unveil New Maritime Strategy". Navy News Service. American Forces Press Service. NNS071017-13. 
^ Bacon, Lance M. (22 June 2010). "CNO: Global challenges need global responses". Navy Times. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012. (Subscription required (help)). 
^ "Pentagon Sacrifices To Save Carrier". 27 January 2012. 
^ Harper, Jon (22 May 2014). "Navy's top admiral: Reducing carrier fleet would burn out sailors, ships". www.stripes.com. Stars and Stripes. Retrieved 22 May 2014. 
^ a b Stashwick, Steven. "Road to 350: What Does the US Navy Do Anyway?". thediplomat.com. The Diplomat. Retrieved 22 November 2016. 
^ Sweetman, Bill (11 August 2014). "Scotland, Missile Defense And Subs". aviationweek.com. Penton. Retrieved 11 August 2014. 
^ Franz-Stefan Gady, The Diplomat. "US Navy Secretary: We Will Have Over 300 Ships by 2020". The Diplomat. Retrieved 12 November 2015. 
^ Gragg, Alan, MCS3 (24 April 2008). "Navy Reestablishes U.S. Fourth Fleet". Navy News Service. NNS080424-13. 
^ "The shore establishment". Navy Organization. United States Navy. 28 November 2006. 
^ "Navy and Marine Corps History, Customs, and Courtesies – Fundamentals". Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune. United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. 
^ "National Security Act of 1947 (As amended 3 August 2007), (50 U.S.C. 426)" (PDF). 26 July 1947. §606.(9) p. 69. 
^ "14 USC 3. Relationship to Navy Department". Legal Information Institute. Cornell University Law School. Retrieved 28 July 2013. 
^ Training After Boot Camp
^ "History of US Navy Uniforms, 1776-1981". Naval History and Heritage Command. US Navy. Retrieved 22 November 2016. 
^ United States Navy officer rank insignia
^ "Group rate marks for pay grades E-1 through E-3". U. S. Navy. Retrieved 2007-01-25. 
^ United States Navy Uniform Regulations. BUPERS, U. S. Navy. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 2007-01-26. 
^ "Navy Enlisted Advancement System - Master Chief". Navy Professional Development Center, Military.com. Retrieved 2007-01-28. 
^ a b "Senior And Master Chiefs As Principal Enlisted Advisor". Military Requirements for Senior and Master Chief Petty Officer Chief. Integrated Publishing. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 2007-01-28. 
^ "Chief of Naval Operations OPNAV Instructions 1306.2D". Navydata, U. S. Navy. Retrieved 2007-01-28. 
^ "United States Navy Uniform Regulations CPO Rating". BUPERS, U. S. Navy. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 2007-01-26. 
^ "United States Navy Uniform Regulations". United States Navy. Retrieved 2009-10-16. 
^ "Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5, Identification Badges/Awards/Insignia". United States Navy. Retrieved 2007-04-02. 
^ "Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5, Section 2, Breast Insignia". United States Navy. Retrieved 2007-11-18. 
^ "Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5, Section 2, Article 5201.2, Warfare and Other Qualifications". United States Navy. Retrieved 2007-11-18. 
^ "Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5, Section 3, Article 5310, Marksmanship Awards (Badges)". United States Navy. Retrieved 2007-11-18. 
^ scot.greber. "MilitaryINSTALLATIONS - U.S. Department of Defense". Archived from the original on 22 January 2016. 
^ "Naval Station Everett Official Site". Naval Station Everett. Archived from the original on 9 September 2005. 
^ "Guam". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 19 May 2007. 
^ "Naval Air Station, Agana [Tiyan]". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 19 February 2010. 
^ "Yokosuka, Japan 35°17'N 139°40'E". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 19 April 2006. 
^ "Naval facilities outside the US". United States Navy. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. 
^ "Ship Naming in the United States Navy". Naval History & Heritage Command. United States Navy. Retrieved 20 June 2015. 
^ O'Rourke, Ronald. (2013). Navy Ship Names: Background For Congress. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service.
^ "CVN-65 Enterprise". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 7 March 2007. 
^ "CVN-68 Nimitz Class". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 8 April 2006. 
^ "Vice Adm. Barry McCullough". Defense News. [dead link]
^ Fleet Size US Navy Retrieved 17 October 2016
^ CAVAS, CHRISTOPHER P. (9 March 2014). "US Navy Budget Plan: Major Questions Abound". defensenews.com. Gannett Government Media. Archived from the original on 9 March 2014. Retrieved 9 March 2014. 
^ Freedberg Jr., Sydney J. (11 March 2014). "Outrage On Capitol Hill As Navy Changes Ship-Counting Rules". breakingdefense.com. Breaking Media, Inc. Retrieved 11 March 2014. 
^ Wolf, Jim (6 May 2010). "US Navy to Gates: Yes, we need 11 aircraft carriers". Reuters. 
^ LaGrone, Sam (18 January 2017). "Delay in Aircraft Carrier Ford Testing Could Compress Workups for First Deployment". USNI News. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017. Retrieved 8 June 2017. 
^ SNA: Modified Littoral Combat Ships to be Designated Frigates - News.USNI.org, 15 January 2015
^ "Submarine Missions". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 8 April 2006. 
^ "A Brief History of U.S. Navy Aircraft Carriers: Part I – The Early Years". The Carriers. United States Navy. Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ "F-35C Carrier Variant Joint Strike Fighter (JSF)". GlobalSecurity. Retrieved 18 July 2006. 
^ "Services Deliver F-35 Initial Operational Capability Timelines to Congress". Navy News Service. 31 May 2013. NNS130531-06. 
^ Wheeler, Winslow T. (9 March 2010). "This Pentagon Needs Watching". The Huffington Post. 
^ "Trident Fleet Ballistic Missile". U.S. Navy Fact File. Retrieved 8 April 2006. 
^ One Hundred Ninth Congress. "Joint Resolution Recognizing Commodore John Barry as the first flag officer of the United States Navy" (PDF). Government Printing Office. Retrieved 30 June 2009. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Navy.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: United States Navy



Official website
"U.S. Naval Institute". 
A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower
"Navy.com, USN official recruitment site". 
"U.S. Navy News website". Archived from the original on 23 December 2007. ; official news
"US Navy". GlobalSecurity. 
D'Alessandro, Michael P. (ed.). "Naval Open Source Intelligence". 
"United States Navy Official Website". 
Lanzendörfer, Tim. "The Pacific War: The U.S. Navy". 
"United States Navy Memorial". 
America's Naval Hardware – Life magazine slideshow
"Photographic History of The U.S. Navy". Naval History. NavSource. 
"Haze Gray & Underway – Naval History and Photography". HazeGray.org. 
"U.S. Navy Ships". Military Analysis Network. Federation of America Scientists. 
U.S. Navy during the Cold War from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
"United States Navy in World War I". World War I at Sea.net. Retrieved 3 February 2007.  (Includes warship losses.)
"U.S. Navy in World War II". World War II on the World Wide Web. Hyper War.  (Includes The Official Chronology of the U.S. Navy in World War II.)
"Our Fighting Ships". U.S. WW II Newsmap. Army Orientation Course. 29 June 1942.  Hosted by the UNT Libraries Digital Collections
"Strict Neutrality – Britain & France at War with Germany, September 1939 – May 1940". United States Navy and World War II. Naval-History.net. Archived from the original on 18 November 2006. Retrieved 3 February 2007.  (Chronology of the lead up of U.S. entry into World War II.)
"The National Security Strategy of the United States of America". Archived from the original on 17 August 2007. 
"Naval recognition-Grand Valley State University Archives and Special Collections". 
"US Navy SEALs Information". 
"US Navy SEALs Directory". Archived from the original on 4 April 2010. 
United States Navy at the Wayback Machine (archived 4 January 1997)







v
t
e


United States Navy






 Portal
 Category





Leadership



Secretary of the Navy
Under Secretary of the Navy
Chief of Naval Operations
Vice Chief of Naval Operations
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
4-star admirals
House Armed Services Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces
Senate Subcommittee on Seapower








Structure



Navy
Navy Reserve
Fleet Marine Force
Expeditionary Combat Command
Merchant Marine


Units
Aircraft wings
Aircraft squadrons
Carrier strike group
Installations
Naval Observatory
Master jet base




Operating
forces



Fleet Forces Command
Pacific Fleet
Naval Forces Europe
Naval Forces Central Command
Naval Forces Southern Command
Naval Special Warfare Command
Naval Reserve Forces
Operational Test and Evaluation Force
Naval Network Warfare Command
Military Sealift Command





Shore



Naval Sea Systems Command
Naval Air Systems Command
Naval Facilities Engineering Command
Naval Supply Systems Command
Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command
Fleet Cyber Command
Naval Academy
Naval Education and Training Command
Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command
Office of Naval Intelligence
Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center
Naval Legal Service Command
Naval Observatory
Navy Occupational Safety & Health
Bureau of Naval Personnel
Chief of Naval Personnel
Bureau of Medicine and Surgery
Navy Installations Command





Fleets



Third Fleet
Fourth Fleet
Fifth Fleet
Sixth Fleet
Seventh Fleet
Tenth Fleet





Ships



A–B
C
D–F
G–H
I–K
L
M
N–O
P
Q–R
S
T–V
W–Z


Aircraft carriers
Airships
Amphibious warfare ships
Auxiliaries
Battleships
Cruisers
Destroyers
Destroyer escorts
Escort carriers
Frigates
Mine warfare vessels
Monitors
Patrol vessels
Sailing frigates
Steam frigates
Steam gunboats
Ships of the line
Sloops of war
Submarines
Torpedo boats








Personnel
and
training




People




Officers



Insignia
Designators





Enlisted



Rates
Ratings
Classification








Personnel



Chaplain Corps

Chief
Deputy Chief


Explosive ordnance disposal
Medical Corps
Dental Corps
Nurse Corps
Medical Service Corps
Supply Corps
Civil Engineer Corps
JAG Corps

JAG
DJAG


NCIS
Boatswain's mates
Hospital corpsman
Naval Aviator
SEALs
Seabees
Master-at-arms
Operations specialist
SWCCs
Hispanic sailors





Training



Recruit
Naval Academy
Officer Candidate School
STA-21
NROTC
BESS
BFTT
CNATT
COMPTUEX
NAWCTSD
AIM
Naval Chaplaincy School
Naval Hospital Corps School
Naval Justice School
Naval Postgraduate School
United States Armed Forces School of Music
Navy Senior Enlisted Academy
Navy Supply Corps School
Naval War College
Nuclear Power School
JMTC
TOPGUN
USNTPS
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences








Equipment



Uniforms
Awards and decorations
Badges
Current fleet
Reserve fleet
Aircraft
Weapons
Naval reactors





History and
traditions



History
"Anchors Aweigh"
Blue Angels
Ceremonial Barge Chesapeake
Continental Navy
Ensign
Fleet bands
Fleet Week
Jack
Line-crossing ceremony
National Museum
Navy Band
Navy Flag
Navy Hymn
Navy Memorial
Navy service numbers
Navy Weeks
Revolt of the Admirals
Sailor's Creed
Ship commissioning
Ship decommissioning
Tingey House
USS Constitution
Wetting-down
United States naval gunfire support debate












v
t
e


United States Armed Forces






 Book
 Portal

A
MC
N
AF
CG


 Category

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Navbox

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Leadership



Commander-in-chief: President of the United States
Secretary of Defense
Deputy Secretary of Defense
Secretary of Homeland Security
Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security
Joint Chiefs of Staff:

Chairman
Vice Chairman


United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services:

Senate
House


Active duty four-star officers
United States military seniority
National Security Act of 1947
Goldwater–Nichols Act





Organization




Service departments



Department of Defense (Secretary): Army (Secretary)
Navy (Secretary)
Air Force (Secretary)
Department of Homeland Security (Secretary): Coast Guard





Branches



Army (Chief of Staff)
Marine Corps (Commandant)
Navy (Chief of Naval Operations)
Air Force (Chief of Staff)
Coast Guard (Commandant)





Reserve components



Reserves:

Army
Marine Corps Reserve
N
AF
CG


National Guard:

A
AF







Civilian auxiliaries



Military Auxiliary Radio System
Merchant Marine
Civil Air Patrol
Coast Guard Auxiliary





Unified Combatant Command



Northern
Central
European
Pacific
Southern
Africa
Special Operations
Strategic
Transportation








Structure



United States Code

Title 10
Title 14
Title 32
Title 50


The Pentagon
Installations
Units:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Logistics
Media
Unit mottoes





Operations and history



Current deployments
Conflicts
Wars
Timeline
History:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Colonial
World War II
Civil affairs
African Americans
Asian Americans
Buddhist Americans
Jewish Americans
Muslim Americans
Pakistani Americans
Sikh Americans
Historiography:

Army Center of Military History
MC History Division
Naval History and Heritage Command
Air Force Historical Research Agency


American official war artists:

Army Art Program
AF Art Program







Personnel




Training



MEPS
ASVAB
Recruit training:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Officer candidate school:

A
MC
N
AF


Warrant:

A
MC


Service academies:

A (prep)
N (prep)
AF (prep)
CG
Merchant Marine


ROTC

A:ECP
MC/N
AF


Medical
Other education





Uniforms



Uniforms:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Awards & decorations:

Inter-service
A
MC/N
AF
CG
Foreign
International
Devices


Badges:

Identification
A
MC
N
AF
CG







Ranks



Enlisted:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Warrant officers
Officer:

A
MC
N
AF
CG







Other



Oath:

Enlistment
Office


Creeds & Codes:

Code of Conduct
NCO
A
MC
N
AF
CG


Service numbers:

A
MC
N
AF
CG


Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code
Pay
Uniform Code of Military Justice
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Military Health System/TRICARE
Separation
Veterans Affairs
Conscription
Chiefs of Chaplains:

A
MC
N
AF
CG










Equipment



A
MC:

vehicles
weapons
other


N
AF
CG




Land



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles (active)





Sea



All watercraft
Ships:

A
N (active)
AF
CG
MSC


Weapons:

N
CG


Aircraft:

N
CG


Reactors





Air



Aircraft

World War I
active


Aircraft designation
Missiles
Helicopter arms





Other



Nuclear football
Electronics (designations)
Flags:

A
MC
N
AF
CG
Ensign
Jack
Guidons


Food
WMDs:

Nuclear
Biological
Chemical













Legend
A = Army
MC = Marine Corps
N = Navy
AF = Air Force
CG = Coast Guard












v
t
e


United States Department of Defense






Headquarters: The Pentagon


James Mattis, Secretary of Defense
Patrick M. Shanahan, Deputy Secretary of Defense










Office of the Secretary of Defense
(including Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities)







Deputy Secretary of Defense



Deputy's Advisory Working Group
Office of Net Assessment
Special Access Program Oversight Committee





Under Secretary of Defense
for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics



Director, Defense Research and Engineering
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Missile Defense Agency
Defense Contract Management Agency
Defense Logistics Agency
Defense Technical Information Center
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
Office of Economic Adjustment
Defense Acquisition University
Defense Acquisition Board





Under Secretary of Defense for Policy



Defense Security Cooperation Agency
Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency
Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee





Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)



Defense Contract Audit Agency
Defense Finance and Accounting Service





Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness



Defense Commissary Agency
Department of Defense Education Activity
DoD Human Resources Activity
Military Health System
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute





Under Secretary of Defense
for Intelligence



Defense Intelligence Agency
Defense Security Service
Defense Information Systems Agency
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency (Director)





Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs



Defense Media Activity (American Forces Press Service, American Forces Radio and Television Service, Stars and Stripes, The Pentagon Channel)





General Counsel of the Department of Defense



Defense Legal Services Agency





Director of Administration and Management



Pentagon Force Protection Agency
Washington Headquarters Services



















Military Departments







Department of the Army



Secretary of the Army
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Army
Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology
Assistant Secretary for Civil Works
Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
General Counsel of the Army
The Administrative Assistant
The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army
Vice Chief of Staff of the Army
Sergeant Major of the Army
Deputy Chief of Staff G-8
Chief of Chaplains
Judge Advocate General
Provost Marshal General
Surgeon General
U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army





Department of the Navy



Secretary of the Navy
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Navy
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Installations and Environment)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisitions)
General Counsel of the Navy
Judge Advocate General
Naval Criminal Investigative Service
Naval Inspector General
Headquarters Marine Corps: Commandant of the Marine Corps
Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps
Chaplain
U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps
Office of the Chief of Naval Operations: Chief of Naval Operations
Vice Chief of Naval Operations
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
Director of Naval Reactors
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Naval Personnel
Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy





Department of the Air Force



Secretary of the Air Force
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Air Force
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Logistics)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs)
General Counsel of the Air Force
Air Force Office of Special Investigations
The Air Staff: Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Safety
Chief Scientist
Judge Advocate General
Surgeon General
U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands
Direct Reporting Units
Field Operating Agencies
















Joint Chiefs of Staff






Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman
Joint Requirements Oversight Council
Director of the Joint Staff
Joint Staff
National Military Command Center
Alternate National Military Command Center
National Defense University













Combatant Commands






Africa Command
Central Command
European Command
Northern Command
Pacific Command
Southern Command
Special Operations Command
Strategic Command (Cyber Command)
Transportation Command













National Guard Bureau






Chief of the National Guard Bureau
Air National Guard
Army National Guard













Office of the Inspector General






Defense Criminal Investigative Service















v
t
e


NATO Maritime Forces



Maritime forces



Albanian Naval Force
Belgian Maritime Component
Bulgarian Navy
Royal Canadian Navy
Croatian Navy
Denmark

Royal Danish Navy
Danish Naval Home Guard


Estonian Navy
France

French Navy
French Maritime Gendarmerie


German Navy
Hellenic Navy
Icelandic Coast Guard
Italian Navy
Latvian Naval Forces
Lithuanian Naval Force
Montenegrin Navy
Royal Netherlands Navy
Norway

Royal Norwegian Navy
Norwegian Home Guard Naval Component


Polish Navy
Portuguese Navy
Romanian Naval Forces
Slovenian Navy
Spain

Spanish Navy
Spanish Royal Guard "Oceanic Sea" Composite Company


Turkey

Turkish Naval Forces
Turkish Coast Guard Command


Royal British Navy
United States

United States Navy
United States Coast Guard







Land forces maritime component



Hungarian Ground Forces
United States Army Transportation Corps





Air forces maritime component



United States Air Force maritime forces












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American civil rights movement 1865–1896 / 1896–1954 / 1954–1968
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 128926517
ISNI: 0000 0001 2155 5249
GND: 14543-9











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Navy&oldid=818563208"					Categories: United States NavyNavies by countryUniformed services of the United States1775 establishments in the Thirteen ColoniesMilitary units and formations established in 1775Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2013Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse American English from December 2014All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse dmy dates from February 2015Articles containing explicitly cited English-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing potentially dated statements from June 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2011Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from July 2013Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers