For other uses, see Vichy (disambiguation).


French State


État Français


Client state of Nazi Germany (1940–42)
Puppet government of Nazi Germany (1942–44)
Government-in-exile (1944-45)






1940–1944[1]










Flag



The Frankish Axe
(francisca)





Motto
"Travail, Famille, Patrie"
"Work, Family, Fatherland"


Anthem
"La Marseillaise" (official)






"Maréchal, nous voilà!" [2]
Marshal, here we are!  (unofficial)






The French State in 1942:



  French State


  French State, German military occupation zone


  French protectorates











The gradual loss of all Vichy territory to Free France and the Axis powers. Legend.



Capital
Vichy (de facto)
Parisa (de jure)


Capital-in-exile
Sigmaringen (1944–45)


Languages
French


Government
Authoritarian state


Chief of State



 • 
1940–1944
Philippe Pétain


Prime Minister



 • 
1940–1942
Philippe Pétain


 • 
1942–1944
Pierre Laval


Legislature
National Assembly


Historical era
World War II


 • 
Second Compiègne
22 June 1940


 • 
Pétain given full powers
10 July 1940


 • 
Operation Torch
8 November 1942


 • 
Case Anton
11 November 1942


 • 
German retreat
Summer 1944


 • 
Disestablished
1944[1]


 • 
Capture of the Sigmaringen enclave
22 April 1945


Currency
French franc







Preceded by
Succeeded by






French Third Republic






Provisional Government of the French Republic









a.
Paris remained the formal capital of the French State, although the Vichy government never operated from there.


b.
Although the French Republic's institutions were officially maintained, the word "Republic" never occurred in any official document of the Vichy government.





Part of a series on the



History of France







Prehistory


Palaeolithic
Mesolithic
Neolithic
Copper Age
Bronze Age
Iron Age








Ancient



Greek colonies
 


Celtic Gaul
  until 50 BC


Roman Gaul
50 BC – 486 AD









Early Middle Ages



Franks
 


Merovingians
481–751


Carolingians
751–987









Middle Ages



Direct Capetians
987–1328


Valois
1328–1498









Early modern


Ancien Régime



Valois-Orléans
1498–1515


Valois-Angoulême
1515–89


Bourbon
1589–1792









Long 19th century



French Revolution
1789–1799


Kingdom of France
1791–92


First Republic
1792–1804


First Empire
1804–14


Restoration
1814–30


July Monarchy
1830–1848


Second Republic
1848–52


Second Empire
1852–70


Third Republic
1870–1940









20th century



Third Republic
1870–1940





Free France
Vichy France



1940–44


Provisional Republic
1944–46


Fourth Republic
1946–58


Fifth Republic
1958–present







Timeline


 France portal





v
t
e





Vichy France (French: Régime de Vichy) is the common name of the French State (État français) headed by Marshal Philippe Pétain during World War II. It represented the unoccupied "Free Zone" (zone libre) in the southern part of metropolitan France and theoretically, the French colonial empire.
From 1940 to 1942, while the Vichy regime was the nominal government of France as a whole, Germany militarily occupied northern France. Thus, while Paris remained the de jure capital of France, the de facto capital of southern, "unoccupied" France was the town of Vichy, 360 km (220 mi) to the south. Following the Allied landings in French North Africa in November 1942, southern France was also militarily occupied by Germany and Italy. The Vichy government remained in existence, but as a de facto client state of Nazi Germany. The Vichy government was suspended in late 1944 when the Allies liberated all of France.
After being appointed Premier by President Albert Lebrun, Marshal Pétain ordered the French Government's military representatives to sign an armistice with Germany on 22 June 1940. Pétain subsequently established an authoritarian regime when the National Assembly of the French Third Republic granted him full powers on 10 July 1940. At that point, the Third Republic was dissolved. Calling for "National Regeneration", the French Government at Vichy reversed many liberal policies and began tight supervision of the economy, with central planning a key feature. Labour unions came under tight government control. The independence of women was reversed, with an emphasis put on motherhood. Conservative Catholics became prominent. Paris lost its avant-garde status in European art and culture. The media were tightly controlled and stressed virulent anti-Semitism, and, after June 1941, anti-Bolshevism.[3]
The French State maintained nominal sovereignty over the whole of French territory, but had effective full sovereignty only in the unoccupied southern zone libre ("free zone"). It had limited and only civil authority in the northern zones under military occupation. The occupation was to be a provisional state of affairs, pending the conclusion of the war, which at the time appeared imminent. The occupation also presented certain advantages, such as keeping the French Navy and French colonial empire under French control, and avoiding full occupation of the country by Germany, thus maintaining a degree of French independence and neutrality. The French Government at Vichy never joined the Axis alliance.
Germany kept two million French soldiers prisoner, carrying out forced labour. They were hostages to ensure that Vichy would reduce its military forces and pay a heavy tribute in gold, food, and supplies to Germany. French police were ordered to round up Jews and other "undesirables" such as communists and political refugees. Much of the French public initially supported the government, despite its undemocratic nature and its difficult position vis-à-vis the Germans, often seeing it as necessary to maintain a degree of French autonomy and territorial integrity. In November 1942, however, the zone libre was also occupied by Axis forces, leading to the disbandment of the remaining army and the French sinking of its remaining fleet and ending any semblance of independence, with Germany now closely supervising all French officials.
Most of the overseas French colonies were originally under Vichy control, but with the Allied invasion of North Africa it lost one colony after another to Charles de Gaulle's Allied-oriented Free France. Public opinion in some quarters turned against the French government and the occupying German forces over time, when it became clear that Germany was losing the war, and resistance to them increased. Following the Allied invasion of France in June 1944 and the Liberation of France later that year, the Free French Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) was installed by the Allies as France's government, led by de Gaulle. Under a "national unanimity" cabinet uniting the many factions of the French Resistance, the GPRF re-established a provisional French Republic, thus apparently restoring continuity with the Third Republic. Most of the legal French government's leaders at Vichy fled or were subject to show trials by the GPRF, and a number were quickly executed for "treason" in a series of purges (épuration légale). Thousands of collaborators were summarily executed by local communists and the Resistance in so-called "savage purges" (épuration sauvage).
The last of the French State exiles were captured in the Sigmaringen enclave by de Gaulle's French 1st Armoured Division in April 1945. Pétain, who had voluntarily made his way back to France via Switzerland, was also put on trial for treason by the new Provisional Government, and received a death sentence, but this was commuted to life imprisonment by de Gaulle. Only four senior Vichy officials were tried for crimes against humanity, although many more had participated in the deportation of Jews for extermination in Nazi concentration camps, abuses of prisoners, and severe acts against members of the Resistance.



Contents


1 Overview

1.1 Terminology
1.2 Jurisdiction
1.3 Legitimacy


2 Ideology
3 Fall of France and establishment of the Vichy government

3.1 Conditions of armistice and 10 July 1940 vote of full powers

3.1.1 Prisoners
3.1.2 Army of the Armistice
3.1.3 German custody
3.1.4 Vichy government




4 Foreign relations

4.1 French Indochina, Japan and Franco-Thai War
4.2 Colonial struggle with Free France

4.2.1 India and Oceania
4.2.2 Americas
4.2.3 Equatorial and West Africa
4.2.4 French Somaliland
4.2.5 Syria and Madagascar
4.2.6 French North Africa




5 Collaboration with Germany

5.1 Racial policies and collaboration

5.1.1 Eugenics policies
5.1.2 Statute on Jews


5.2 July 1942 Vel' d'Hiv Roundup
5.3 August 1942 and January 1943 raids
5.4 Jewish death toll
5.5 Government responsibility


6 Military
7 Collaborationnistes
8 Social and economic history

8.1 Economy

8.1.1 Forced labour
8.1.2 Food shortages


8.2 Women


9 German invasion, November 1942
10 Decline of the regime

10.1 Independence of the SOL
10.2 Sigmaringen commission
10.3 Provisional government
10.4 Purges
10.5 1980s trials


11 Historiographical debates and "Vichy Syndrome"

11.1 "Sword and shield" argument
11.2 Purification
11.3 Foreign Jews


12 Notable figures
13 Non-Vichy collaborationists
14 See also
15 Notes
16 References
17 Bibliography

17.1 English
17.2 Historiography
17.3 French
17.4 German
17.5 Films


18 External links



Overview[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Further information: World War II, Events preceding World War II in Europe, and Causes of World War II
In 1940, Marshal Pétain was known as a First World War hero, the victor of the battle of Verdun. As the last premier of the Third Republic, being a reactionary by inclination, he blamed the Third Republic's democracy for France's sudden defeat by Germany. He set up a paternalistic, authoritarian regime that actively collaborated with Germany, Vichy's official neutrality notwithstanding. The Vichy government cooperated with the Nazis' racial policies.
Terminology[edit]




France under German occupation (Nazis occupied the southern zone starting in November 1942—Operation Case Anton). The yellow zone was under Italian administration.


After the National Assembly under the Third Republic voted to give full powers to Philippe Pétain on July 10, 1940, the name République française (French Republic) disappeared from all official documents. From that point on, the regime was referred to officially as the État français (French State). Because of its unique situation in the history of France, its contested legitimacy,[1] and the generic nature of its official name, the "French State" is most often represented in English by the synonyms "Vichy France", "Vichy regime", "government of Vichy", or in context, simply "Vichy".




Personal flag of Philippe Pétain, Chief of State of Vichy France (Chef de l'État Français)


The territory under the control of the Vichy government was the unoccupied, southern portion of France south of the Line of Demarcation, as established by the Armistice of June 22, 1940, and the overseas French territories, such as French North Africa, which was "an integral part of Vichy", and where all antisemitic Vichy's laws were also implemented. This was called the Unbesetztes Gebiet (Unoccupied zone) by the Germans, and known as the Zone libre (Free Zone) in France, or less formally as the "southern zone" (zone du sud) especially after Operation Anton, the invasion of the Zone libre by German forces in November 1942. Other contemporary colloquial terms for the Zone libre were based on abbreviation and wordplay, such as the "zone nono", for the non-occupied Zone.[4]
Jurisdiction[edit]
In theory, the civil jurisdiction of the Vichy government extended over most of metropolitan France, French Algeria, the French protectorate in Morocco, the French protectorate of Tunisia, and the rest of the French colonial empire that accepted the authority of Vichy; only the disputed border territory of Alsace-Lorraine was placed under direct German administration.[5] Alsace-Lorraine was officially still part of France, as the Reich never annexed the region. The Reich government at the time was not interested in attempting to enforce piecemeal annexations in the West (although it later did annex Luxembourg) - it operated under the assumption that Germany's new western border would be determined in peace negotiations that would be attended by all of the Western Allies, thus producing a frontier that would be recognized by all of the major powers. Since Adolf Hitler's overall territorial ambitions were not limited to recovering Alsace-Lorraine, and since Britain was never brought to terms, these peace negotiations never took place.
The Nazis had some intention[citation needed] of annexing a large swath of northeastern France and replacing that region's inhabitants with German settlers, and initially forbade French refugees from returning to this region. These restrictions, which were never thoroughly enforced, were basically abandoned following the invasion of the Soviet Union, which had the effect of turning the Nazis' territorial ambitions almost exclusively to the East.[citation needed] German troops guarding the boundary line of the northeastern Zone interdite were withdrawn on the night of December 17-18, 1941 although the line remained in place on paper for the remainder of the occupation.
Nevertheless, effectively Alsace-Lorraine was annexed: German law applied to the region, its inhabitants were conscripted into the Wehrmacht[citation needed] and pointedly the customs posts separating France from Germany were placed back where they had been between 1871-1918. Similarly, a sliver of French territory in the Alps was under direct Italian administration from June 1940 to September 1943. Throughout the rest of the country, civil servants were under the formal authority of French ministers in Vichy.[citation needed] René Bousquet, the head of French police nominated by Vichy, exercised his power in Paris through his second-in-command, Jean Leguay, who coordinated raids with the Nazis. German laws, however, took precedence over French ones in the occupied territories, and the Germans often rode roughshod over the sensibilities of Vichy administrators.
On 11 November 1942, following the landing of the Allies in North Africa (Operation Torch), the Axis launched Operation Anton, occupying southern France and disbanding the strictly limited "Armistice Army" that Vichy had been allowed by the armistice.
Legitimacy[edit]
Vichy's claim to be the legitimate French government was denied by Free France and by all subsequent French governments[1] after the war. They maintain that Vichy was an illegal government run by traitors, having come to power through an unconstitutional putsch. Pétain was constitutionally appointed the Premier by President Lebrun on 16 June 1940, and he was legally within his rights to sign the armistice with Germany; however, his decision to ask the National Assembly to dissolve itself while granting him dictatorial powers has been more controversial. Historians have particularly debated the circumstances of the vote by the National Assembly of the Third Republic, granting full powers to Pétain on 10 July 1940. The main arguments advanced against Vichy's right to incarnate the continuity of the French state were based on the pressure exerted by Pierre Laval, former Premier in the Third Republic, on the deputies in Vichy, and on the absence of 27 deputies and senators who had fled on the ship Massilia, and thus could not take part in the vote. The legitimacy of the Vichy government was recognized by the United Kingdom, the United States, and other nations, which extended diplomatic recognition to Petain's government.
Ideology[edit]
The Vichy regime sought an anti-modern counter-revolution. The traditionalist right in France, with strength in the aristocracy and among Catholics, had never accepted the republican traditions of the French Revolution. It demanded a return to traditional lines of culture and religion and embraced authoritarianism, while dismissing democracy.[6] The Communist element, strongest in labour unions, turned against Vichy in June 1941, when Germany invaded the Soviet Union. Vichy was intensely anti-Communist and generally pro-German; American historian Stanley G. Payne found that it was "distinctly rightist and authoritarian but never fascist".[7] Political scientist Robert Paxton analyzed the entire range of Vichy supporters, from reactionaries to moderate liberal modernizers, and concluded that genuine fascist elements had but minor roles in most sectors.[8]
The Vichy government tried to assert its legitimacy by symbolically connecting itself with the Gallo-Roman period of France's history, and celebrated the Gaulish chieftain Vercingetorix as the "founder" of the nation.[9] It was asserted that just as the defeat of the Gauls in the 52 BC Battle of Alesia had been the moment in French history when a sense of common nationhood was born, the defeat of 1940 would again unify the nation.[9] The Vichy government's "Francisque" insignia featured two symbols from the Gallic period: the baton and the double-headed hatchet (labrys) arranged so as to resemble the fasces, symbol of the Italian Fascists.[9] To advance his message, Marshal Pétain frequently spoke on French radio. In his radio speeches, Pétain always used the personal pronoun je, portrayed himself as a Christ-like figure sacrificing himself for France while also assuming a God-like tone of a semi-omniscient narrator who knew truths about the world that the rest of the French did not.[10] To justify the Vichy ideology of the Révolution nationale ("national revolution"), Pétain needed a radical break with the Republic, and during his radio speeches the entire French Third Republic era was always painted in the blackest of colors, a time of la décadence ("decadence") when the French people were alleged to have suffered moral degeneration and decline.[11] Summarising Pétain's speeches, the British historian Christopher Flood wrote that Pétain blamed la décadence on "political and economic liberalism, with its divisive, individualistic and hedonistic values—locked in sterile rivalry with its antithetical outgrowths, Socialism and Communism...".[12] Pétain argued that rescuing the French people from la décadence required a period of authoritarian government which would restore national unity and the traditionalist morality which Pétain claimed the French had forgotten.[12] Despite his highly negative view of the Third Republic, Pétain argued that la France profonde ("deep France", denoting profoundly French aspects of French culture) still existed, and that the French people needed to return to what Pétain insisted was their true identity.[13] Alongside this claim for a moral revolution was Pétain's call for France to turn inwards, to withdraw from the world, which Pétain always portrayed as a hostile and threatening place full of endless dangers for the French.[12]
The key component of Vichy's ideology was Anglophobia.[14] In part, Vichy's virulent Anglophobia was due to its leaders' personal dislike of the British, as Marshal Pétain, Pierre Laval and Admiral François Darlan were all Anglophobes.[15] As early as February 1936, Pétain had told the Italian Ambassador to France that "England has always been France's most implacable enemy"; he went on to say that France had "two hereditary enemies", namely Germany and Britain, with the latter being easily the more dangerous of the two; and he wanted a Franco-German-Italian alliance that would partition the British Empire, an event that Pétain claimed would solve all of the economic problems caused by the Great Depression.[16] Beyond that, in order to justify both the armistice with Germany and the Révolution nationale, Vichy needed to portray the French declaration of war on Germany as a hideous mistake, and the French society under the Third Republic as degenerate and rotten.[17] The Révolution nationale together with Pétain's policy of la France seule ("France alone") were meant to "regenerate" France from la décadence that was said to have destroyed French society and brought about the defeat of 1940. Such a harsh critique of French society could only generate so much support, and as such Vichy blamed French problems on various "enemies" of France, the chief of which was Britain, the "eternal enemy" that had supposedly conspired via Masonic lodges first to weaken France and then to pressure France into declaring war on Germany in 1939.[17] No other nation was attacked as frequently and violently as Britain was in Vichy propaganda.[18] In Pétain's radio speeches, Britain was always portrayed as the "Other", a nation that was the complete antithesis of everything good in France, the blood-soaked "perfidious Albion" and the relentless "eternal enemy" of France whose ruthlessness knew no bounds.[19] The chief themes of Vichy Anglophobia were British "selfishness" in using and abandoning France after instigating wars, British "treachery" and British plans to take over French colonies.[20] The three examples that were used to illustrate these themes were the Dunkirk evacuation in May 1940, the Royal Navy attack at Mers-el-Kébir on the French Mediterranean fleet that killed over 1,300 French sailors in July 1940, and the failed Anglo-Free French attempt to seize Dakar in September 1940.[21] Typical of Vichy anti-British propaganda was the widely distributed pamphlet published in August 1940 and written by self-proclaimed "professional Anglophobe" Henri Béraud titled Faut-il réduire l'Angleterre en esclavage? ("Should England Be Reduced to Slavery?"); the question in the title was merely rhetorical.[22] Additionally, Vichy mixed Anglophobia with racism and antisemitism to portray the British as a racially degenerate "mixed race" working for Jewish capitalists, in contrast to the "racially pure" peoples on the continent of Europe who were building a "New Order".[23] In an interview conducted by Béraud with Admiral Darlan published in Gringoire newspaper in 1941, Darlan was quoted as saying that if the "New Order" failed in Europe it would mean "...here in France, the return to power of the Jews and Freemasons subservient to Anglo-Saxon policy".[24]
Fall of France and establishment of the Vichy government[edit]
France declared war on Germany on 3 September 1939, following the German invasion of Poland on 1 September. After the eight-month Phoney War, the Germans launched their offensive in the west on 10 May 1940. Within days, it became clear that French military forces were overwhelmed and that military collapse was imminent.[25] Government and military leaders, deeply shocked by the débâcle, debated how to proceed. Many officials, including Prime Minister Paul Reynaud, wanted to move the government to French territories in North Africa, and continue the war with the French Navy and colonial resources. Others, particularly the Vice-Premier Philippe Pétain and the Commander-in-Chief, General Maxime Weygand, insisted that the responsibility of the government was to remain in France and share the misfortune of its people. The latter view called for an immediate cessation of hostilities.[26]:121–126
While this debate continued, the government was forced to relocate several times, to avoid capture by advancing German forces, finally reaching Bordeaux. Communications were poor and thousands of civilian refugees clogged the roads. In these chaotic conditions, advocates of an armistice gained the upper hand. The Cabinet agreed on a proposal to seek armistice terms from Germany, with the understanding that, should Germany set forth dishonourable or excessively harsh terms, France would retain the option to continue to fight. General Charles Huntziger, who headed the French armistice delegation, was told to break off negotiations if the Germans demanded the occupation of all metropolitan France, the French fleet, or any of the French overseas territories. The Germans did not.[27]




French prisoners of war are marched off under German guard, 1940


Prime Minister Paul Reynaud favored continuing the war; however, he was soon outvoted by those who advocated an armistice. Facing an untenable situation, Reynaud resigned and, on his recommendation, President Albert Lebrun appointed the 84-year-old Pétain as his replacement on 16 June 1940. The Armistice with France (Second Compiègne) agreement was signed on 22 June 1940. A separate French agreement was reached with Italy, which had entered the war against France on 10 June, well after the outcome of the battle had been decided.




Philippe Pétain meeting Hitler in October 1940.


Adolf Hitler had a number of reasons for agreeing to an armistice. He wanted to ensure that France did not continue to fight from North Africa, and he wanted to ensure that the French Navy was taken out of the war. In addition, leaving a French government in place would relieve Germany of the considerable burden of administering French territory, particularly as Hitler turned his attentions toward Britain – which did not surrender and fought on against Germany. Finally, as Germany lacked a navy sufficient to occupy France's overseas territories, Hitler's only practical recourse to deny the British the use of those territories was to maintain France's status as a de jure independent and neutral nation while also sending a message to Britain that they were alone, with France appearing to switch sides and the United States remaining neutral. However, Nazi espionage against France after its defeat intensified greatly, particularly in southern France.[28]
Conditions of armistice and 10 July 1940 vote of full powers[edit]
Further information: Armistice with France (Second Compiègne)
The armistice divided France into occupied and unoccupied zones: northern and western France, including the entire Atlantic coast, were occupied by Germany, and the remaining two-fifths of the country were under the control of the French government with the capital at Vichy under Pétain. Ostensibly, the French government administered the entire territory.
Prisoners[edit]
Main article: French prisoners of war in World War II
Germany took two million French soldiers as prisoners of war and sent them to camps in Germany. About one-third had been released on various terms by 1944. Of the remainder, the officers and NCOs (corporals and sergeants) were kept in camps but were exempt from forced labor. The privates were first sent to "Stalag" camps for processing and were then put out to work. About half of them worked in German agriculture, where food rations were adequate and controls were lenient. The others worked in factories or mines, where conditions were much harsher.[29]
Army of the Armistice[edit]
See also: Vichy French Air Force




French colonial prisoner in German captivity, 1940.[30][not in citation given]


The Germans occupied northern France directly. The French had to pay costs for the 300,000-strong German occupation army, amounting to 20 million Reichsmarks per day, paid at the artificial rate of twenty francs to the reichsmark. This was 50 times the actual costs of the occupation garrison. The French government also had responsibility for preventing French citizens from escaping into exile.
Article IV of the Armistice allowed for a small French army—the Army of the Armistice (Armée de l'Armistice)—stationed in the unoccupied zone, and for the military provision of the French colonial empire overseas. The function of these forces was to keep internal order and to defend French territories from Allied assault. The French forces were to remain under the overall direction of the German armed forces.
The exact strength of the Vichy French Metropolitan Army was set at 3,768 officers, 15,072 non-commissioned officers, and 75,360 men. All members had to be volunteers. In addition to the army, the size of the Gendarmerie was fixed at 60,000 men plus an anti-aircraft force of 10,000 men. Despite the influx of trained soldiers from the colonial forces (reduced in size in accordance with the Armistice) there was a shortage of volunteers. As a result, 30,000 men of the class of 1939 were retained to fill the quota. At the beginning of 1942 these conscripts were released, but there were still not enough men. This shortage remained until the dissolution, despite Vichy appeals to the Germans for a regular form of conscription.
The Vichy French Metropolitan Army was deprived of tanks and other armored vehicles, and was desperately short of motorized transport, a particular problem for cavalry units. Surviving recruiting posters stress the opportunities for athletic activities, including horsemanship, reflecting both the general emphasis placed by the Vichy government on rural virtues and outdoor activities, and the realities of service in a small and technologically backward military force. Traditional features characteristic of the pre-1940 French Army, such as kepis and heavy capotes (buttoned-back greatcoats) were replaced by berets and simplified uniforms.
The Vichy authorities did not deploy the Army of the Armistice against resistance groups active in the south of France, reserving this role to the Vichy Milice (militia), a paramilitary force created on 30 January 1943 by the Vichy government to combat the Resistance;[31] so that members of the regular army could defect to the Maquis after the German occupation of southern France and the disbandment of the Army of the Armistice in November 1942. By contrast, the Milice continued to collaborate and its members were subject to reprisals after the Liberation.
Vichy French colonial forces were reduced in accordance with the terms of the Armistice; still, in the Mediterranean area alone, Vichy had nearly 150,000 men under arms. There were about 55,000 in French Morocco, 50,000 in Algeria, and almost 40,000 in the Army of the Levant (Armée du Levant), in Lebanon and Syria. Colonial forces were allowed to keep some armored vehicles, though these were mostly "vintage" World War I tanks (Renault FT).
German custody[edit]
The Armistice required France to turn over any German citizens within the country upon German demand. The French regarded this as a "dishonourable" term, since it would require France to hand over persons who had entered France seeking refuge from Germany. Attempts to negotiate the point with Germany proved unsuccessful, and the French decided not to press the issue to the point of refusing the Armistice.
Vichy government[edit]




Pierre Laval and Philippe Pétain in Frank Capra documentary film Divide and Conquer (1943)






Pierre Laval with the head of German police units in France, SS-Gruppenführer Carl Oberg


On 10 July 1940, the Parliament and the government gathered in the quiet spa town of Vichy, their provisional capital in central France. (Lyon, France's second-largest city, would have been a more logical choice but mayor Édouard Herriot was too associated with the Third Republic. Marseilles had a reputation as the dangerous "Chicago" of France. Toulouse was too remote and had a left-wing reputation. Vichy was centrally located and had many hotels for ministers to use.)[26]:142 Pierre Laval and Raphaël Alibert began their campaign to convince the assembled Senators and Deputies to vote full powers to Pétain. They used every means available, promising ministerial posts to some, while threatening and intimidating others. They were aided by the absence of popular, charismatic figures who might have opposed them, such as Georges Mandel and Édouard Daladier, then aboard the ship Massilia on their way to North Africa and exile. On 10 July the National Assembly, comprising both the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies, voted by 569 votes to 80, with 20 voluntary abstentions, to grant full and extraordinary powers to Marshal Pétain. By the same vote, they also granted him the power to write a new constitution.[32] By Act No. 2 on the following day, Pétain defined his own powers, and abrogated any Third Republic laws that were in conflict with them.[33] (These[clarification needed] would later be annulled in August 1944.[1])




1942 Vichy France safe-conduct passport used for Algeria.


Most legislators believed that democracy would continue, albeit with a new constitution. Although Pierre Laval said on 6 July that "parliamentary democracy has lost the war; it must disappear, ceding its place to an authoritarian, hierarchical, national and social regime", the majority trusted in Pétain. Léon Blum, who voted no, wrote three months later that Laval's "obvious objective was to cut all the roots that bound France to its republican and revolutionary past. His 'national revolution' was to be a counter-revolution eliminating all the progress and human rights won in the last one hundred and fifty years".[34] The minority of mostly Radicals and Socialists who opposed Laval became known as the Vichy 80. Deputies and senators who voted to grant full powers to Pétain were condemned on an individual basis after the liberation.
The majority of French historians and all post-war French governments contend that this vote by the National Assembly was illegal. Three main arguments are put forward:

Abrogation of legal procedure
The impossibility for parliament to delegate its constitutional powers without controlling its use a posteriori
The 1884 constitutional amendment making it unconstitutional to put into question the "republican form" of the government

Julian T. Jackson wrote, however, that "There seems little doubt, therefore, that at the beginning Vichy was both legal and legitimate." He stated that if legitimacy comes from popular support, Pétain's massive popularity in France until 1942 made his government legitimate; if legitimacy comes from diplomatic recognition, over 40 countries including the United States, Canada, and China recognized the Vichy government. According to Jackson, de Gaulle's Free French acknowledged the weakness of its case against Vichy's legality by citing multiple dates (16 June, 23 June, and 10 July) for the start of Vichy's illegitimate rule, implying that at least for some period of time, Vichy was not yet illegitimate.[26]:134 Countries recognized the Vichy government despite de Gaulle's attempts in London to dissuade them; only the German occupation of all of France in November 1942 ended diplomatic recognition. Partisans of Vichy point out that the grant of governmental powers was voted by the two chambers of the Third Republic (the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies), in conformity with the law.
The argument concerning the abrogation of legal procedure is based on the absence and non-voluntary abstention of 176 representatives of the people – the 27 on board the Massilia, and an additional 92 deputies and 57 senators, some of whom were in Vichy, but not present for the vote. In total, the parliament was composed of 846 members, 544 Deputies and 302 Senators. One Senator and 26 Deputies were on the Massilia. One Senator did not vote; 8 Senators and 12 Deputies voluntarily abstained; 57 Senators and 92 Deputies involuntarily abstained. Thus, out of a total of 544 Deputies, only 414 voted; and out of a total of 302 Senators, only 235 voted. Of these, 357 Deputies voted in favor of Pétain and 57 against, while 212 Senators voted for Pétain, and 23 against. Thus, Pétain was approved by 65% of all Deputies and 70% of all Senators. Although Pétain could claim legality for himself – particularly in comparison with the essentially self-appointed leadership of Charles de Gaulle – the dubious circumstances of the vote explain why a majority of French historians do not consider Vichy a complete continuity of the French state.[35]
The text voted by the Congress stated:

The National Assembly gives full powers to the government of the Republic, under the authority and the signature of Marshal Pétain, to the effect of promulgating by one or several acts a new constitution of the French state. This constitution must guarantee the rights of labor, of family and of the fatherland. It will be ratified by the nation and applied by the assemblies which it has created.[36]





1943 1 Franc coin. Front: "French State". Back: "Work Family Homeland".


The Constitutional Acts of 11 and 12 July 1940[37] granted to Pétain all powers (legislative, judicial, administrative, executive – and diplomatic) and the title of "head of the French state" (chef de l'État français), as well as the right to nominate his successor. On 12 July Pétain designated Laval as Vice-President and his designated successor, and appointed Fernand de Brinon as representative to the German High Command in Paris. Pétain remained the head of the Vichy regime until 20 August 1944. The French national motto, Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité (Freedom, Equality, Brotherhood), was replaced by Travail, Famille, Patrie (Work, Family, Fatherland); it was noted at the time that TFP also stood for the criminal punishment of "travaux forcés à perpetuité" ("forced labor in perpetuity").[38] Reynaud was arrested in September 1940 by the Vichy government and sentenced to life imprisonment in 1941 before the opening of the Riom Trial.
Pétain was reactionary by nature, his status as a hero of the Third Republic during World War I notwithstanding. Almost as soon as he was granted full powers, Pétain began blaming the Third Republic's democracy and endemic corruption for France's humiliating defeat by Germany. Accordingly, his government soon began taking on authoritarian characteristics. Democratic liberties and guarantees were immediately suspended.[34] The crime of "felony of opinion" (délit d'opinion) was re-established, effectively repealing freedom of thought and expression; critics were frequently arrested. Elective bodies were replaced by nominated ones. The "municipalities" and the departmental commissions were thus placed under the authority of the administration and of the prefects (nominated by and dependent on the executive power). In January 1941 the National Council (Conseil National), composed of notables from the countryside and the provinces, was instituted under the same conditions. Despite the clear authoritarian cast of Pétain's government, he did not formally institute a one-party state, he maintained the Tricolor and other symbols of republican France, and unlike many far rightists, he was not an anti-Dreyfusard. Pétain excluded fascists from office in his government, and by and large his cabinet comprised "February 6 men" (i.e. members of the "National Union government" formed after the Stavisky riots of 6 February 1934) or mainstream politicians whose career prospects had been blocked by the triumph of Front populaire in 1936.[39]
Foreign relations[edit]
Further information: Foreign relations of Vichy France
Vichy France was recognized by most Axis and neutral powers, including the USA and the USSR. During the war, Vichy France conducted military actions against armed incursions from Axis and Allied belligerents, an example of armed neutrality. The most important such action was the scuttling of the French fleet in Toulon on 27 November 1942, preventing its capture by the Axis. The United States granted Vichy full diplomatic recognition, sending Admiral William D. Leahy to France as American ambassador. President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Secretary of State Cordell Hull hoped to use American influence to encourage those elements in the Vichy government opposed to military collaboration with Germany. The Americans also hoped to encourage Vichy to resist German war demands, such as for air bases in French-mandated Syria or to move war supplies through French territories in North Africa. The essential American position was that France should take no action not explicitly required by the Armistice terms that could adversely affect Allied efforts in the war.
The US position towards Vichy France and de Gaulle was especially hesitant and inconsistent. President Roosevelt disliked Charles de Gaulle, whom he regarded as an "apprentice dictator".[40] Robert Murphy, Roosevelt's representative in North Africa, started preparing for a landing in North Africa in December 1940 (a year before the US entered the war). The US first tried to support General Maxime Weygand, general delegate of Vichy for Africa until December 1941. This first choice having failed, they turned to Henri Giraud shortly before the landing in North Africa on 8 November 1942. Finally, after François Darlan's turn towards the Free Forces — Darlan had been president of the Council of Vichy from February 1941 to April 1942 — they played him against de Gaulle.[40]
US General Mark W. Clark of the combined Allied command made Admiral Darlan sign on 22 November 1942 a treaty putting "North Africa at the disposition of the Americans" and making France "a vassal country".[40] Washington then imagined, between 1941 and 1942, a protectorate status for France, which would be submitted after the Liberation to an Allied Military Government of Occupied Territories (AMGOT) like Germany. After the assassination of Darlan on 24 December 1942, Washington turned again towards Henri Giraud, to whom had rallied Maurice Couve de Murville, who had financial responsibilities in Vichy, and Lemaigre-Dubreuil, a former member of La Cagoule and entrepreneur, as well as Alfred Pose, general director of the Banque nationale pour le commerce et l'industrie (National Bank for Trade and Industry).[40]
The Soviet Union maintained full diplomatic relations with the Vichy government until 30 June 1941. These were broken after Vichy expressed support for Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union. Due to British requests and the sensitivities of its French Canadian population, Canada maintained full diplomatic relations with the Vichy regime until the beginning of November 1942 and Case Anton – the complete occupation of Vichy France by the Nazis.[41]




Memorial to the 1,297 French seamen who died during the British bombardment of their ships at Mers El Kebir.


Britain feared that the French naval fleet could end up in German hands and be used against its own naval forces, which were so vital to maintaining North Atlantic shipping and communications. Under the armistice, France had been allowed to retain the French Navy, the Marine Nationale, under strict conditions. Vichy pledged that the fleet would never fall into the hands of Germany, but refused to send the fleet beyond Germany's reach by sending it to Britain or to faraway territories of the French empire such as the West Indies. This did not satisfy Winston Churchill, who ordered French ships in British ports to be seized by the Royal Navy. Shortly after the Armistice (22 June 1940), Britain conducted the destruction of the French Fleet at Mers-el-Kebir, killing 1,297 French military personnel, and Vichy severed diplomatic relations with Britain. The French squadron at Alexandria, under Admiral René-Emile Godfroy, was effectively interned until 1943 after an agreement was reached with Admiral Andrew Browne Cunningham, commander of the British Mediterranean Fleet.[42] After the Mers el Kebir incident, the United Kingdom recognized Free France as the legitimate government of France.
Switzerland and other neutral states maintained diplomatic relations with the Vichy regime until the liberation of France in 1944 when Philippe Pétain resigned and was deported to Germany for the creation of a forced government-in-exile.[43]
French Indochina, Japan and Franco-Thai War[edit]
Main articles: Invasion of French Indochina, French-Thai War, Japanese coup de main in French Indochina, and French Indochina in World War II




Japanese troops entering Saigon in 1941.


In June 1940 the Fall of France made the French hold on Indochina tenuous. The isolated colonial administration was cut off from outside help and outside supplies. After negotiations with Japan, the French allowed the Japanese to set up military bases in Indochina.[44] This seemingly subservient behavior convinced Major-General Plaek Pibulsonggram, the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand, that Vichy France would not seriously resist a campaign by the Thai military to recover parts of Cambodia and Laos that had been taken from Thailand by France in the early 20th century. In October 1940, the military forces of Thailand attacked across the border with Indochina and launched the Franco-Thai War. Although the French won an important naval victory over the Thais, Japan forced the French to accept Japanese mediation of a peace treaty that returned the disputed territory to Thai control. The French were left in place to administer the rump colony of Indochina until 9 March 1945, when the Japanese staged a coup d'état in French Indochina and took control, establishing their own colony, the Empire of Vietnam, as a double puppet state.
Colonial struggle with Free France[edit]
Main article: Free France
To counter the Vichy government, General Charles de Gaulle created the Free French Forces (FFL) after his Appeal of 18 June 1940 wireless speech. Initially, Winston Churchill was ambivalent about de Gaulle, and Churchill severed diplomatic ties with Vichy only when it became clear that the Vichy government would not join the Allies.[citation needed]
India and Oceania[edit]
Until 1962, France possessed four small, non-contiguous but politically united colonies across India, the largest being Pondicherry in Southeast India. Immediately after the fall of France, the Governor General of French India, Louis Alexis Étienne Bonvin, declared that the French colonies in India would continue to fight with the British allies. Free French forces from that area (and others) participated in the Western Desert campaign, although news of the death of French-Indian soldiers caused some disturbances in Pondicherry.[citation needed] The French possessions in Oceania joined the Free French side in 1940, or in one case in 1942. They then served as bases for the Allied effort in the Pacific and contributed troops to the Free French Forces.[45]
Following the Appeal of 18 June, debate arose among the population of French Polynesia. A referendum was organized on 2 September 1940 in Tahiti and Moorea, with outlying islands reporting agreement in the following days. The vote was 5564 to 18 in favor of joining the Free French side.[46] Following the attack on Pearl Harbor, American forces identified French Polynesia as an ideal refuelling point between Hawaii and Australia and, with de Gaulle's agreement, organized "Operation Bobcat" sending nine ships with 5000 American soldiers to build a naval refuelling base and airstrip and set up coastal defense guns on Bora Bora.[47] This first experience was valuable in later Seabee (phonetic pronunciation of the naval acronym, CB, or Construction Battalion) efforts in the Pacific, and the Bora Bora base supplied the Allied ships and planes that fought the battle of the Coral Sea. Troops from French Polynesia and New Caledonia formed a Bataillon du Pacifique in 1940; became part of the 1st Free French Division in 1942, distinguishing themselves during the Battle of Bir Hakeim and subsequently combining with another unit to form the Bataillon d'infanterie de marine et du Pacifique; fought in the Italian Campaign, distinguishing themselves at the Garigliano during the Battle of Monte Cassino and on to Tuscany; and participated in the Provence landings and onwards to the liberation of France.[48][49]
In New Caledonia, Henri Sautot promptly declared allegiance to the Free French, effective 19 September 1940.[45] Due to its location on the edge of the Coral Sea and on the flank of Australia, New Caledonia became strategically critical in the effort to combat the Japanese advance in the Pacific in 1941–1942 and to protect the sea lanes between North America and Australia. Nouméa served as a headquarters of the United States Navy and Army in the South Pacific,[50] and as a repair base for Allied vessels. New Caledonia contributed personnel both to the Bataillon du Pacifique and to the Free French Naval Forces that saw action in the Pacific and Indian Ocean.
In the New Hebrides (now Vanuatu), then a French-British condominium, Resident Commissioner Henri Sautot quickly led the French community to join the Free French side. The outcome was decided by a combination of patriotism and economic opportunism in the expectation that independence would result.[51][52]
In Wallis and Futuna the local administrator and bishop sided with Vichy, but faced opposition from some of the population and clergy; their attempts at naming a local king in 1941 (to buffer the territory from their opponents) backfired as the newly elected king refused to declare allegiance to Pétain. The situation stagnated for a long while, due to the remoteness of the islands and because no overseas ship visited the islands for 17 months after January 1941. An aviso sent from Nouméa took over Wallis on behalf of the Free French on 27 May 1942, and Futuna on 29 May 1942. This allowed American forces to build an airbase and seaplane base on Wallis (Navy 207) that served the Allied Pacific operations.[53]
Americas[edit]
Main articles: History of Martinique § World War II, and History of French Guiana § 20th century




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (May 2016)



The Free French seized control of Saint Pierre and Miquelon on 25 December 1941. Guadeloupe and Martinique in the French West Indies, as well as French Guiana on the northern coast of South America, did not join the Free French until 1943–1944.[citation needed]
Equatorial and West Africa[edit]
In Central Africa, three of the four colonies in French Equatorial Africa went over to the Free French almost immediately: French Chad on 26 August 1940, French Congo on 29 August 1940, and Ubangi-Shari on 30 August 1940. They were joined by the French mandate of Cameroun on 27 August 1940. One colony in French Equatorial Africa, Gabon, had to be occupied by military force between 27 October and 12 November 1940.[54]
On 23 September 1940, the Royal Navy and Free French forces under Charles de Gaulle launched Operation Menace, an attempt to seize the strategic, Vichy-held port of Dakar in French West Africa (modern Senegal). After attempts to encourage them to join the Allies were rebuffed by the defenders, a sharp fight erupted between Vichy and Allied forces. HMS Resolution was heavily damaged by torpedoes, and Free French troops landing at a beach south of the port were driven off by heavy fire. Even worse from a strategic point of view, bombers of the Vichy French Air Force based in North Africa began bombing the British base at Gibraltar in response to the attack on Dakar. Shaken by the resolute Vichy defense, and not wanting to further escalate the conflict, British and Free French forces withdrew on 25 September, bringing the battle to an end.
On 8 November 1940, Free French forces under the command of de Gaulle and Pierre Koenig, along with the assistance of the Royal Navy, invaded Vichy-held Gabon. Gabon, which was the only territory of French Equatorial Africa that was unwilling to join the Free French Forces, fell into allied hands on 12 November 1940, after the capital Libreville was bombed and captured. The final Vichy troops in Gabon surrendered without any military confrontation with the allies at Port-Gentil. The capture of Gabon by the Allies was crucial to ensure that the entire French Equatorial Africa was out of Axis reach.[citation needed]
French Somaliland[edit]
Main article: French Somaliland in World War II




Map of French Somaliland, 1922



The governor of French Somaliland (now Djibouti), Brigadier-General Paul Legentilhomme had a garrison of seven battalions of Senegalese and Somali infantry, three batteries of field guns, four batteries of anti-aircraft guns, a company of light tanks, four companies of militia and irregulars, two platoons of the camel corps and an assortment of aircraft. After visiting from 8–13 January 1940, Wavell decided that Legentilhomme would command the military forces in both Somalilands should war with Italy come.[55] In June, an Italian force was assembled to capture the port city of Djibouti, the main military base.[56] After the fall of France in June, the neutralisation of Vichy French colonies allowed the Italians to concentrate on the more lightly defended British Somaliland.[57] On 23 July, Legentilhomme was ousted by the pro-Vichy naval officer Pierre Nouailhetas and left on 5 August for Aden, to join the Free French. In March 1941, the British enforcement of a strict contraband regime to prevent supplies being passed on to the Italians, lost its point after the conquest of the AOI. The British changed policy, with encouragement from the Free French, to "rally French Somaliland to the Allied cause without bloodshed". The Free French were to arrange a voluntary ralliement by propaganda (Operation Marie) and the British were to blockade the colony.[58]
Wavell considered that if British pressure was applied, a rally would appear to have been coerced. Wavell preferred to let the propaganda continue and provided a small amount of supplies under strict control. When the policy had no effect, Wavell suggested negotiations with the Vichy governor Louis Nouailhetas, to use the port and railway. The suggestion was accepted by the British government but because of the concessions granted to the Vichy regime in Syria, proposals were made to invade the colony instead. In June, Nouailhetas was given an ultimatum, the blockade was tightened and the Italian garrison at Assab was defeated by an operation from Aden. For six months, Nouailhetas remained willing to grant concessions over the port and railway but would not tolerate Free French interference. In October the blockade was reviewed but the beginning of the war with Japan in December, led to all but two blockade ships being withdrawn. On 2 January 1942, the Vichy government offered the use of the port and railway, subject to the lifting of the blockade but the British refused and ended the blockade unilaterally in March.[59]
Syria and Madagascar[edit]
The next flashpoint between Britain and Vichy France came when a revolt in Iraq was put down by British forces in June 1941. German Air Force (Luftwaffe) and Italian Air Force (Regia Aeronautica) aircraft, staging through the French possession of Syria, intervened in the fighting in small numbers. That highlighted Syria as a threat to British interests in the Middle East. Consequently, on 8 June, British and Commonwealth forces invaded Syria and Lebanon. This was known as the Syria-Lebanon campaign or Operation Exporter. The Syrian capital, Damascus, was captured on 17 June and the five-week campaign ended with the fall of Beirut and the Convention of Acre (Armistice of Saint Jean d'Acre) on 14 July 1941.
The additional participation of Free French forces in the Syrian operation was controversial within Allied circles. It raised the prospect of Frenchmen shooting at Frenchmen, raising fears of a civil war. Additionally, it was believed that the Free French were widely reviled within Vichy military circles, and that Vichy forces in Syria were less likely to resist the British if they were not accompanied by elements of the Free French. Nevertheless, de Gaulle convinced Churchill to allow his forces to participate, although de Gaulle was forced to agree to a joint British and Free French proclamation promising that Syria and Lebanon would become fully independent at the end of the war.
From 5 May to 6 November 1942 British and Commonwealth forces conducted Operation Ironclad, known as the Battle of Madagascar: the seizure of the large, Vichy French-controlled island of Madagascar, which the British feared Japanese forces might use as a base to disrupt trade and communications in the Indian Ocean. The initial landing at Diégo-Suarez was relatively quick, though it took British forces a further six months to gain control of the entire island.[citation needed]
French North Africa[edit]
Main articles: Operation Torch and French Committee of National Liberation
Operation Torch was the American and British invasion of French North Africa, Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia, started on 8 November 1942, with landings in Morocco and Algeria. The long-term goal was to clear German and Italian forces from North Africa, enhance naval control of the Mediterranean, and prepare for an invasion of Italy in 1943. The Vichy forces initially resisted, killing 479 Allied forces and wounding 720. Vichy Admiral Darlan initiated cooperation with the Allies. The Allies recognized Darlan's self-nomination as High Commissioner of France (head of civil government) for North and West Africa. He ordered Vichy forces there to cease resisting and cooperate with the Allies, and they did so. By the time the Tunisia Campaign was fought, the French forces in North Africa had gone over to the Allied side, joining the Free French Forces.[60][61]




Henri Giraud and de Gaulle during the Casablanca Conference in January 1943.


In North Africa, after the 8 November 1942 putsch by the French resistance, most Vichy figures were arrested, including General Alphonse Juin, chief commander in North Africa, and Admiral François Darlan. However, Darlan was released, and U.S. General Dwight D. Eisenhower finally accepted his self-nomination as High Commissioner of North Africa and French West Africa (Afrique occidentale française, AOF), a move that enraged de Gaulle, who refused to recognize Darlan's status. After Darlan signed an armistice with the Allies and took power in North Africa, Germany violated the 1940 armistice with France and invaded Vichy France on 10 November 1942 (operation code-named Case Anton), triggering the scuttling of the French fleet in Toulon.
Henri Giraud arrived in Algiers on 10 November 1942, and agreed to subordinate himself to Admiral Darlan as the French Africa army commander. Even though Darlan was now in the Allied camp, he maintained the repressive Vichy system in North Africa, including concentration camps in southern Algeria and racist laws. Detainees were also forced to work on the Transsaharien railroad. Jewish goods were "aryanized" (i.e. stolen), and a special Jewish Affairs service was created, directed by Pierre Gazagne. Numerous Jewish children were prohibited from going to school, something which not even Vichy had implemented in metropolitan France.[62] Admiral Darlan was assassinated on 24 December 1942 in Algiers by the young monarchist Bonnier de La Chapelle. Although de La Chapelle had been a member of the resistance group led by Henri d'Astier de La Vigerie, it is believed he was acting as an individual.
After Admiral Darlan's assassination, Henri Giraud became his de facto successor in French Africa with Allied support. This occurred through a series of consultations between Giraud and de Gaulle. De Gaulle wanted to pursue a political position in France and agreed to have Giraud as commander-in-chief, as the more qualified military person of the two. Later, the Americans sent Jean Monnet to counsel Giraud and to press him to repeal the Vichy laws. After difficult negotiations, Giraud agreed to suppress the racist laws, and to liberate Vichy prisoners from the South Algerian concentration camps. The Cremieux decree, which granted French citizenship to Jews in Algeria and which had been repealed by Vichy, was immediately restored by General de Gaulle.
Giraud took part in the Casablanca conference, with Roosevelt, Churchill, and de Gaulle, in January 1943. The Allies discussed their general strategy for the war, and recognized joint leadership of North Africa by Giraud and de Gaulle. Henri Giraud and Charles de Gaulle then became co-presidents of the Comité français de la Libération Nationale, which unified the Free French Forces and territories controlled by them and had been founded at the end of 1943. Democratic rule was restored in French Algeria, and the Communists and Jews liberated from the concentration camps.[62]
At the end of April 1945 Pierre Gazagne, secretary of the general government headed by Yves Chataigneau, took advantage of his absence to exile anti-imperialist leader Messali Hadj and arrest the leaders of his party, the Algerian People's Party (PPA).[62] On the day of the Liberation of France, the GPRF would harshly repress a rebellion in Algeria during the Sétif massacre of 8 May 1945, which has been qualified by some historians as the "real beginning of the Algerian War".[62]
Collaboration with Germany[edit]




23 January 1943: German-Vichy French meeting in Marseilles. SS-Sturmbannführer Bernhard Griese, Marcel Lemoine (regional préfet), Rolf Mühler (de) (Commander of Marseilles Sicherheitspolizei); laughing: René Bousquet (General Secretary of the French National Police created in 1941), creator of the GMRs; behind: Louis Darquier de Pellepoix (Commissioner for Jewish Affairs).


Historians distinguish between state collaboration followed by the Vichy regime, and "collaborationists", who were private French citizens eager to collaborate with Germany and who pushed towards a radicalization of the regime. Pétainistes, on the other hand, were direct supporters of Marshal Pétain rather than of Germany (although they accepted Pétain's state collaboration). State collaboration was sealed by the Montoire (Loir-et-Cher) interview in Hitler's train on 24 October 1940, during which Pétain and Hitler shook hands and agreed on cooperation between the two states. Organized by Pierre Laval, a strong proponent of collaboration, the interview and the handshake were photographed and exploited by Nazi propaganda to gain the support of the civilian population. On 30 October 1940, Pétain made state collaboration official, declaring on the radio: "I enter today on the path of collaboration."[a] On 22 June 1942, Laval declared that he was "hoping for the victory of Germany". The sincere desire to collaborate did not stop the Vichy government from organising the arrest and even sometimes the execution of German spies entering the Vichy zone.[63]
The composition and policies of the Vichy cabinet were mixed. Many Vichy officials, such as Pétain, were reactionaries who felt that France's unfortunate fate was a result of its republican character and the actions of its left-wing governments of the 1930s, in particular of the Popular Front (1936–1938) led by Léon Blum. Charles Maurras, a monarchist writer and founder of the Action Française movement, judged that Pétain's accession to power was, in that respect, a "divine surprise", and many people of his persuasion believed it preferable to have an authoritarian government similar to that of Francisco Franco's Spain, even if under Germany's yoke, than to have a republican government. Others, like Joseph Darnand, were strong anti-Semites and overt Nazi sympathizers. A number of these joined the units of the Légion des Volontaires Français contre le Bolchévisme (Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism) fighting on the Eastern Front, later becoming the SS Charlemagne Division.[64]
On the other hand, technocrats such as Jean Bichelonne and engineers from the Groupe X-Crise used their position to push various state, administrative, and economic reforms. These reforms have been cited as evidence of a continuity of the French administration before and after the war. Many of these civil servants and the reforms they advocated were retained after the war. Just as the necessities of a war economy during the First World War had pushed forward state measures to reorganize the economy of France against the prevailing classical liberal theories – structures retained after the 1919 Treaty of Versailles – reforms adopted during World War II were kept and extended. Along with the 15 March 1944 Charter of the Conseil National de la Résistance (CNR), which gathered all Resistance movements under one unified political body, these reforms were a primary instrument in the establishment of post-war dirigisme, a kind of semi-planned economy which led to France becoming the modern social democracy it is now. An example of such continuities is the creation of the French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems by Alexis Carrel, a renowned physician who also supported eugenics. This institution was renamed as the National Institute of Demographic Studies (INED) after the war, and exists to this day. Another example is the creation of the national statistics institute, renamed INSEE after the Liberation. The reorganization and unification of the French police by René Bousquet, who created the groupes mobiles de réserve (GMR, Reserve Mobile Groups), is another example of Vichy policy reform and restructuring maintained by subsequent governments. A national paramilitary police force, the GMR was occasionally used in actions against the French Resistance, but its main purpose was to enforce Vichy authority through intimidation and repression of the civilian population. After Liberation, some of its units were merged with the Free French Army to form the Compagnies Républicaines de Sécurité (CRS, Republican Security Companies), France's main anti-riot force.

Racial policies and collaboration[edit]
Further information: Révolution nationale




French Police registering new inmates at the Pithiviers camp.






French Milice guarding detainees.


Germany interfered little in internal French affairs for the first two years after the armistice, as long as public order was maintained.[26]:139 As soon as it was established, Pétain's government voluntarily took measures against "undesirables": Jews, métèques (immigrants from Mediterranean countries), Freemasons, Communists, Gypsies (also known as Romani), homosexuals,[65] and left-wing activists. Inspired by Charles Maurras's conception of the "Anti-France" (which he defined as the "four confederate states of Protestants, Jews, Freemasons, and foreigners"), Vichy persecuted these supposed enemies.
In July 1940, Vichy set up a special commission charged with reviewing naturalizations granted since the 1927 reform of the nationality law. Between June 1940 and August 1944, 15,000 persons, mostly Jews, were denaturalized.[66] This bureaucratic decision was instrumental in their subsequent internment.
The internment camps already opened by the Third Republic were immediately put to new use, ultimately becoming transit camps for the implementation of the Holocaust and the extermination of all undesirables, including the Romani people (who refer to the extermination of the Romani as Porrajmos). A Vichy law of 4 October 1940 authorized internments of foreign Jews on the sole basis of a prefectoral order,[67] and the first raids took place in May 1941. Vichy imposed no restrictions on black people in the Unoccupied Zone; the regime even had a mulatto cabinet minister, the Martinique-born lawyer Henry Lémery.[68]
The Third Republic had first opened concentration camps during World War I for the internment of enemy aliens, and later used them for other purposes. Camp Gurs, for example, had been set up in southwestern France after the fall of Catalonia, in the first months of 1939, during the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), to receive the Republican refugees, including Brigadists from all nations, fleeing the Francoists. After Édouard Daladier's government (April 1938 – March 1940) took the decision to outlaw the French Communist Party (PCF) following the signing of the German-Soviet non-aggression pact (the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact) in August 1939, these camps were also used to intern French communists. Drancy internment camp was founded in 1939 for this use; it later became the central transit camp through which all deportees passed on their way to concentration and extermination camps in the Third Reich and Eastern Europe. When the Phoney War started with France's declaration of war against Germany on 3 September 1939, these camps were used to intern enemy aliens. These included German Jews and anti-fascists, but any German citizen (or other Axis national) could also be interned in Camp Gurs and others. As the Wehrmacht advanced into Northern France, common prisoners evacuated from prisons were also interned in these camps. Camp Gurs received its first contingent of political prisoners in June 1940. It included left-wing activists (communists, anarchists, trade-unionists, anti-militarists) and pacifists, but also French fascists who supported Italy and Germany. Finally, after Pétain's proclamation of the "French State" and the beginning of the implementation of the "Révolution nationale" (National Revolution), the French administration opened up many concentration camps, to the point that, as historian Maurice Rajsfus writes: "The quick opening of new camps created employment, and the Gendarmerie never ceased to hire during this period."[69]
Besides the political prisoners already detained there, Gurs was then used to intern foreign Jews, stateless persons, Romani, homosexuals, and prostitutes. Vichy opened its first internment camp in the northern zone on 5 October 1940, in Aincourt, in the Seine-et-Oise department, which it quickly filled with PCF members.[70] The Royal Saltworks at Arc-et-Senans, in the Doubs, was used to intern Romani.[71] The Camp des Milles, near Aix-en-Provence, was the largest internment camp in the Southeast of France; twenty-five hundred Jews were deported from there following the August 1942 raids.[72] Exiled Republican, antifascist Spaniards who had sought refuge in France after the Nationalist victory in the Spanish Civil War were then deported, and 5,000 of them died in Mauthausen concentration camp.[73] In contrast, French colonial soldiers were interned by the Germans in French territory instead of being deported.[73]
Besides the concentration camps opened by Vichy, the Germans also opened some Ilags (Internierungslager) for the detention of enemy aliens on French territory; in Alsace, which was under the direct administration of the Reich, they opened the Natzweiler camp, the only concentration camp created by the Nazis on French territory. Natzweiler included a gas chamber, which was used to exterminate at least 86 detainees (mostly Jewish) with the aim of obtaining a collection of undamaged skeletons for the use of Nazi professor August Hirt.
The Vichy government enacted a number of racial laws. In August 1940, laws against antisemitism in the media (the Marchandeau Act) were repealed, while the decree n°1775 of September 5, 1943, denaturalized a number of French citizens, in particular Jews from Eastern Europe.[73] Foreigners were rounded-up in "Foreign Workers' Groups" (groupements de travailleurs étrangers) and, as with the colonial troops, used by the Germans as manpower.[73] The Statute on Jews excluded them from the civil administration.
Vichy also enacted racial laws in its territories in North Africa. "The history of the Holocaust in France's three North African colonies (Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia) is intrinsically tied to France's fate during this period."[74][75][76][77][78]
With regard to economic contribution to the German economy it is estimated that France provided 42% of the total foreign aid.[79]
Eugenics policies[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In 1941, Nobel Prize winner Alexis Carrel, an early proponent of eugenics and euthanasia, and a member of Jacques Doriot's French Popular Party (PPF),[citation needed] advocated for the creation of the Fondation Française pour l'Étude des Problèmes Humains (French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems), using connections to the Pétain cabinet. Charged with the "study, in all of its aspects, of measures aimed at safeguarding, improving and developing the French population in all of its activities", the Foundation was created by decree of the collaborationist Vichy regime in 1941, and Carrel appointed as 'regent'.[80] The Foundation also had for some time as general secretary François Perroux.[citation needed]
The Foundation was behind the 16 December 1942 Act mandating the "prenuptial certificate", which required all couples seeking marriage to submit to a biological examination, to ensure the "good health" of the spouses, in particular with regard to sexually transmitted diseases (STD) and "life hygiene".[citation needed] Carrel's institute also conceived the "scholar booklet" ("livret scolaire"), which could be used to record students' grades in French secondary schools, and thus classify and select them according to scholastic performance.[citation needed] Besides these eugenic activities aimed at classifying the population and improving its health, the Foundation also supported an 11 October 1946 law instituting occupational medicine, enacted by the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) after the Liberation.[citation needed]
The Foundation initiated studies on demographics (Robert Gessain, Paul Vincent, Jean Bourgeois), nutrition (Jean Sutter), and housing (Jean Merlet), as well as the first polls (Jean Stoetzel). The foundation, which after the war became the INED demographics institute, employed 300 researchers from the summer of 1942 to the end of the autumn[when?] of 1944.[81] "The foundation was chartered as a public institution under the joint supervision of the ministries of finance and public health. It was given financial autonomy and a budget of forty million francs, roughly one franc per inhabitant: a true luxury considering the burdens imposed by the German Occupation on the nation's resources. By way of comparison, the whole Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) was given a budget of fifty million francs."[80]
Alexis Carrel had previously published in 1935 the best-selling book L'Homme, cet inconnu ("Man, This Unknown"). Since the early 1930s, Carrel had advocated the use of gas chambers to rid humanity of its "inferior stock"[citation needed], endorsing the scientific racism discourse[citation needed]. One of the founders of these pseudoscientifical theories had been Arthur de Gobineau in his 1853–1855 essay titled An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races.[citation needed] In the 1936 preface to the German edition of his book, Alexis Carrel had added a praise to the eugenics policies of the Third Reich, writing that:

(t)he German government has taken energetic measures against the propagation of the defective, the mentally diseased, and the criminal. The ideal solution would be the suppression of each of these individuals as soon as he has proven himself to be dangerous.[82]

Carrel also wrote in his book that:

(t)he conditioning of petty criminals with the whip, or some more scientific procedure, followed by a short stay in hospital, would probably suffice to ensure order. Those who have murdered, robbed while armed with automatic pistol or machine gun, kidnapped children, despoiled the poor of their savings, misled the public in important matters, should be humanely and economically disposed of in small euthanasic institutions supplied with proper gasses. A similar treatment could be advantageously applied to the insane, guilty of criminal acts.[83]

Alexis Carrel had also taken an active part to a symposium in Pontigny organized by Jean Coutrot, the "Entretiens de Pontigny".[citation needed] Scholars such as Lucien Bonnafé, Patrick Tort and Max Lafont have accused Carrel of responsibility for the execution of thousands of mentally ill or impaired patients under Vichy.[citation needed]
Statute on Jews[edit]




Poster above the entrance of an anti-semitic exposition called "The Jew and France".


A Nazi ordinance dated 21 September 1940, forced Jews of the "occupied zone" to declare themselves as such at a police station or sub-prefectures (sous-préfectures). Under the responsibility of André Tulard, head of the Service on Foreign Persons and Jewish Questions at the Prefecture of Police of Paris, a filing system registering Jewish people was created. Tulard had previously created such a filing system under the Third Republic, registering members of the Communist Party (PCF). In the department of the Seine, encompassing Paris and its immediate suburbs, nearly 150,000 persons, unaware of the upcoming danger and assisted by the police, presented themselves at police stations in accordance with the military order. The registered information was then centralized by the French police, who constructed, under the direction of inspector Tulard, a central filing system. According to the Dannecker report, "this filing system is subdivided into files alphabetically classed, Jewish with French nationality and foreign Jewish having files of different colours, and the files were also classed, according to profession, nationality and street [of residency]".[84] These files were then handed over to Theodor Dannecker, head of the Gestapo in France, under the orders of Adolf Eichmann, head of the RSHA IV-D. They were used by the Gestapo on various raids, among them the August 1941 raid in the 11th arrondissement of Paris, which resulted in 3,200 foreign and 1,000 French Jews being interned in various camps, including Drancy.
On 3 October 1940, the Vichy government voluntarily promulgated the first Statute on Jews, which created a special underclass of French Jewish citizens, and enforced, for the first time in France, racial segregation.[85] The October 1940 Statute excluded Jews from the administration, the armed forces, entertainment, arts, media, and certain professions, such as teaching, law, and medicine. A Commissariat-General for Jewish Affairs (CGQJ, Commissariat Général aux Questions Juives) was created on 29 March 1941. It was directed by Xavier Vallat until May 1942, and then by Darquier de Pellepoix until February 1944. Mirroring the Reich Association of Jews, the Union Générale des Israélites de France was founded.
The police oversaw the confiscation of telephones and radios from Jewish homes and enforced a curfew on Jews starting in February 1942. They also enforced requirements that Jews not appear in public places, and ride only on the last car of the Parisian metro.
Along with many French police officials, André Tulard was present on the day of the inauguration of Drancy internment camp in 1941, which was used largely by French police as the central transit camp for detainees captured in France. All Jews and others "undesirables" passed through Drancy before heading to Auschwitz and other camps.
July 1942 Vel' d'Hiv Roundup[edit]
Main article: Vel' d'Hiv Roundup




Two Jewish women in occupied Paris wearing Yellow badges before the mass arrests


In July 1942, under German orders, the French police organized the Vel' d'Hiv Roundup (Rafle du Vel' d'Hiv) under orders by René Bousquet and his second in Paris, Jean Leguay with cooperation from authorities of the SNCF, the state railway company. The police arrested 13,152 Jews, including 4,051 children—which the Gestapo had not asked for—and 5,082 women on 16 and 17 July, and imprisoned them in the Winter Velodrome in unhygienic conditions. They were led to Drancy internment camp (run by Nazi Alois Brunner and French constabulary police), then crammed into box cars and shipped by rail to Auschwitz. Most of the victims died en route due to lack of food or water. The remaining survivors were sent to the gas chambers. This action alone represented more than a quarter of the 42,000 French Jews sent to concentration camps in 1942, of which only 811 would return after the end of the war. Although the Nazi VT (Verfügungstruppe) had directed the action, French police authorities vigorously participated. "There was no effective police resistance until the end of Spring of 1944", wrote historians Jean-Luc Einaudi and Maurice Rajsfus.[86]
August 1942 and January 1943 raids[edit]
Further information: Round up of Marseille
The French police, headed by Bousquet, arrested 7,000 Jews in the southern zone in August 1942. 2,500 of them transited through the Camp des Milles near Aix-en-Provence before joining Drancy. Then, on 22, 23 and 24 January 1943, assisted by Bousquet's police force, the Germans organized a raid in Marseilles. During the Battle of Marseilles, the French police checked the identity documents of 40,000 people, and the operation succeeded in sending 2,000 Marseillese people in the death trains, leading to the extermination camps. The operation also encompassed the expulsion of an entire neighborhood (30,000 persons) in the Old Port before its destruction. For this occasion, SS-Gruppenführer Karl Oberg, in charge of the German Police in France, made the trip from Paris, and transmitted to Bousquet orders directly received from Heinrich Himmler. It is another notable case of the French police's willful collaboration with the Nazis.[87]
Jewish death toll[edit]
In 1940 approximately 350,000 Jews lived in metropolitan France, less than half of them with French citizenship (the others being foreign, mostly exiles from Germany during the 1930s).[88] About 200,000 of them, and the large majority of foreign Jews, resided in Paris and its outskirts. Among the 150,000 French Jews, about 30,000, generally native from Central Europe, had been naturalized French during the 1930s. Of the total, approximately 25,000 French Jews and 50,000 foreign Jews were deported.[89] According to historian Robert Paxton, 76,000 Jews were deported and died in concentration and extermination camps. Including the Jews who died in concentration camps in France, this would have made for a total figure of 90,000 Jewish deaths (a quarter of the total Jewish population before the war, by his estimate).[90] Paxton's numbers imply that 14,000 Jews died in French concentration camps. However, the systematic census of Jewish deportees from France (citizens or not) drawn under Serge Klarsfeld concluded that 3,000 had died in French concentration camps and 1,000 more had been shot. Of the approximately 76,000 deported, 2,566 survived. The total thus reported is slightly below 77,500 dead (somewhat less than a quarter of the Jewish population in France in 1940).[91]
Proportionally, either number makes for a lower death toll than in some other countries (in the Netherlands, 75% of the Jewish population was murdered).[90] This fact has been used as arguments by supporters of Vichy. However, according to Paxton, the figure would have been greatly lower if the "French state" had not willfully collaborated with Germany, which lacked staff for police activities. During the Vel' d'Hiv Roundup of July 1942, Laval ordered the deportation of the children, against explicit German orders. Paxton pointed out that if the total number of victims had not been higher, it was due to the shortage in wagons, the resistance of the civilian population and deportation in other countries (notably in Italy).[90]
Government responsibility[edit]
For decades, the French government argued that the French Republic had been dismantled when Philippe Pétain instituted a new French State during the war and that the Republic had been re-established when the war was over. It was not for the Republic, therefore, to apologise for events that happened while it had not existed and which had been carried out by a State which it did not recognise. For example, former President François Mitterrand had maintained that the Vichy Government, not France's Republic, was responsible. This position was more recently reiterated by Marine Le Pen, leader of the National Front Party, during the 2017 election campaign.[92][93]




Commemorative plaque to the victims held in the Vel' d'Hiv after the 16–17 July 1942 roundup of Jews in Paris.


The first official admission that the French State had been complicit in the deportation of 76,000 Jews during WW II was made in 1995 by then President Jacques Chirac, at the site of the Vélodrome d'Hiver where 13,000 Jews had been rounded up for deportation to death camps in July 1942. "France, on that day [16 July 1942], committed the irreparable. Breaking its word, it handed those who were under its protection over to their executioners," he said. Those responsible for the roundup were "4500 policemen and gendarmes, French, under the authority of their leaders [who] obeyed the demands of the Nazis..... the criminal folly of the occupiers was seconded by the French, by the French state".[94][95][96]
On 16 July 2017, also at a ceremony at the Vel' d'Hiv site, President Emmanuel Macron denounced the country's role in the Holocaust in France and the historical revisionism that denied France's responsibility for the 1942 roundup and subsequent deportation of 13,000 Jews. "It was indeed France that organised this", Macron insisted, French police collaborating with the Nazis. "Not a single German" was directly involved," he added. Macron was even more specific than Chirac had been in stating that the Government during the War was certainly that of France. "It is convenient to see the Vichy regime as born of nothingness, returned to nothingness. Yes, it’s convenient, but it is false. We cannot build pride upon a lie."[97][98]
Macron made a subtle reference to Chirac's remark when he added, "I say it again here. It was indeed France that organized the roundup, the deportation, and thus, for almost all, death."[99][100]
Military[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (August 2016)



Portions of the French military fell into Vichy control:
General Charles Noguès served as commander-in-chief of Vichy French Forces.
Vichy French Navy were under the command of Admiral Jean-François Darlan with naval garrison in Toulon.
Vichy French Air Force was led by General Jean Romatet with involvement in actions in North Africa.
Collaborationnistes[edit]
Main articles: Milice, Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism, Légion impériale, 33rd Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Charlemagne (1st French), Special Brigades, and Carlingue




Légion des Volontaires fighting with the Axis on the Russian front.


Stanley Hoffmann in 1974,[101] and after him, other historians such as Robert Paxton and Jean-Pierre Azéma have used the term collaborationnistes to refer to fascists and Nazi sympathisers who, for ideological reasons, wished a reinforced collaboration with Hitler's Germany. Examples of these are Parti Populaire Français (PPF) leader Jacques Doriot, writer Robert Brasillach or Marcel Déat. A principal motivation and ideological foundation among collaborationnistes was anticommunism.[101] Collaborationnisme (collaborationism) should be distinguished from collaboration. Collaboration refers to those of the French who for whatever reason collaborated with the Germans whereas collaborationism refers to those, primarily from the fascist right, who embraced the goal of a German victory as their own.
Organizations such as La Cagoule opposed the Third Republic, particularly when the left-wing Popular Front was in power.
Collaborationists may have influenced the Vichy government's policies, but ultra-collaborationists never comprised the majority of the government before 1944.[102]
In order to enforce the régime's will, some paramilitary organizations were created. A notable example was the "Légion Française des Combattants" (LFC) (French Legion of Fighters), including at first only former combatants, but quickly adding "Amis de la Légion" and cadets of the Légion, who had never seen battle, but who supported Pétain's régime. The name was then quickly changed to "Légion Française des Combattants et des volontaires de la Révolution Nationale" (French Legion of Fighters and Volunteers of the National Revolution). Joseph Darnand created a "Service d'Ordre Légionnaire" (SOL), which consisted mostly of French supporters of the Nazis, of which Pétain fully approved.
Social and economic history[edit]




Vichy French zinc and aluminum coins made during the war. These coins circulated in both the German–occupied zone and unoccupied zone.


Vichy authorities were strongly opposed to "modern" social trends and tried through "national regeneration" to restore behavior more in line with traditional Catholicism. Philip Manow argues that, "Vichy represents the authoritarian, antidemocratic solution that the French political right, in coalition with the national Church hierarchy, had sought repeatedly during the interwar period and almost put in place in 1934."[103] Calling for "National Regeneration", Vichy reversed many liberal policies and began tight supervision of the economy with central planning a key feature.[3] Labor unions came under tight government control. There were no elections. The independence of women was reversed, with an emphasis put on motherhood. Government agencies had to fire married women employees. Conservative Catholics became prominent. Paris lost its avant-garde status in European art and culture. The media were tightly controlled and stressed virulent anti-Semitism, and, after June 1941, anti-Bolshevism. Hans Petter Graver says Vichy "is notorious for its enactment of anti-Semitic laws and decrees, and these were all loyally enforced by the judiciary".[104]
Economy[edit]
Vichy rhetoric exalted the skilled laborer and small businessman. In practice, however, the needs of artisans for raw materials were neglected in favor of large businesses.[105] The General Committee for the Organization of Commerce (CGOC) was a national program to modernize and professionalize small business.[106]
In 1940 the government took direct control of all production, which was synchronized with the demands of the Germans. It replaced free trade unions with compulsory state unions that dictated labor policy without regard to the voice or needs of the workers. The centralized, bureaucratic control of the French economy was not a success, as German demands grew heavier and more unrealistic, passive resistance and inefficiencies multiplied, and Allied bombers hit the rail yards; however, Vichy made the first comprehensive long-range plans for the French economy. The government had never before attempted a comprehensive overview. De Gaulle's Provisional Government in 1944–45 quietly used the Vichy plans as a base for its own reconstruction program. The Monnet Plan of 1946 was closely based on Vichy plans.[107] Thus both teams of wartime and early postwar planners repudiated prewar laissez-faire practices and embraced the cause of drastic economic overhaul and a planned economy.[108]
Forced labour[edit]
Nazi Germany kept French POWs as forced labourers throughout the war. They added compulsory (and volunteer) workers from occupied nations, especially in metal factories. The shortage of volunteers led the Vichy government to pass a law in September 1942 that effectively deported workers to Germany, where they constituted fifteen percent of the labor force by August 1944. The largest number worked in the giant Krupp steel works in Essen. Low pay, long hours, frequent bombings, and crowded air raid shelters added to the unpleasantness of poor housing, inadequate heating, limited food, and poor medical care, all compounded by harsh Nazi discipline. They finally returned home in the summer of 1945.[109] The forced labour draft encouraged the French Resistance and undermined the Vichy government.[110]
Food shortages[edit]
Civilians suffered shortages of all varieties of consumer goods.[111] The rationing system was stringent but badly mismanaged, leading to produced malnourishment, black markets, and hostility to state management of the food supply. The Germans seized about twenty percent of the French food production, causing severe disruption to the French household economy.[112] French farm production fell by half because of lack of fuel, fertilizer and workers; even so the Germans seized half the meat, twenty percent of the produce, and two percent of the champagne.[113] Supply problems quickly affected French stores, which lacked most items. The government answered by rationing, but German officials set the policies and hunger prevailed, especially affecting youth in urban areas. The queues lengthened in front of shops.
Some people—including German soldiers—benefited from the black market, where food was sold without tickets at very high prices. Farmers especially diverted meat to the black market, which meant that much less for the open market. Counterfeit food tickets were also in circulation. Direct buying from farmers in the countryside and barter against cigarettes became common. These activities were strictly forbidden, however, and thus carried the risk of confiscation and fines. Food shortages were most acute in the large cities. In the more remote country villages, clandestine slaughtering, vegetable gardens and the availability of milk products permitted better survival. The official ration provided starvation level diets of one thousand thirteen or fewer calories a day, supplemented by home gardens and, especially, black market purchases.[114]
Women[edit]
The 2 million French soldiers held as POWs and forced laborers in Germany throughout the war were not at risk of death in combat but the anxieties of separation for their 800,000 wives were high. The government provided a modest allowance, but one in ten became prostitutes to support their families.[115]
Meanwhile, the Vichy regime promoted a highly traditional model of female roles.[116] The Révolution Nationale official ideology fostered the patriarchal family, headed by a man with a subservient wife who was devoted to her many children. It gave women a key symbolic role to carry out the national regeneration. It used propaganda, women's organizations, and legislation to promote maternity, patriotic duty, and female submission to marriage, home, and children's education.[111] The falling birthrate appeared to be a grave problem to Vichy. It introduced family allowances and opposed birth control and abortion. Conditions were very difficult for housewives, as food was short as well as most necessities.[117] Mother's Day became a major date in the Vichy calendar, with festivities in the towns and schools featuring the award of medals to mothers of numerous children. Divorce laws were made much more stringent, and restrictions were placed on the employment of married women. Family allowances that had begun in the 1930s were continued, and became a vital lifeline for many families; it was a monthly cash bonus for having more children. In 1942 the birth rate started to rise, and by 1945 it was higher than it had been for a century.[26]:331–332
On the other side women of the Resistance, many of whom were associated with combat groups linked to the French Communist Party (PCF), broke the gender barrier by fighting side by side with men. After the war, their services were ignored, but France did give women the vote in 1944.[118]
German invasion, November 1942[edit]
See also: Case Anton and Operation Attila (World War II)




Progressive end of the Vichy regime


Hitler ordered Case Anton to occupy Corsica and then the rest of the unoccupied southern zone in immediate reaction to the landing of the Allies in North Africa (Operation Torch) on 8 November 1942. Following the conclusion of the operation on 12 November, Vichy's remaining military forces were disbanded. Vichy continued to exercise its remaining jurisdiction over almost all of metropolitan France, with the residual power devolved into the hands of Laval, until the gradual collapse of the regime following the Allied invasion in June 1944. On 7 September 1944, following the Allied invasion of France, the remainders of the Vichy government cabinet fled to Germany and established a puppet government in exile in the so-called Sigmaringen enclave. That rump government finally fell when the city was taken by the Allied French army in April 1945.
Part of the residual legitimacy of the Vichy regime resulted from the continued ambivalence of U.S. and other leaders. President Roosevelt continued to cultivate Vichy, and promoted General Henri Giraud as a preferable alternative to de Gaulle, despite the poor performance of Vichy forces in North Africa—Admiral François Darlan had landed in Algiers the day before Operation Torch. Algiers was headquarters of the Vichy French XIX Army Corps, which controlled Vichy military units in North Africa. Darlan was neutralized within 15 hours by a 400-strong French resistance force. Roosevelt and Churchill accepted Darlan, rather than de Gaulle, as the French leader in North Africa. De Gaulle had not even been informed of the landing in North Africa.[62] The United States also resented the Free French taking control of St Pierre and Miquelon on 24 December 1941, because, Secretary of State Hull believed, it interfered with a U.S.-Vichy agreement to maintain the status quo with respect to French territorial possessions in the western hemisphere.
Following the invasion of France via Normandy and Provence (Operation Overlord and Operation Dragoon) and the departure of the Vichy leaders, the U.S., Britain and the Soviet Union finally recognized the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) headed by de Gaulle as the legitimate government of France on 23 October 1944. Before that, the first return of democracy to Metropolitan France since 1940 had occurred with the declaration of the Free Republic of Vercors on 3 July 1944, at the behest of the Free French government—but that act of resistance was quashed by an overwhelming German attack by the end of July.
Decline of the regime[edit]
Independence of the SOL[edit]




A recruitment poster for the Milice. The text says "Against Communism / French Militia / Secretary-General Joseph Darnand".


In 1943 the Service d'ordre légionnaire (SOL) collaborationist militia, headed by Joseph Darnand, became independent and was transformed into the "Milice française" (French Militia). Officially directed by Pierre Laval himself, the SOL was led by Darnand, who held an SS rank and pledged an oath of loyalty to Adolf Hitler. Under Darnand and his sub-commanders, such as Paul Touvier and Jacques de Bernonville, the Milice was responsible for helping the German forces and police in the repression of the French Resistance and Maquis.
Sigmaringen commission[edit]
See also: Sigmaringen enclave




The Sigmaringen operation was based in the city's ancient castle.






Liberation of France, 1944.


Following the Liberation of Paris on 25 August 1944, Pétain and his ministers were taken to Germany by the German forces. There, Fernand de Brinon established a pseudo-government in exile at Sigmaringen. Pétain refused to participate and the Sigmaringen operation had little or no authority. The offices used the official title French Delegation (French: Délégation française) or the French Government Commission for the Protection of National Interests (French: Commission gouvernementale française pour la défense des intérêts nationaux). Sigmaringen had its own radio station (Radio-patrie, Ici la France) and official press (La France, Le Petit Parisien), and hosted the embassies of the Axis powers: Germany, Italy and Japan. The population of the enclave was about 6,000, including known collaborationist journalists, the writers (Louis-Ferdinand Céline and Lucien Rebatet), the actor (Robert Le Vigan), and their families, as well as 500 soldiers, 700 French SS, prisoners of war and French civilian forced laborers.[26]:567–568
Provisional government[edit]
Main article: Provisional Government of the French Republic
The Free French, concerned that the Allies might decide to put France under administration of the Allied Military Government for Occupied Territories, strove to establish quickly the Provisional Government of the French Republic. The first action of that government was to re-establish republican legality throughout metropolitan France.
The provisional government considered the Vichy government to have been unconstitutional and all its actions therefore without legitimate authority. All "constitutional acts, legislative or regulatory" taken by the Vichy government, as well as decrees taken to implement them, were declared null and void by the Order of 9 August 1944. Inasmuch as blanket rescission of all acts taken by Vichy (i.e., including measures that might have been taken by a legitimate republican government) was deemed impractical, though, the Order provided that acts not expressly noted as nullified in the Order were to continue to receive "provisional application". Many acts were explicitly repealed, including all acts that Vichy had called "constitutional acts", all acts that discriminated against Jews, all acts related to so-called "secret societies" (e.g., Freemasons), and all acts that established special tribunals.[119]
Collaborationist paramilitary and political organizations, such as the Milice and the Service d'ordre légionnaire, were also dissolved.[119]
The provisional government also took steps to replace local governments, including governments that had been suppressed by the Vichy regime, through new elections or by extending the terms of those who had been elected not later than 1939.[120]
Purges[edit]
Further information: Pursuit of Nazi collaborators and Épuration légale






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



After the liberation, France was swept for a short period with a wave of executions of Collaborationists. Collaborationists were brought to the Vélodrome d'hiver, Fresnes prison or the Drancy internment camp. Women who were suspected of having romantic liaisons with Germans, or more often[citation needed] of being prostitutes who had entertained German customers, were publicly humiliated by having their heads shaved. Those who had engaged in the black market were also stigmatized as "war profiteers" (profiteurs de guerre), and popularly called "BOF" (Beurre Oeuf Fromage, or Butter Eggs Cheese, because of the products sold at outrageous prices during the Occupation). However, the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF, 1944–46) quickly reestablished order, and brought Collaborationists before the courts. Many convicted Collaborationists were then given amnesty under the Fourth Republic (1946–54).
Four different periods are distinguished by historians:

the first phase of popular convictions (épuration sauvage – wild purge): executions without judgments and shaving of women's heads. Estimations by police prefects made in 1948 and 1952 counted as many as 6,000 executions before the Liberation, and 4,000 afterward.
the second phase (épuration légale or legal purge), which began with Charles de Gaulle's 26 and 27 June 1944 purge ordonnances (de Gaulle's first ordonnance instituting purge Commissions was enacted on 18 August 1943): judgments of Collaborationists by the Commissions d'épuration, who condemned approximately 120,000 persons (e.g. Charles Maurras, leader of the royalist Action Française, was thus condemned to a life sentence on 25 January 1945), including 1,500 death sentences (Joseph Darnand, head of the Milice, and Pierre Laval, head of the French state, were executed after trial on 4 October 1945, Robert Brasillach, executed on 6 February 1945, etc.)—many of those who survived this phase were later given amnesty.
the third phase, more lenient towards Collaborationists (the trial of Philippe Pétain or of writer Louis-Ferdinand Céline).
finally came the period for amnesty and graces (e.g.,. Jean-Pierre Esteva, Xavier Vallat, creator of the General Commission for Jewish Affairs, René Bousquet, head of French police, etc.)

Other historians have distinguished the purges against intellectuals (Brasillach, Céline, etc.), industrialists, fighters (LVF, etc.) and civil servants (Papon, etc.).




Paris 1944: Women accused of collaboration with Nazis are paraded through the streets; they often had their hair cut off as a form of humiliation.


Philippe Pétain was charged with treason in July 1945. He was convicted and sentenced to death by firing squad, but Charles de Gaulle commuted the sentence to life imprisonment. In the police, some collaborators soon resumed official responsibilities. This continuity of the administration was pointed out,[citation needed] in particular concerning the events of the Paris massacre of 1961, executed under the orders of head of the Parisian police Maurice Papon when Charles de Gaulle was head of state. Papon was tried and convicted for crimes against humanity in 1998.
The French members of the Waffen-SS Charlemagne Division who survived the war were regarded as traitors. Some of the more prominent officers were executed, while the rank-and-file were given prison terms; some of them were given the option of doing time in Indochina (1946–54) with the Foreign Legion instead of prison.[citation needed]
Among artists, singer Tino Rossi was detained in Fresnes prison, where, according to Combat newspaper, prison guards asked him for autographs. Pierre Benoit and Arletty were also detained.
Executions without trials and other forms of "popular justice" were harshly criticized immediately after the war, with circles close to Pétainists advancing the figures of 100,000, and denouncing the "Red Terror", "anarchy", or "blind vengeance". The writer and Jewish internee Robert Aron estimated the popular executions to a number of 40,000 in 1960. This surprised de Gaulle, who estimated the number to be around 10,000, which is also the figure accepted today by mainstream historians. Approximately 9,000 of these 10,000 refer to summary executions in the whole of the country, which occurred during battle.[citation needed]
Some imply that France did too little to deal with collaborators at this stage, by selectively pointing out that in absolute value (numbers), there were fewer legal executions in France than in its smaller neighbor Belgium, and fewer internments than in Norway or the Netherlands.[citation needed] However, the situation in Belgium was not comparable as it mixed collaboration with elements of a war of secession: The 1940 invasion prompted the Flemish population to generally side with the Germans in the hope of gaining national recognition, and relative to national population a much higher proportion of Belgians than French thus ended up collaborating with the Nazis or volunteering to fight alongside them;[121][122] the Walloon population in turn led massive anti-Flemish retribution after the war, some of which, such as the execution of Irma Swertvaeger Laplasse, remained controversial.[123]
The proportion of collaborators was also higher in Norway, and collaboration occurred on a larger scale in the Netherlands (as in Flanders) based partly on linguistic and cultural commonality with Germany. The internments in Norway and Netherlands, meanwhile, were highly temporary and were rather indiscriminate; there was a brief internment peak in these countries as internment was used partly for the purpose of separating Collaborationists from non-Collaborationists.[124] Norway ended up executing only 37 Collaborationists.
1980s trials[edit]
Some accused war criminals were judged, some for a second time, from the 1980s onwards: Paul Touvier, Klaus Barbie, Maurice Papon, René Bousquet (the head of the French police during the war) and his deputy Jean Leguay. Bousquet and Leguay were both convicted for their responsibilities in the Vel' d'Hiv Roundup of July 1942. Among others, Nazi hunters Serge and Beate Klarsfeld spent part of their post-war effort trying to bring them before the courts. A fair number of collaborationists then joined the OAS terrorist movement during the Algerian War (1954–62). Jacques de Bernonville escaped to Quebec, then Brazil. Jacques Ploncard d'Assac became counsellor to the dictator António de Oliveira Salazar in Portugal.[125]
In 1993, former Vichy official René Bousquet was assassinated while he awaited prosecution in Paris following a 1991 inculpation for crimes against humanity; he had been prosecuted but partially acquitted and immediately amnestied in 1949.[126] In 1994 former Vichy official Paul Touvier (1915–1996) was convicted of crimes against humanity. Maurice Papon was likewise convicted in 1998, released three years later due to ill health, and died in 2007.[127]
Historiographical debates and "Vichy Syndrome"[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Until Jacques Chirac's presidency, the official point of view of the French government was that the Vichy regime was an illegal government distinct from the French Republic, established by traitors under foreign influence.[128] Indeed, Vichy France eschewed the formal name of France ("French Republic") and styled itself the "French State", replacing the Republican motto of Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité (liberty, equality, fraternity) inherited from the 1789 French Revolution, with the motto Travail, Famille, Patrie (work, family, fatherland).
While the criminal behaviour of Vichy France was consistently acknowledged, this point of view denied any responsibility of the state of France, alleging that acts committed between 1940 and 1944 were unconstitutional acts devoid of legitimacy.[129] The main proponent of this view was Charles de Gaulle himself, who insisted, as did other historians afterwards, on the unclear conditions of the June 1940 vote granting full powers to Pétain, which was refused by the minority of Vichy 80.[130] In particular, coercive measures used by Pierre Laval have been denounced by those historians who hold that the vote did not, therefore, have Constitutional legality (See subsection: Conditions of armistice and 10 July 1940 vote of full powers). In later years, de Gaulle's position was reiterated by president Mitterrand.[98] "I will not apologize in the name of France. The Republic had nothing to do with this. I do not believe France is responsible," he said in September 1994.[92]
The first President to accept responsibility for the arrest and deportation of Jews from France was Jacques Chirac, in a 16 July 1995 speech. He recognized the responsibility of "the French State"[94][98] for seconding the "criminal folly of the occupying country", in particular the French police, headed by René Bousquet (charged in 1990 with crimes against humanity),[131] which assisted the Nazis in the enactment of the so-called "Final Solution". The July 1942 Vel' d'Hiv Roundup is a tragic example of how the French police did the Nazi work, going even further than what military orders demanded (by sending children to Drancy internment camp, last stop before the extermination camps).[132]
President Macron's statement on 16 July 2017 was even more specific, stating clearly that the Vichy regime was certainly the French State during WW II, and played a role in the Holocaust. (Earlier that year, speeches made by Marine Le Pen had made the headlines by claiming that the Vichy Government was "not France".)[133] Macron made the following remark when discussing the Vel' d'Hiver roundup of Jews: "It is convenient to see the Vichy regime as born of nothingness, returned to nothingness. Yes, it’s convenient, but it is false."[97][98]
As historian Henry Rousso has put it in The Vichy Syndrome (1987), Vichy and the state collaboration of France remains a "past that doesn't pass away".[134]
Historiographical debates are still, today, passionate, opposing conflictual views on the nature and legitimacy of Vichy's collaborationism with Germany in the implementation of the Holocaust. Three main periods have been distinguished in the historiography of Vichy: first the Gaullist period, which aimed at national reconciliation and unity under the figure of Charles de Gaulle, who conceived himself above political parties and divisions; then the 1960s, with Marcel Ophüls's film The Sorrow and the Pity (1971); finally the 1990s, with the trial of Maurice Papon, civil servant in Bordeaux in charge of the "Jewish Questions" during the war, who was convicted after a very long trial (1981–1998) for crimes against humanity. The trial of Papon did not only concern an individual itinerary, but the French administration's collective responsibility in the deportation of the Jews. Furthermore, his career after the war, which led him to be successively prefect of the Paris police during the Algerian War (1954–1962) and then treasurer of the Gaullist Union des Démocrates pour la République party from 1968 to 1971, and finally Budget Minister under president Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and prime minister Raymond Barre from 1978 to 1981, was symptomatic of the quick rehabilitation of former collaborationists after the war. Critics contend that this itinerary, shared by others (although few had such public roles), demonstrates France's collective amnesia, while others point out that the perception of the war and of the state collaboration has evolved during these years. Papon's career was considered more scandalous as he had been responsible, during his function as prefect of police of Paris, for the 1961 Paris massacre of Algerians during the war, and was forced to resign from this position after the "disappearance", in Paris in 1965, of the Moroccan anti-colonialist leader Mehdi Ben Barka.[135] Papon was convicted in 1998 as having been complicit with the Nazis in crimes against humanity.[136]
While it is certain that the Vichy government and a large number of its high administration collaborated in the implementation of the Holocaust, the exact level of such cooperation is still debated. Compared with the Jewish communities established in other countries invaded by Germany, French Jews suffered proportionately lighter losses (see Jewish death toll section above); although, starting in 1942, repression and deportations struck French Jews as well as foreign Jews.[73] Former Vichy officials later claimed that they did as much as they could to minimize the impact of the Nazi policies, although mainstream French historians contend that the Vichy regime went beyond the Nazi expectations.
The regional newspaper Nice Matin revealed on 28 February 2007, that in more than 1,000 condominium properties on the Côte d'Azur, rules dating to Vichy were still "in force", or at least existed on paper. One of these rules, for example, stated that:

The contractors shall make the following statements: they are of French nationality, are not Jewish, nor married to Jewish in the sense of the laws and ordinances in force [under Vichy, ed. note]

The president of the Conseil Représentatif des Institutions juives de France-Côte d'Azur, a Jewish association group, issued a strong condemnation labeling it "the utmost horror" when one of the inhabitants of such a condominium qualified this as an "anachronism" with "no consequences".[137] Jewish inhabitants were able and willing to live in the buildings, and to explain this the Nice Matin reporter surmised that some tenants may have not read the condominium contracts in detail, while others deemed the rules obsolete.[138] A reason for the latter is that any racially discriminatory condominium or other local rule that may have existed "on paper", Vichy-era or otherwise, was invalidated by the constitutions of the French Fourth Republic (1946) and French Fifth Republic (1958) and was inapplicable under French antidiscrimination law. Thus, even if the tenants or coowners had signed or otherwise agreed to these rules after 1946, any such agreement would be null and void (caduque) under French law, as were the rules. Rewriting or eliminating the obsolete rules would have had to be done at the occupants' expense, including notary fees of 900 to 7000 EUR per building.[138]
"Sword and shield" argument[edit]
Today, the few remaining Vichy supporters continue to maintain the official argument advanced by Pétain and Laval: the state collaboration was supposed to protect the French civilian population from the hardships of the Occupation. At his trial Pétain proclaimed that while Charles de Gaulle had represented the "sword" of France, Pétain had been the "shield" which protected France.[139]
Purification[edit]
Munholland reports a widespread consensus among historians regarding the authoritarian character of the Vichy regime and its:

broadly stated desire to regenerate a "decadent" state and society that had become corrupted by an ambient lassitude, secularism, and hedonism under the Third Republic by returning to earlier and purer values and imposing a greater discipline and dynamism upon the industrial order.[140]

Foreign Jews[edit]
Although this claim is rejected by the rest of the French population and by the state itself, another myth remains more widespread than this one. This other myth refers to the alleged "protection" by Vichy of French Jews by "accepting" to collaborate in the deportation – and, ultimately, in the extermination – of foreign Jews.
However, this argument has been rejected by several historians who are specialists of the subject, among them US historian Robert Paxton, who is widely recognized, and historian of the French police Maurice Rajsfus. Both were called on as experts during the Papon trial in the 1990s.
Robert Paxton thus declared, before the court, on 31 October 1997, that "Vichy took initiatives... The armistice allowed it a breathing space." [141] Henceforth, on its own Vichy decided, within the homeland, to implement the "National Revolution" ("Révolution nationale"). After naming the alleged causes of the defeat ("democracy, parliamentarism, cosmopolitanism, the left wing, foreigners, Jews, ..."), Vichy put in place, by 3 October 1940, the first anti-Jewish legislation. From then on, Jewish people were considered "second-zone citizens[141] ".
Internationally, France "believed the war to be finished". Thus, by July 1940, Vichy was eagerly negotiating with the German authorities in an attempt to gain a place for France in the Third Reich's "New Order". But "Hitler never forgot the 1918 defeat. He always said no." Vichy's ambition was doomed from the start.[141]
"Antisemitism was a constant theme", recalled Robert Paxton. It even, at first, opposed German plans. "At this time the Nazis had not yet decided to exterminate the Jews, but to expel them. Their idea was not to make of France an antisemitic country. On the contrary, they wanted to send there the Jews that they expelled" from the Reich.[141]
The historic change came in 1941–1942, with the pending German defeat on the Eastern Front. The war then became "total", and in August 1941, Hitler decided on the "global extermination of all European Jews". This new policy was officially formulated during the January 1942 Wannsee Conference, and implemented in all European occupied countries by spring[when?] 1942. France, praising itself for having remained an independent state (as opposed to other occupied countries) "decided to cooperate. This is the second Vichy."[141] The first train of deportees left Drancy on 27 March 1942, for Poland – the first in a long series.
"The Nazis needed the French administration... They always complained about the lack of staff." recalled Paxton,[141] something which Maurice Rajsfus has also underlined. Although the American historian recognized during the trial that the "civil behavior of certain individuals" had permitted many Jews to escape deportation, he stated that:

The French state, itself, participated in the policy of extermination of the Jews... How can one claim the reverse when such technical and administrative resources were made available to them?[141]

Pointing to the French police's registering of Jews, as well as Laval's decision, taken completely autonomously in August 1942, to deport children along with their parents, Paxton added:

Contrary to preconceived ideas, Vichy did not sacrifice foreign Jews in the hope of protecting French Jews. At the hierarchy summit, it knew, from the start, that the deportation of French Jews was unavoidable.[141]

Despite Paxton's assertion about Vichy knowledge "from the start", deportations from France did not start until summer 1942, several months after mass deportation from other countries started. Part of the population housed at the Dachau concentration camp, opened in 1933, was Jewish, and major death camps in Poland and Germany were opened in 1941 and early 1942.
Paxton then referred to the case of Italy, where deportation of Jewish people had started only after the German occupation. Italy surrendered to the Allies in mid-1943 but was then invaded by Germany. Fighting continued there through 1944. In particular, in Nice, "Italians had protected the Jews. And the French authorities complained about it to the Germans."[141] In this instance, deportations from Italy started immediately upon its invasion by Germany. In fact, the rise of Benito Mussolini and Italian fascism had drastically curtailed Jewish immigration during the inter-war period, and Italy had passed drastic anti-Semitic laws in 1938 that stripped Jews of their citizenship. Ultimately, a similar proportion of Jews from Italy as from France were deported.
More recent work by the historian Susan Zuccotti finds that, in general, the Vichy government facilitated the deportation of foreign Jews rather than French ones, until at least 1943:

Vichy officials [had] hoped to deport foreign Jews throughout France in order to ease pressure on native Jews. Pierre Laval himself expressed the official Vichy position... In the early months of 1943, the terror [Adam] Munz and [Alfred] Feldman described in German-occupied France was still experienced by foreign Jews like themselves. It is difficult to know exactly how many French Jews were arrested, usually for specific or alleged offenses, but on 21 January 1943, Helmut Knochen informed Eichmann in Berlin that there were 2,159 French citizens among the 3,811 prisoners at Drancy. Many had been at Drancy for several months. They had not been deported because, until January 1943, there had usually been enough foreigners and their children to fill the forty-three trains that had carried about 41,591 people to the east... By January 1943, however, foreign Jews were increasingly aware of the danger and difficult to find. Nazi pressure for the arrest of French Jews and the deportation of those already at Drancy increased accordingly. Thus, when Knochen reported that there were 2,159 French citizens among the 3,811 prisoners at Drancy on 21 January 1943, he also asked Eichmann for permission to deport them. There had been no convoy from Drancy in December and January, and [SS Lieutenant Heinz] Röthke was pressuring Knochen to resume them. Röthke also wanted to empty Drancy in order to refill it. Despite Vichy officials' past disapproval and Eichmann's own prior discouragement of such a step, permission for the deportation of the French Jews at Drancy, except for those in mixed marriages, was granted from Berlin on 25 January.[142]

Whatever the Vichy government's intent initially or subsequently, the numerical outcome was that less than 15% of French Jews, vs. nearly twice that proportion of non-citizen Jews residing in France, died. More Jews lived in France at the end of the Vichy regime than had approximately ten years earlier.[143]
Notable figures[edit]
See also: Category:French collaborators with Nazi Germany




Pierre Pucheu in 1941, who was executed in 1944.



Xavier Vallat





Philippe Pétain, Head of State.
Pierre Laval, Prime Minister (1940, 1942–1944).
Pierre-Étienne Flandin, Prime Minister (1940–1941).
François Darlan, Prime Minister (1941–1942).
Pierre Pucheu, Minister of the Interior.
Maxime Weygand, Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces and Minister of Defense.
Charles Huntziger, general and Minister of Defense.
René Bousquet, head of the French police.
Jean Leguay, delegate of Bousquet in the "free zone", charged with crimes against humanity for his role in the July 1942 Vel' d'Hiv Roundup.
Louis Darquier de Pellepoix, Commissioner for Jewish Affairs.
Philippe Henriot, State Secretary of Information and Propaganda.
Maurice Papon, head of the Jewish Questions Service in the prefecture of Bordeaux. Condemned for crimes against humanity in 1998.[citation needed]
Simon Sabiani, head of the Parti Populaire Français in Marseille.
Paul Touvier, condemned in 1995 for crimes against humanity for his role as head of the Milice in Lyon.
Xavier Vallat, Commissioner General for Jewish Questions.
Marcel Déat, founder of the Rassemblement national populaire (RNP) in 1941. Joined the government in the last months of the Occupation.
Gaston Henry-Haye, Vichy ambassador to the United States of America.
François Mitterrand, later President of the French Republic (1981-1995)

Non-Vichy collaborationists[edit]

Marcel Bucard, founder of the far-right Mouvement franciste and Legion des volontaires francais contre le bolchevisme (LVF).
Eugène Deloncle, co-founder of the right-wing terrorist group La Cagoule in 1935 and fascist Mouvement social révolutionnaire in 1940.
Jacques Doriot, founder of the Parti Populaire Français (PPF) and member of the LVF.
Étienne Leandri, wore the Gestapo uniform during the war and participated in the creation of the Gaullist Service d'Action Civique (SAC) in the 1960s.
Robert Brasillach, writer, executed for collaboration after the war.
Louis-Ferdinand Céline, writer.
Pierre Drieu La Rochelle, writer.
Robert Le Vigan, actor.
Lucien Rebatet, writer.
Charles Maurras, writer and founder of royalist movement Action Française.
Pierre Taittinger, chairman of the municipal council of Paris 1943–1944.
Henri Lafont
Pierre Bonny, also known as Pierre Bony.

See also[edit]

1942–43 Riom Trial and The Vichy 80
Cadix, Allied intelligence center in Uzès.
Collaboration with the Axis Powers during World War II
Foreign relations of Vichy France
Franco-German cooperation
French Colonial Empire
German occupation of France during World War II
Italian occupation of France during World War II
List of French possessions and colonies
Military Administration in France
Military history of France during World War II
Oradour-sur-Glane
Ordre Nouveau, French translation of Nationsozialistische Neue Ordnung, Hitler's planned Nazi hegemony in Europe.
Organisation Todt
Pursuit of Nazi collaborators
Amy Elizabeth Thorpe
Western Front (Frankreich) Area (Luftflotte 3, France)
World War II in the Basque Country
Camp of Septfonds

Notes[edit]



^ French: Pétain: "J'entre aujourd'hui dans la voie de la collaboration."



References[edit]


^ a b c d "Ordonnance du 9 août 1944 relative au rétablissement de la légalité républicaine sur le territoire continental – Version consolidée au 10 août 1944" [Law of August 9, 1944 Concerning the Reestablishment of the Legally Constituted Republic on the Mainland - Consolidated Version of August 10, 1944]. gouv.fr. Legifrance. August 9, 1944. Archived from the original on 2009-07-16. Retrieved 2015-10-21. Article 1: The form of the Government of France is and remains the Republic. By law it has not ceased to exist.
Article 2: The following are therefore null and void: all legislative or regulatory acts as well as all actions of any description whatsoever taken to execute them, promulgated in Metropolitan France after 16 June 1940 and until the restoration of the Provisional Government of the French Republic. This nullification is hereby expressly declared and must be noted.
Article 3. The following acts are hereby expressly nullified and held invalid: The so-called "Constitutional Law of 10 July 1940; as well as any laws called 'Constitutional Law';... 
^ Dompnier, Nathalie (2001). "Entre La Marseillaise et Maréchal, nous voilà ! quel hymne pour le régime de Vichy ?". In Chimènes, Myriam. La vie musicale sous Vichy. Histoire du temps présent (in French). Bruxelles: Éditions Complexe – IRPMF-CNRS, coll. p. 71. ISBN 2870278640. 
^ a b Debbie Lackerstein, National Regeneration in Vichy France: Ideas and Policies, 1930–1944 (2013)
^ Levieux, Eleanor (1999). Insiders' French : beyond the dictionary. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 239. ISBN 978-0-226-47502-8. 
^ Simon Kitson. "Vichy Web - The Occupiers and Their Policies". French Studies, University of Birmingham. Retrieved 18 June 2017. 
^ Philip G. Nord (2010). France's New Deal: From the Thirties to the Postwar Era. Princeton U.P. p. 12. ISBN 9780691142975. 
^ Stanley G. Payne (1983). Fascism: A Comparative Approach Toward a Definition. U. of Wisconsin Press. p. 137. ISBN 9780299080648. 
^ Laqueur, Walter (1978). Fascism: A Reader's Guide. U. of California Press. p. 298. ISBN 9780520036420. 
^ a b c Karlsgodt, Elizabeth (2011). Defending National Treasures: French Art and Heritage Under Vichy. Stanford University Press. pp. 126–128. ISBN 0804770182. 
^ Flood, Christopher "Pétain and de Gaulle" pages 88-110 from France At War In the Twentieth Century edited by Valerie Holman and Debra Kelly, Oxford: Berghahan Books, 2000 pages 92-93
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, pp. 96–98.
^ a b c Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 99.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 101.
^ Cornick, Martyn "Fighting Myth with Reality: The Fall of France, Anglophobia, and the BBC" pages 65-87 from France At War In the Twentieth Century edited by Valerie Holman and Debra Kelly, Oxford: Berghahan Books, 2000 pages 69-74.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 69-70.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 69.
^ a b Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 70.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 71-76.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 97.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 72.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 72-73.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 75.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 75-76.
^ Holman & Kelly 2000, p. 76.
^ Robert A. Doughty, The Breaking Point: Sedan and the Fall of France, 1940 (1990)
^ a b c d e f Jackson, Julian (2001). France: The Dark Years, 1940–1944. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-820706-9. 
^ Singer, Barnett (2008). Maxime Weygand: A Biography of the French General in Two World Wars. McFarland. p. 111. ISBN 9780786435715. 
^ http://Spying for Germany in Vichy France.
^ Richard Vinen, The Unfree French: Life under the Occupation (2006) pp 183–214
^ French Colonial Soldiers in German Prisoner-of-War Camps (1940–1945), Raffael Scheck, 2010, French History, p421
^ Richard Joseph Golsan (2000). The Papon Affair: Memory and Justice on Trial. Psychology Press. p. 14. ISBN 9780415923651. 
^ Jean-Pierre Maury. "Loi constitutionnelle du 10 juillet 1940". Mjp.univ-perp.fr. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ "Constitutional act no. 2, defining the authority of the chief of the French state". Journal Officiel de la République française. July 11, 1940. 
^ a b Christofferson, Thomas R.; Christofferson, Michael S. (2006). France during World War II: From Defeat to Liberation. Fordham University Press. pp. 37–40. ISBN 0-8232-2562-3. 
^ Jean-Pierre Azéma, De Munich à la Libération, Le Seuil, 1979, p.82 ISBN 2-02-005215-6
^ French: L'Assemblée Nationale donne les plein pouvoirs au gouvernement de la République, sous l'autorité et la signature du maréchal Pétain, à l'effet de promulguer par un ou plusieurs actes une nouvelle Constitution de l'État français. Cette Constitution doit garantir les droits du travail, de la famille et de la patrie. Elle sera ratifiée par la nation et appliquée par les Assemblées qu'elle aura créées.
^ Jean-Pierre Maury. "Actes constitutionnels du Gouvernement de Vichy, 1940–1944, France, MJP, université de Perpignan". Mjp.univ-perp.fr. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ John F. Sweets, Choices in Vichy France: The French Under Nazi Occupation (New York, 1986), p. 33
^ Ousby, Ian Occupation The Ordeal of France, 1940-1944, New York: CooperSquare Press, 2000 page 83.
^ a b c d When the US wanted to take over France, Annie Lacroix-Riz, in Le Monde diplomatique, May 2003 (English, French, etc.)
^ "Canada and the World: A History". International.gc.ca. 31 January 2011. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ Burrin, Philippe (1997). La France à l'heure allemande 1940–1944. Paris: Seuil. ISBN 2-02-031477-0
^ Lawrence Journal-World - Aug 22, 1944. Retrieved 17 January 2016.
^ Toland, The Rising Sun
^ a b Jouin, Yves (1965). "La Nouvelle-Calédonie et la Polynésie Française dans la Guerre du Pacifique". Revue historique des armées. 21 (3): 155–164. 
^ "Les ÉFO dans la Seconde Guerre Mondiale : la question du ralliement et ses conséquences". Itereva Histoire-Géographie. 5 November 2006. Retrieved 16 March 2011. 
^ Triest, Willard G. "Gearing up for Operation Bobcat" in Mason, John T., editor, The Pacific War Remembered. U.S. Naval Institute Press, 2003, p. 41–51 ISBN 1591144787, 9781591144786.
^ "Citation of the bataillon d'infanterie de marine et du Pacifique for valor during the fourth battle of Monte Cassino". 22 July 1944. Retrieved 16 March 2011. 
^ "Le Bataillon d'infanterie de marine et du Pacifique (BIMP)". Retrieved 16 March 2011. 
^ World War II Pacific Island Guide, p. 71, Gordon L. Rottman, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2002
^ "Document 3: le choix des Nouvelles-Hébrides". 17 July 2010. Retrieved 16 March 2011. 
^ Regnault, Jean-Marc; Kurtovitch, Ismet (2002). "Les ralliements du Pacifique en 1940: Entre légende gaulliste, enjeux stratégiques mondiaux et rivalités Londres/Vichy". Revue d'histoire moderne et contemporaine. 49 (4): 71–90. JSTOR 20530880. 
^ Lestrade, Claude (1997). "Le ralliement de Wallis à la " France libre " (1942)". Journal de la Société des Océanistes. 105 (105): 199–203. doi:10.3406/jso.1997.2029. Retrieved 16 March 2011. 
^ http://www.cheminsdememoire.gouv.fr/page/affichecitoyennete.php?idLang=en&idCitoyen=25
^ Raugh 1993, pp. 75–76.
^ Playfair 1954, p. 89.
^ Mockler 1984, p. 241.
^ Playfair 2004, pp. 322–323.
^ Playfair 2004, pp. 323–324.
^ Funk, Arthur L. (April 1973). "Negotiating the 'Deal with Darlan'". Journal of Contemporary History. 8 (2): 81–117. JSTOR 259995. 
^ Arthur L. Funk, The Politics of Torch (1974)
^ a b c d e Extraits de l'entretien d'Annie Rey-Goldzeiguer Archived 1 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine. [1, avec Christian Makarian et Dominique Simonnet, publié dans l'Express du 14 mars 2002], on the LDH website (in French)
^ Simon Kitson, The Hunt for Nazi Spies, Fighting Espionage in Vichy France. University of Chicago Press, 2008; the French edition appeared in 2005.
^ J.Lee Ready (1995), World War Two. Nation by Nation, London, Cassell, page 86. ISBN 1-85409-290-1
^ Boninchi, Marc (2005). Vichy et l'ordre moral. Paris: PUF. pp. 143–193. ISBN 9782130553397. OCLC 420826274 – via Cairn.info. (Registration required (help)). 
^ François Masure, "État et identité nationale. Un rapport ambigu à propos des naturalisés", in Journal des anthropologues, hors-série 2007, pp. 39–49 (see p. 48) (in French)
^ Dominique Rémy, Les Lois de Vichy, Romillat, 2004, p.91, ISBN 2-87894-026-1
^ "Vichy France and the Jews". Michael Robert Marrus, Robert O. Paxton (1995). Stanford University Press. pp. 367–368. ISBN 0-8047-2499-7
^ Maurice Rajsfus, Drancy, un camp de concentration très ordinaire, Cherche Midi éditeur (2005).
^ Aincourt, camp d'internement et centre de tri Archived 14 July 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Saline royale d'Arc et Senans (25) – L'internement des Tsiganes". Cheminsdememoire.gouv.fr. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ "Listes des internés du camp des Milles 1941". Jewishtraces.org. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ a b c d e Film documentary on the website of the Cité nationale de l'histoire de l'immigration (in French)
^ "Vichy discrimination against Jews in North Africa". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (ushmm.org). Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ "Jewish population of French North Africa". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (ushmm.org). 6 January 2011. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ "Jews in North Africa: Oppression and Resistance". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (ushmm.org). Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ "Jews in North Africa after the Allied Landings". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (ushmm.org). Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ "The Holocaust: Re-examining The Wannsee Conference, Himmler's Appointments Book, and Tunisian Jews". Nizkor.org. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ Christoph Buchheim, 'Die besetzten Lander im Dienste der Deutschen Kriegswirtschaft', VfZ, 32, (1984), p. 119
^ a b See Reggiani, Alexis Carrel, the Unknown: Eugenics and Population Research under Vichy, French Historical Studies, 2002; 25: 331–356
^ Gwen Terrenoire, "Eugenics in France (1913–1941) : a review of research findings Archived 18 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine.", Joint Programmatic Commission UNESCO-ONG Science and Ethics, 2003
^ Quoted in Andrés Horacio Reggiani. Alexis Carrel, the Unknown: Eugenics and Population Research under Vichy (French historical studies, 25:2 Spring 2002), p. 339. Also quoted in French by Didier Daeninckx in "Quand le négationnisme s'invite à l'université". amnistia.net. Archived from the original on 16 March 2007. Retrieved 28 January 2007. 
^ Quoted in Szasz, Thomas. The Theology of Medicine New York: Syracuse University Press, 1977.
^ French: « ce fichier se subdivise en fichier simplement alphabétique, les Juifs de nationalité française et étrangère ayant respectivement des fiches de couleur différentes, et des fichiers professionnels par nationalité et par rue. »
^ The Guardian: Disclosed: the zealous way Marshal Pétain enforced Nazi anti-Semitic laws, 3 October 2010, last accessed 3 October 2010
^ Einaudi (2001). Les silences de la police : 16 juillet 1942-17 octobre 1961 (in French). Paris: L'Esprit frappeur. p. 17. ISBN 978-2-84405-173-8. 
^ Maurice Rajsfus, La Police de Vichy. Les Forces de l'ordre françaises au service de la Gestapo, 1940/1944, Le Cherche-midi éditeur, 1995. Chapter XIV, La Bataille de Marseille, pp. 209–217. (in French)
^ ""France" in U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum online Holocaust Encyclopedia". Ushmm.org. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ Azéma, Jean-Pierre and Bédarida, François (dir.), La France des années noires, 2 vol., Paris, Seuil, 1993 [rééd. Seuil, 2000 (Points Histoire)]
^ a b c Le rôle du gouvernement de Vichy dans la déportation des juifs, notes taken during a conference of Robert Paxton at Lyon on 4 November 2000 (in French)
^ Summary from data compiled by the Association des Fils et Filles des déportés juifs de France, 1985.
^ a b Simons, Marlise (1995-07-17). "Chirac Affirms France's Guilt In Fate of Jews". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ McAuley, James (2017-04-10). "Marine Le Pen: France 'not responsible' for deporting Jews during Holocaust". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ a b "France opens WW2 Vichy regime files". BBC News. 2015-12-28. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ Allocution de M. Jacques CHIRAC Président de la République prononcée lors des cérémonies commémorant la grande rafle des 16 et 17 juillet 1942 (Paris) Archived 13 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine., Président de la république
^ "Allocution de M. Jacques CHIRAC Président de la République prononcée lors des cérémonies commémorant la grande rafle des 16 et 17 juillet 1942 (Paris)" (PDF). www.jacqueschirac-asso (in French). 16 July 1995. Retrieved 17 July 2014. 
^ a b "'France organised this': Macron denounces state role in Holocaust atrocity". The Guardian. 2017-07-17. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ a b c d Goldman, Russell (2017-07-17). "Macron Denounces Anti-Zionism as 'Reinvented Form of Anti-Semitism'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ McAuley, James (2017-07-16). "Macron hosts Netanyahu, condemns anti-Zionism as anti-Semitism". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ "Israel PM mourns France's deported Jews". BBC News. 2017-07-16. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ a b Hoffmann, Stanley (1974). "La droite à Vichy". Essais sur la France: déclin ou renouveau?. Paris: Le Seuil. 
^ Azéma, Jean-Pierre; Wieviorka, Olivier (2004). Vichy 1940–44. Perrin. p. 234. ISBN 2-262-02229-1. 
^ Philip Manow, "Workers, farmers and Catholicism: A history of political class coalitions and the south-European welfare state regime". Journal of European Social Policy 25.1 (2015): 32-49.
^ Hans Petter Graver, "The Opposition". in Judges Against Justice (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015) pp. 91-112.
^ Zdatny, Steven M. (1986). "The Corporatist Word and the Modernist Deed: Artisans and Political Economy in Vichy France". European History Quarterly. 16 (2): 155–179. doi:10.1177/026569148601600202. 
^ Jones, Joseph (1982). "Vichy France and Postwar Economic Modernization: The Case of the Shopkeepers". French Historical Studies. 12 (4): 541–563. doi:10.2307/286424. JSTOR 286424. 
^ Brinkley, Douglas; et al. (1992). Jean Monnet: The Path to European Unity. New York: St. Martin's Press. p. 87. ISBN 0312047738. 
^ Lynch, Frances M. B. (1997). France and the international economy: from Vichy to the Treaty of Rome. London: Routledge. p. 185. ISBN 0415142199. 
^ Berger, Françoise (2003). "L'exploitation de la Main-d'oeuvre Française dans l'industrie Siderurgique Allemande pendant la Seconde Guerre Mondiale" [The Exploitation of French Labor in the German Iron and Steel Industry During World War II]. Revue d'histoire moderne et contemporaine. 50 (3): 148–181. JSTOR 20530987. 
^ Kitson, Simon (2009). "The Marseille Police and the German Forced Labour Draft (1943–1944)". French History. 23 (2): 241–260. doi:10.1093/fh/crp006. 
^ a b Diamond, Hanna (1999). Women and the Second World War in France, 1939–1948: Choices and Constraints. New York: Longman. ISBN 0582299098. 
^ Collingham, E. M. (2011). The Taste of War: World War Two and the Battle for Food. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 9780713999648. 
^ Mouré, Kenneth (2010). "Food Rationing and the Black Market in France (1940–1944)". French History. 24 (2): 262–282 [pp. 272–273]. doi:10.1093/fh/crq025. PMID 20672479. 
^ Mouré, Kenneth (2010). "Food Rationing and the Black Market in France (1940–1944)". French History. 24 (2): 262–282. doi:10.1093/fh/crq025. PMID 20672479. 
^ Fishman, Sarah (1991). We Will Wait: Wives of French Prisoners of War, 1940–1945. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0300047746. 
^ Pollard, Miranda (1998). Reign of Virtue: Mobilizing Gender in Vichy France. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226673499. 
^ Muel-Dreyfus, Francine; Johnson, Kathleen A. (2001). Vichy and the Eternal Feminine: A Contribution to a Political-Sociology of Gender. Durham: Duke University Press. ISBN 0822327775. 
^ Schwartz, Paula (1989). "Partisianes and Gender Politics in Vichy France". French Historical Studies. 16 (1): 126–151. doi:10.2307/286436. JSTOR 286436. 
^ a b Jean-Pierre Maury. "Ordonnance du 9 août 1944 relative au rétablissement de la légalité républicaine sur le territoire continental". Mjp.univ-perp.fr. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ Jean-Pierre Maury. "Ordonnance du 21 avril 1944 relative à l'organisation des pouvoirs publics en France après la Libération". Mjp.univ-perp.fr. Retrieved 31 May 2011. 
^ "Flemish Legion Military and Feldpost History". Axis and Foreign Volunteer Legion Military Awards & Postal History. Retrieved 23 May 2009. 
^ "Accession Plans". german-foreign-policy.com. 11 December 2007. Retrieved 23 May 2009. 
^ Helm, Sarah (16 February 1996). "War memories widen Belgium's communal rift". The Independent on Sunday. Retrieved 23 May 2009. 
^ Andenæs, Johs (1980) [1979]. Det vanskelige oppgjøret (in Norwegian) (2nd ed.). Oslo: Tanum-Norli. p. 59. ISBN 82-518-0917-7. 
^ "Vichy France Facts". World War 2 Facts. Retrieved 12 January 2014. 
^ René Bousquet devant la Haute Cour de Justice (in French)
^ Kitson, Simon. "Bousquet, Touvier and Papon: Three Vichy personalities" (PDF). Retrieved 30 March 2011. 
^ Carrier, Peter (29 December 2017). "Holocaust Monuments and National Memory Cultures in France and Germany Since 1989: The Origins and Political Function of the Vél' D'Hiv' in Paris and the Holocaust Monument in Berlin". Berghahn Books – via Google Books. 
^ One of the first legal acts of the provisional government was to pass an ordinance reestablishing the rule of law: Ordonnance du 9 août 1944 relative au rétablissement de la légalité républicaine sur le territoire continental, article 1: "The form of government of France is and stays the Republic. In law, the Republic never ceased to exist." article 2: "Thus, all constitutional acts, statutes and regulations, and decisions taken for the execution thereof, taken after 16 June 1940 up to the reestablishment of the provisional government of the French Republic, are null and devoid of effects."
^ Wolf, Joan Beth (29 December 2017). "Harnessing the Holocaust: The Politics of Memory in France". Stanford University Press – via Google Books. 
^ "Obituary: Rene Bousquet". The Independent. 1993-06-09. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ En 1995, la reconnaissance des « fautes commises par l'État » in Le Monde, 26 January 2005 (in French)
^ "Marine Le Pen denies French role in wartime roundup of Paris Jews". The Guardian. 2017-04-09. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ Traverso, Enzo (2016-02-16). Fire and Blood: The European Civil War, 1914-1945. Verso Books. ISBN 9781784781347. 
^ Mulholland, Maureen; Melikan, R. A. (2003). The Trial in History: Domestic and international trials, 1700-2000. Manchester University Press. ISBN 9780719064869. 
^ Whitney, Craig R. (2007-02-18). "Maurice Papon, Convicted Vichy Official, 96, Dies". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2017-12-16. 
^ Nice Matin, 28 February 2007 (subscription only) – The news is taken up by L'Humanité on 1 March 2007, Des immeubles niçois à l'heure de Vichy (in French)
^ a b Le Figaro, 15 October 2007, A vendre appartement pour Français non juif (in French)
^ Curtis, Michale (2013). Verdict On Vichy: Power and Prejudice in the Vichy France Regime. Skyhorse. p. 108. 
^ Kim Munholland, "Wartime France: Remembering Vichy". French Historical Studies (1994) 18#3 pp. 801–820 quoting p. 809
^ a b c d e f g h i L'Humanité, 1 November 1997, Robert Paxton donne une accablante leçon d'histoire (Robert Paxton gives a damning lesson of history) (in French) and Robert Paxton: History Lesson. Retrieved August 29, 2016.
^ Susan Zuccotti, The Holocaust, the French, and the Jews. University of Nebraska Press, 1999, pp. 168–169. ISBN 0-8032-9914-1
^ François Delpech, Historiens et Géographes, no 273, mai–juin 1979, ISSN 0046-757X


Bibliography[edit]
English[edit]


Atkin, Nicholas, Pétain, (Longman, 1997)
Azema, Jean-Pierre. From Munich to Liberation 1938–1944 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1985)
Azema, Jean-Pierre, ed. Collaboration and Resistance: Images of Life in Vichy France 1940–1944 (2000) 220pp; photographs
Boyd, Douglas. Voices from the Dark Years: The Truth About Occupied France 1940-1945 (The History Press, 2015)
Burrin, Philippe. France Under the Germans: Collaboration and Compromise (1998)
Carmen Callil Bad Faith. A Forgotten History of Family, Fatherland and Vichy France. New York: Knopf. 2006. ISBN 0-375-41131-3; Biography of Louis Darquier de Pellepoix, the Commissioner for Jewish Affairs
Christofferson, Thomas R., and Michael S. Christofferson. France during World War II: From Defeat to Liberation (2nd ed. 2006) 206pp; brief introduction online edition
Davies, Peter. France and the Second World War: Resistance, Occupation and Liberation (Introduction to History) (2000) 128pp excerpt and text search
Diamond, Hanna. Women and the Second World War in France, 1939–1948: Choices and Constraints (1999)
Diamond, Hanna, and Simon Kitson, eds. Vichy, Resistance, Liberation: New Perspectives on Wartime France (2005) online edition; online review
Fogg, Shannon Lee. The Politics of Everyday Life in Vichy France: Foreigners, Undesirables, and Strangers (2009), 226pp excerpt and text search
Gildea, Robert. Marianne in Chains: Daily Life in the Heart of France During the German Occupation (2004) excerpt and text search
Glass, Charles, Americans in Paris: Life and Death Under Nazi Occupation (2009) excerpt and text search
Gordon, B. Historical Dictionary of World War Two France: The Occupation, Vichy and the Resistance, 1938–1946 (Westport, Conn., 1998)
Halls, W. D. Politics, Society and Christianity in Vichy France (1995) online edition
Holman, Valerie; Kelly, Debra (January 2000). France at War in the Twentieth Century: Propaganda, Myth, and Metaphor. Contemporary France (Providence, R.I.). New York: Berghahn Books. ISBN 978-1-57181-701-3. OCLC 41497185. 
Jackson, Julian. France: The Dark Years, 1940–1944 (2003) excerpt and text search; online edition
Kedward, H. R. Occupied France: Collaboration and Resistance (Oxford, 1985), short survey
Kitson, Simon, The Hunt for Nazi Spies: Fighting Espionage in Vichy France, (University of Chicago Press, 2008). ISBN 978-0-226-43893-1.
Kooreman, Megan. The Expectation of Justice: France, 1944–1946. (Duke University Press. 1999)
Lackerstein, Debbie. National Regeneration in Vichy France: Ideas and Policies, 1930–1944 (2013) excerpt and text search
Langer, William, Our Vichy gamble, (1947); U.S. policy 1940–42
Larkin, Maurice. France since the Popular Front: Government and People 1936–1996 (Oxford U P 1997). ISBN 0-19-873151-5
Lemmes, Fabian. "Collaboration in wartime France, 1940–1944", European Review of History (2008), 15#2 pp 157–177
Levieux, Eleanor (1999). Insiders' French : beyond the dictionary. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-47502-8. 
Manow, Philip. "Workers, farmers and Catholicism: A history of political class coalitions and the south-European welfare state regime". Journal of European Social Policy (2015) 25#1 pp: 32-49.
Marrus, Michael R. and Robert Paxton. Vichy France and the Jews. (Stanford University Press, 1995). online 1981 edition
Martin Mauthner. Otto Abetz and His Paris Acolytes - French Writers Who Flirted with Fascism, 1930–1945. (Sussex Academic Press, 2016). ISBN 978-1-84519-784-1
Melton, George E. Darlan: Admiral and Statesman of France, 1881–1942. (Praeger, 1998). ISBN 0-275-95973-2.
Mockler, Anthony (1984). Haile Selassie's War: The Italian−Ethiopian Campaign, 1935–1941. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-394-54222-3. 
Nord, Philip. France's New Deal: From the Thirties to the Postwar Era (Princeton U.P., 2010)
Playfair, Major-General I. S. O.; et al. (1954). Butler, J. R. M., ed. The Mediterranean and Middle East: The Early Successes Against Italy (to May 1941). History of the Second World War, United Kingdom Military Series. I. HMSO. OCLC 494123451. Retrieved 3 September 2015. 
Paxton, Robert O. Vichy France: Old Guard and New Order, 1940–1944 (2nd ed. 2001) excerpt and text search; influential survey
Pollard, Miranda. Reign of virtue: mobilizing gender in Vichy France (University of Chicago Press, 2012)
Raugh, H. E. (1993). Wavell in the Middle East, 1939–1941: A Study in Generalship. London: Brassey's. ISBN 0-08-040983-0. 
Smith, Colin. England's Last War Against France: Fighting Vichy, 1940–1942, London, Weidenfeld, 2009. ISBN 978-0-297-85218-6
Sutherland, Jonathan, and Diane Canwell. Vichy Air Force at War: The French Air Force that Fought the Allies in World War II (Pen & Sword Aviation, 2011)
Sweets, John F., Choices in Vichy France: The French Under Nazi Occupation (New York, 1986) excerpt and text search, focus on city of Clermont-Ferrand
Thomas, Martin, The French Empire at War, 1940–45, Manchester University Press, 1998, paperback 2007.
Vinen, Richard. The Unfree French: Life Under the Occupation (2007)
Weisberg, Richard H.. Vichy Law and the Holocaust in France. New York University Press. 1998. ISBN 0-8147-9336-3


Historiography[edit]


Conan, Eric, and Henry Rousso. Vichy: An ever-present past (UP of New England, 1998)
Fishman, Sarah, et al. France at War: Vichy and the Historians (2000) online edition
Golsan, Richard J. Vichy's Afterlife: History & Counterhistory in Postwar France (2000)
Gordon, Bertram M. "The 'Vichy Syndrome' problem in history", French Historical Studies (1995) 19#2 pp 495–518, on the denial of the realities of Vichy in JSTOR
Munholland, Kim. "Wartime France: Remembering Vichy", French Historical Studies (1994) 18#3 pp. 801–820 in JSTOR
Poznanski, Renée. "Rescue of the Jews and the Resistance in France: From History to Historiography", French Politics, Culture and Society (2012) 30#2 pp 8–32.
Rousso, Henry. The Vichy Syndrome: History and Memory in France since 1944. (2nd ed. 2006). ISBN 0-674-93539-X
Singer, Barnett. "The Changing Image of Vichy in France", Contemporary Review Summer 2009 online edition


French[edit]


Henri Amouroux, La grande histoire des Français sous l'Occupation, 8 volumes, Laffont, 1976
Jean-Pierre Azéma & François Bedarida, Vichy et les Français, Paris, Fayard, 1996.

Le régime de Vichy et les Français (dir. Jean-Pierre Azéma & François Bédarida, Institut d'histoire du temps présent), Fayard, 1992, ISBN 2-213-02683-1


Michèle Cointet. Dictionnaire historique de la France sous l'Occupation (2nd ed. 2000) 732pp
Michèle Cointet. L'Eglise sous Vichy. 1940–1945. La repentance en question., Perrin, Paris, 1998. ISBN 2-262-01231-8
Eric Conan et Henry Rousso. Vichy, un passé qui ne passe pas, Fayard, Paris, 1994, ISBN 2-213-59237-3
Yves Maxime Danan, La vie politique à Alger, de 1940 à 1944, L.G.D.J., Paris 1963.
Jean-Luc Einaudi (2001). Les silences de la police : 16 juillet 1942-17 octobre 1961 (in French). Paris: L'Esprit frappeur. ISBN 978-2-84405-173-8. 
André Kaspi. Les Juifs pendant l'Occupation, Seuil, Paris, 1991, ISBN 2-02-013509-4
Serge Klarsfeld. Vichy-Auschwitz. Le rôle de Vichy dans la solution finale de la question juive en France. 1943–1944., Fayard, Paris, 1985, ISBN 2-213-01573-2
Launay, Jacques de. Le Dossier de Vichy, in series, Collection Archives, [Éditions] Julliard, [Paris], 1967. N.B.: A documentary history.
Herbert R. Lottman. Pétain. Seuil, 1984, ISBN 2-02-006763-3
Rousso, Henry (2007). Le régime de Vichy [The Vichy Regime]. Que sais-je ? n° 1720 (in French). Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. ISBN 978-2-13-054077-9. OCLC 777999316. 
Jacques Sabille. "Les Juifs de Tunisie sous Vichy et l'Occupation". Paris: Edition du Centre de Documentation Juive Contemporaine, 1954
Sémelin, Jacques (2013). Persécutions et entraides dans la France occupée : comment 75 % des juifs de France ont échappé à la mort (in French). Paris: Seuil Arènes. ISBN 978-2-35204-235-8. 


German[edit]


Eberhard Jäckel: Frankreich in Hitlers Europa: die deutsche Frankreichpolitik im 2. Weltkrieg, Stuttgart 1966.
Martin Jungius: Der verwaltete Raub. Die "Arisierung" der Wirtschaft in Frankreich 1940–1944. Thorbecke, Ostfildern 2008, Beiheft der Francia Nr. 67, hrsg. von Deutschen Historischen Institut Paris.
Michael Mayer Staaten als Täter. Ministerialbürokratie und 'Judenpolitik' in NS-Deutschland und Vichy-Frankreich. Ein Vergleich. Preface by Horst Möller and Georges-Henri Soutou München, Oldenbourg, 2010 (Studien zur Zeitgeschichte; 80). ISBN 978-3-486-58945-0. (Comparative study of anti-Jewish policy implemented by the government in Nazi-Germany, by German occupational forces in France and by the semi-autonomic French government in Vichy)
Rousso, Henry (2009) [1st pub. 2007 Le Régime de Vichy]. Vichy: Frankreich unter deutscher Besatzung ; 1940 - 1944 [Vichy: France under the Occupation: 1940–1944]. Beck'sche Reihe (in German). Munich: C.H. Beck. ISBN 978-3-406-58454-1. OCLC 316118163. 


Films[edit]


Marcel Ophüls, The Sorrow and the Pity (1969).
Claude Chabrol, The Eye of Vichy (1993).


External links[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Adolf Hitler's Appeal to the French People on the Entry of German Troops into Unoccupied France






Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Adolf Hitler's Letter to Marshal Petain Announcing Complete German Occupation of France






Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Adolf Hitler's Letter to Marshal Petain Announcing Decision to Occupy Toulon






Simon Kitson's Vichy web-page
Original "Establishment of the Vichy government" constitutional act
Map of the "free" and "occupied" French zones
National Geographic coverage of the armistice (in French)
Obituary of a Republic Time Magazine, 22 July 1940
Vica Nazi Propaganda Comics – Duke University Libraries Digital Collections—Pro-Nazi comics produced in Vichy France
NAZI diplomacy: Vichy, 1940
The Holocaust in France, at Yad Vashem website
Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, But Not for All: France and the "Alien" Jews, 1933–1942


 Media related to 
Vichy government (1940-1944) at Wikimedia Commons






v
t
e


Countries occupied by Germany during World War II






Albania
Austria
Belgium
Channel Islands
Czechoslovakia

Bohemia and Moravia
Slovakia


Denmark
Egypt
France
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Luxembourg
Monaco
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
San Marino
Soviet Union

Belarus
Estonia
Latvia
Lithuania
Ukraine


Tunisia
Yugoslavia

Croatia
Macedonia
Montenegro
Serbia











See also: Areas annexed by Nazi Germany • Reichskommissariat • Military administrations •










v
t
e


World War II






Asia and the Pacific

China
South-East Asia
North and Central Pacific
South-West Pacific


Europe

Western
Eastern


Mediterranean and Middle East

North Africa
East Africa
Italy


West Africa
Atlantic
North America
South America


Casualties
Military engagements
Conferences
Commanders





Participants





Allies
(leaders)




Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
China
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
France
Free France (from June 1940)
Greece
India
Italy (from September 1943)
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Philippines (Commonwealth)
Poland
South Africa
Southern Rhodesia
Soviet Union
United Kingdom
United States

Puerto Rico


Yugoslavia






Axis and
Axis-aligned
(leaders)




Albania
Bulgaria
Reorganized National Government of the Republic of China
Independent State of Croatia
Finland
Germany
Hungary
Free India
Iraq
Italy (until September 1943)
Italian Social Republic
Japan
Manchukuo
Philippines (Second Republic)
Romania
Slovakia
Thailand
Vichy France

Armed neutrality







Resistance



Albania
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Czech lands
Denmark
Estonia
Ethiopia
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong
Italy
Japan
Jewish
Korea
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malaya
Netherlands
Northeast China
Norway
Philippines
Poland

Anti-communist


Romania
Thailand
Soviet Union
Slovakia
Western Ukraine
Vietnam
Yugoslavia

Monarchists










Timeline




Prelude



Africa
Asia
Europe





1939



Poland
Phoney War
Winter War
Atlantic
Changsha
China





1940



Weserübung
Netherlands
Belgium
France

Armistice of 22 June 1940


Britain
North Africa
West Africa
British Somaliland
North China
Baltic States
Moldova
Indochina
Greece
Compass





1941



East Africa
Yugoslavia
Shanggao
Greece
Crete
Iraq
Soviet Union (Barbarossa)
Finland
Lithuania
Syria and Lebanon
Kiev
Iran
Leningrad
Gorky
Moscow
Sevastopol
Pearl Harbor

The outbreak of the Pacific War


Hong Kong
Philippines
Changsha
Malaya
Borneo (1941–42)





1942



Burma
Changsha
Java Sea
Coral Sea
Gazala
Dutch Harbor
Attu (occupation)
Kiska
Zhejiang-Jiangxi
Midway
Rzhev
Blue
Stalingrad
Singapore
Dieppe
El Alamein
Guadalcanal
Torch





1943



Tunisia
Kursk
Smolensk
Gorky
Solomon Islands
Attu
Sicily
Cottage
Lower Dnieper
Italy

Armistice of Cassibile


Gilbert and Marshall Islands
Burma
Northern Burma and Western Yunnan
Changde





1944



Monte Cassino / Shingle
Narva
Korsun–Cherkassy
Tempest
Ichi-Go
Overlord
Neptune
Normandy
Mariana and Palau
Bagration
Western Ukraine
Tannenberg Line
Warsaw
Eastern Romania
Belgrade
Paris
Dragoon
Gothic Line
Market Garden
Estonia
Crossbow
Pointblank
Lapland
Hungary
Leyte
Ardennes

Bodenplatte


Philippines (1944–1945)
Burma (1944–45)





1945



Vistula–Oder
Iwo Jima
Western invasion of Germany
Okinawa
Italy (Spring 1945)
Borneo
Syrmian Front
Berlin
Czechoslovakia
Budapest
West Hunan
Guangxi
Surrender of Germany
Project Hula
Manchuria
Manila
Borneo
Taipei
Atomic bombings

Debate


Kuril Islands

Shumshu


Surrender of Japan

End of World War II in Asia










Aspects




General




Famines



Bengal famine of 1943
Chinese famine of 1942–43
Greek Famine of 1941-1944
Dutch famine of 1944–45
Vietnamese Famine of 1945








Air warfare of World War II
Blitzkrieg
Comparative military ranks
Cryptography
Diplomacy
Home front

United States
Australian
United Kingdom


Lend-Lease
Manhattan Project
Military awards
Military equipment
Military production
Nazi plunder
Opposition
Technology

Allied cooperation


Total war
Strategic bombing
Puppet states
Women
Art and World War II








Aftermath



Expulsion of Germans
Operation Paperclip
Operation Osoaviakhim
Operation Keelhaul
Occupation of Germany
Territorial changes of Germany
Soviet occupations

Romania
Poland
Hungary
Baltic States


Occupation of Japan
First Indochina War
Indonesian National Revolution
Cold War
Decolonization
Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany
Popular culture





War crimes



Allied war crimes

Soviet war crimes
British war crimes
United States war crimes


German (Forced labour) / Wehrmacht war crimes

Holocaust
Aftermath
Response
Prosecution


Italian war crimes
Japanese war crimes

Unit 731
Prosecution


Croatian war crimes

against the Serbs
against the Jews


Romanian war crimes





Wartime
sexual violence



German military brothels
Camp brothels
Rape during the occupation of Japan
Sook Ching
Comfort women
Rape of Nanking
Rape of Manila
Rape during the occupation of Germany
Rape during the liberation of France
Rape during the liberation of Poland





Prisoners



Finnish prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
German prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
German prisoners of war in the United States
Italian prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
Japanese prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
Japanese prisoners of war in World War II
German mistreatment of Soviet prisoners of war
Polish prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
Romanian prisoners of war in the Soviet Union











Bibliography
Category
Portal












v
t
e


France topics



History




Periods



Timeline
Prehistory
Celtic Gaul
Roman Gaul
Kingdom of the Visigoths
Francia

West Francia


Middle Ages
Early modern era
Long nineteenth century

Revolutionary era
Napoleonic era
Belle Époque


Twentieth century





Regimes



Absolute monarchy

Ancien Régime


First Republic
First Empire
Constitutional monarchy

Bourbon Restoration
July Monarchy


Second Republic
Second Empire
Third Republic
France during the Second World War

Free France
Vichy France
Provisional Republic


Fourth Republic
Fifth Republic








Geography







Administrative divisions
Cities
Climate
Extreme points
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers








Politics







Constitution
Elections

presidential


Foreign relations
Government
Human rights

Intersex
LGBT


Judiciary
Law

enforcement


Military
Parliament
Political parties








Economy







Agriculture
Banking

Central bank


Economic history
Energy
Euro
Exports
Franc (former currency)
French subdivisions by GDP
Stock exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Health care
People
Poverty
Religion
Social class
Welfare





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema (comedy)
Cuisine
Fashion
Gardens
Language
Literature
Media
Music
Philosophy
Public holidays
Sport
Symbols
Theatre












Outline




Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject







Coordinates: 46°10′N 3°24′E﻿ / ﻿46.167°N 3.400°E﻿ / 46.167; 3.400





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vichy_France&oldid=817756144"					Categories: Former countries in EuropeStates and territories established in 1940Vichy FranceFrance in World War IIClient states of Nazi GermanyGerman occupation of France during World War IIFormer countries in French history1940s in FranceThe Holocaust in FranceModern history of FrancePolitical history of France by periodPolitics of World War IIStates and territories disestablished in 19441940 establishments in France1944 disestablishments in France1940 establishments in Europe1944 disestablishments in EuropeCatholicism and politicsPhilippe PétainVichyFrance–Germany relationsHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with French-language external linksPages with login required references or sourcesCS1 Norwegian-language sources (no)Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from November 2013Articles containing French-language textFormer country articles requiring maintenancePages using infobox former country with unknown parametersPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parametersPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parametersArticles needing additional references from April 2013All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from November 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2017Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from November 2014Articles to be expanded from May 2016All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesInterlanguage link template link numberArticles needing additional references from February 2012Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from February 2009Articles to be expanded from August 2016Articles needing additional references from December 2016Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012Articles with unsourced statements from July 2009Articles with unsourced statements from July 2007Articles with unsourced statements from April 2009Articles with unsourced statements from May 2009Articles needing additional references from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012CS1 German-language sources (de)Coordinates on Wikidata