"Ortsteil" redirects here. For subdistricts of Berlin, see Boroughs and neighborhoods of Berlin.
For other uses, see Village (disambiguation).




The old village of Hollókő, Nógrád, Hungary (UNESCO World Heritage Site)






An alpine village in the Lötschental Valley, Switzerland






Hybe in Slovakia with Western Tatra mountains in background






Berber village in Ourika valley, High Atlas, Morocco


A village is a clustered human settlement or community, larger than a hamlet but smaller than a town, with a population ranging from a few hundred to a few thousand. Though often located in rural areas, the term urban village is also applied to certain urban neighborhoods. Villages are normally permanent, with fixed dwellings; however, transient villages can occur. Further, the dwellings of a village are fairly close to one another, not scattered broadly over the landscape, as a dispersed settlement.
In the past, villages were a usual form of community for societies that practice subsistence agriculture, and also for some non-agricultural societies. In Great Britain, a hamlet earned the right to be called a village when it built a church.[1] In many cultures, towns and cities were few, with only a small proportion of the population living in them. The Industrial Revolution attracted people in larger numbers to work in mills and factories; the concentration of people caused many villages to grow into towns and cities. This also enabled specialization of labor and crafts, and development of many trades. The trend of urbanization continues, though not always in connection with industrialization.
Although many patterns of village life have existed, the typical village was small, consisting of perhaps 5 to 30 families. Homes were situated together for sociability and defence, and land surrounding the living quarters was farmed. Traditional fishing villages were based on artisan fishing and located adjacent to fishing grounds.



Contents


1 South Asia
2 Central Asia
3 East Asia
4 Southeast Asia

4.1 Indonesia
4.2 Malaysia and Singapore
4.3 Myanmar
4.4 Philippines
4.5 Thailand
4.6 Vietnam


5 Central and Eastern Europe

5.1 Slavic countries

5.1.1 Bulgaria
5.1.2 Russia
5.1.3 Ukraine




6 Western and Southern Europe

6.1 France
6.2 Italy
6.3 Spain
6.4 Portugal
6.5 Netherlands
6.6 United Kingdom


7 Middle East

7.1 Lebanon
7.2 Syria


8 Australasia and Oceania
9 South America
10 North America

10.1 Canada
10.2 United States

10.2.1 Incorporated villages
10.2.2 Unincorporated villages




11 Africa

11.1 Nigeria
11.2 South Africa


12 See also

12.1 Settlement types
12.2 Countries and localities


13 Footnotes
14 External links



South Asia[edit]




Villages in Rajasthan, India


"The soul of India lives in its villages", declared M. K. Gandhi[2] at the beginning of 20th century. According to the 2011 census of India, 68.84% of Indians (around 833.1 million people) live in 640,867 different villages.[3] The size of these villages varies considerably. 236,004 Indian villages have a population of fewer than 500, while 3,976 villages have a population of 10,000+. Most of the villages have their own temple, mosque, or church, depending on the local religious following.
Central Asia[edit]
Main article: Aul
Auyl (Kazakh: Ауыл) is a Kazakh word meaning "village" in Kazakhstan.[4] According to the 2009 census of Kazakhstan, 42.7% of Kazakhs (7.5 million people) live in 8172 different villages.[5] To refer to this concept along with the word "auyl" often used the Slavic word "selo" in Northern Kazakhstan.
East Asia[edit]




A typical rural village in Hainan, China


People's Republic of China
Main article: Village (China)
In mainland China, villages 村 are divisions under township Zh:乡 or town Zh:镇.
Republic of China (Taiwan) In the Republic of China (Taiwan), villages are divisions under townships or county-controlled cities. The village is called a tsuen or cūn (村) under a rural township (鄉) and a li (里) under an urban township (鎮) or a county-controlled city. See also Li (unit).
Japan




Shirakawa-gō, Gifu, Japan


Main article: Villages of Japan
South Korea
Main article: Villages of South Korea
Southeast Asia[edit]
Indonesia[edit]
Main article: Administrative village




The nagari of Pariangan, West Sumatra


In Indonesia, depending on the principles they are administered, villages are called Kampung or Desa (officially kelurahan). A "Desa" (a term that derives from a Sanskrit word meaning "country" that is found in the name "Bangladesh"=bangla and desh/desha) is administered according to traditions and customary law (adat), while a kelurahan is administered along more "modern" principles. Desa are generally located in rural areas while kelurahan are generally urban subdivisions. A village head is respectively called kepala desa or lurah. Both are elected by the local community. A desa or kelurahan is the subdivision of a kecamatan (subdistrict), in turn the subdivision of a kabupaten (district) or kota (city).
The same general concept applies all over Indonesia. However, there is some variation among the vast numbers of Austronesian ethnic groups. For instance, in Bali villages have been created by grouping traditional hamlets or banjar, which constitute the basis of Balinese social life. In the Minangkabau area in West Sumatra province, traditional villages are called nagari (a term deriving from another Sanskrit word meaning "city", which can be found in the name like "Srinagar"=sri and nagar/nagari). In some areas such as Tanah Toraja, elders take turns watching over the village at a command post.[citation needed] As a general rule, desa and kelurahan are groupings of hamlets (kampung in Indonesian, dusun in the Javanese language, banjar in Bali). a kampung is defined today as a village in Brunei and Indonesia.
Malaysia and Singapore[edit]




Morten Village in Malacca, Malaysia


Kampung is a term used in Malaysia, (sometimes spelling kampong or kompong in the English language) for "a Malay hamlet or village in a Malay-speaking country".[6] In Malaysia, a kampung is determined as a locality with 10,000 or fewer people. Since historical times, every Malay village came under the leadership of a penghulu (village chief), who has the power to hear civil matters in his village (see Courts of Malaysia for more details).
A Malay village typically contains a "masjid" (mosque) or "surau", paddy fields and Malay houses on stilts. Malay and Indonesian villagers practice the culture of helping one another as a community, which is better known as "joint bearing of burdens" (gotong royong).[7] They are family-oriented (especially the concept of respecting one's family [particularly the parents and elders]), courtesy and practice belief in God ("Tuhan") as paramount to everything else. It is common to see a cemetery near the mosque. All Muslims in the Malay or Indonesian village want to be prayed for, and to receive Allah's blessings in the afterlife. In Sarawak and East Kalimantan, some villages are called 'long', primarily inhabited by the Orang Ulu.
Malaysian kampung are found in Singapore, but there are few kampung villages remaining, mostly on islands surrounding Singapore, such as Pulau Ubin. In the past, there were many kampung villages in Singapore but development and urbanization have replaced them.
The term "kampung", sometimes spelled "kampong", is one of many Malay words to have entered common usage in Malaysia and Singapore. Locally, the term is frequently used to refer to either one's hometown or a rural village, depending on context.
Myanmar[edit]
Main article: Villages of Myanmar
Philippines[edit]
In urban areas of the Philippines, the term "village" most commonly refers to private subdivisions, especially gated communities. These villages emerged in the mid-20th century and were initially the domain of elite urban dwellers. Those are common in major cities in the country and their residents have a wide range of income levels. Such villages may or may not correspond to administrative units (usually barangays) or be privately administered. Barangays more correspond to the villages of old times, and the chairman (formerly a village datu) now settles administrative, intrapersonal, and political matters or polices the village though with much less authority and respect than in Indonesia or Malaysia.
Thailand[edit]
Main article: Muban
Vietnam[edit]
Village, or "làng", is a basis of Vietnam society. Vietnam's village is the typical symbol[citation needed] of Asian agricultural production. Vietnam's village typically contains: a village gate, "lũy tre" (bamboo hedges), "đình làng" (communal house) where "thành hoàng" (tutelary god) is worshiped, a common well, "đồng lúa" (rice field), "chùa" (temple) and houses of all families in the village. All the people in Vietnam's villages usually have a blood relationship. They are farmers who grow rice and have the same traditional handicraft. Vietnam's villages have an important role in society (Vietnamese saying: "Custom rules the law" -"Phép vua thua lệ làng" [literally: the king's law yields to village customs]). It is common for Vietnamese villagers to prefer to be buried in their village upon death.[citation needed]
Central and Eastern Europe[edit]
Slavic countries[edit]




Lug, village in northern Serbia


Selo (Cyrillic: село; Polish: sioło) is a Slavic word meaning "village" in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Russia, Serbia, and Ukraine. For example, there are numerous sela (plural of selo) called Novo Selo in Bulgaria, Croatia, Montenegro and others in Serbia, and Macedonia. Another Slavic word for a village is ves (Polish: wieś, Czech: ves, vesnice, Slovak: ves, Slovene: vas). In Slovenia, the word selo is used for very small villages (fewer than 100 people) and in dialects; the Slovene word vas is used all over Slovenia.
Bulgaria[edit]
Main article: List of villages in Bulgaria




Kovachevitsa, a village in southern Bulgaria


In Bulgaria, the different types of sela vary from a small selo of 5 to 30 families to one of several thousand people. According to a 2002 census, in that year there were 2,385,000 Bulgarian citizens living in settlements classified as villages.[8] A 2004 Human Settlement Profile on Bulgaria[9] conducted by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs stated that:

The most intensive is the migration "city – city". Approximately 46% of all migrated people have changed their residence from one city to another. The share of the migration processes "village – city" is significantly less – 23% and "city – village" – 20%. The migration "village – village" in 2002 is 11%.[8]

It also stated that

the state of the environment in the small towns and villages is good apart from the low level of infrastructure.[8]

In Bulgaria, it is becoming popular to visit villages for the atmosphere, culture, crafts, hospitality of the people and the surrounding nature. This is called selski turizam (Bulgarian: селски туризъм), meaning "village tourism".[citation needed]
Russia[edit]




Nook of a village near Lake Baikal, Siberia


In Russia, as of the 2010 Census, 26.3% of the country's population lives in rural localities;[10] down from 26.7% recorded in the 2002 Census.[10] Multiple types of rural localities exist, but the two most common are derevnya (деревня) and selo (село). Historically, the formal indication of status was religious: a city (gorod) had a cathedral, a selo had a church, while a derevnya had neither.
The lowest administrative unit of the Russian Empire, a volost, or its Soviet or modern Russian successor, a selsoviet, was typically headquartered in a selo and embraced a few neighboring villages.
In the 1960s–1970s, the depopulation of the smaller villages was driven by the central planners' drive in order to get the farm workers out of smaller, "prospect-less" hamlets and into the collective or state farms' main villages or even larger towns and city, with more amenities.[11]
Most Russian rural residents are involved in agricultural work, and it is very common for villagers to produce their own food. As prosperous urbanites purchase village houses for their second homes, Russian villages sometimes are transformed into dacha settlements, used mostly for seasonal residence.
The historically Cossack regions of Southern Russia and parts of Ukraine, with their fertile soil and absence of serfdom, had a rather different pattern of settlement from central and northern Russia. While peasants of central Russia lived in a village around the lord's manor, a Cossack family often lived on its own farm, called khutor. A number of such khutors plus a central village made up the administrative unit with a center in a stanitsa (Russian: стани́ца; Ukrainian: станиця, stanytsia). Such stanitsas often with a few thousand residents, were usually larger than a typical selo in central Russia.
The term aul/aal is used to refer mostly Muslim-populated villages in Caucasus and Idel-Ural, without regard to the number of residents.
Ukraine[edit]




Mayaky Village, Donetsk, Ukraine






The largest Ukrainian village ("selo") Kosmach


In Ukraine, a village, known locally as a "selo" (село), is considered the lowest administrative unit. Villages may have an individual administration (silrada) or a joint administration, combining two or more villages. Villages may also be under the jurisdiction of a city council (miskrada) or town council (selyshchna rada) administration.
There is, however, another smaller type of settlement which is designated in Ukrainian as a selysche (селище). This type of community is generally referred to in English as a "settlement". In comparison with an urban-type settlement, Ukrainian legislation does not have a concrete definition or a criterion to differentiate such settlements from villages. They represent a type of a small rural locality that might have once been a khutir, a fisherman's settlement, or a dacha. They are administered by a silrada (council) located in a nearby adjacent village. Sometimes, the term "selysche" is also used in a more general way to refer to adjacent settlements near a bigger city including urban-type settlements (selysche miskoho typu) or villages. However, ambiguity is often avoided in connection with urbanized settlements by referring to them using the three-letter abbreviation smt instead.
The khutir (хутір) and stanytsia (станиця) are not part of the administrative division any longer, primarily due to collectivization. Khutirs were very small rural localities consisting of just few housing units and were sort of individual farms. They became really popular during the Stolypin reform in the early 20th century. During the collectivization, however, residents of such settlements were usually declared to be kulaks and had all their property confiscated and distributed to others (nationalized) without any compensation. The stanitsa likewise has not survived as an administrative term. The stanitsa was a type of a collective community that could include one or more settlements such as villages, khutirs, and others. Today, stanitsa-type formations have only survived in Kuban (Russian Federation) where Ukrainians were resettled during the time of the Russian Empire.

Western and Southern Europe[edit]
France[edit]




Saint-Cirq-Lapopie in Lot is one of "The Most Beautiful Villages in France".


A commune is considered as a village if it is not part a ville (urban unit). For the Insee, an urban unit has more than 2000 inhabitants living in buildings less than 200 metres from each others.[12] An independent association named Les Plus Beaux Villages de France, was created in 1982 to promote assets of small and picturesque French villages of quality heritage. As of 2008, 152 villages in France have been listed in "The Most Beautiful Villages of France".
Italy[edit]




The village of Collina, part of the Forni Avoltri municipality, in Friuli, Italy


See also: Frazione and Town § Italy
In Italy, villages are spread throughout the country. No legal definition of village exists in Italian law; nonetheless, a settlement inhabited by less than 2000 people is usually described as "village". More often, Italian villages that are a part of a municipality are called frazione, whereas the village that hosts the municipal seat is called paese (town) or capoluogo.
Spain[edit]
In Spain, a village (pueblo or aldea) refers to a small population unit, smaller than a town (villa) and a city (ciudad), typically located in a rural environment. While commonly it is the smallest administrative unit (municipio), it is possible for a village to be legally composed of smaller population units in its territory. There is not a clear-cut distinction between villages, towns and cities in Spain, since they had been traditionally categorized according to their religious importance and their relationship with surrounding population units.
Portugal[edit]
Villages are more usual in the northern and central regions, Azores Islands and in the Alentejo. Most of them have a church and a "Casa do Povo" (people's house), where the village's summer romarias or religious festivities are usually held. Summer is also when many villages are host to a range of folk festivals and fairs, taking advantage of the fact that many of the locals who reside abroad tend to come back to their native village for the holidays.
Netherlands[edit]
In the flood prone districts of the Netherlands, villages were traditionally built on low man-made hills called terps before the introduction of regional dyke-systems. In modern days, the term dorp (lit. "village") is usually applied to settlements no larger than 20,000, though there's no official law regarding status of settlements in the Netherlands.
United Kingdom[edit]
See also: List of the largest villages in England




Shortstown in the Eastcotts Parish, Bedford, Bedfordshire


A village in the UK is a compact settlement of houses, smaller in size than a town, and generally based on agriculture or, in some areas, mining (such as Ouston, County Durham), quarrying or sea fishing. They are very similar to those in Ireland.




The main street of the village of Castle Combe, Wiltshire, England


The major factors in the type of settlement are location of water sources, organisation of agriculture and landholding, and likelihood of flooding. For example, in areas such as the Lincolnshire Wolds, the villages are often found along the spring line halfway down the hillsides, and originate as spring line settlements, with the original open field systems around the village. In northern Scotland, most villages are planned to a grid pattern located on or close to major roads, whereas in areas such as the Forest of Arden, woodland clearances produced small hamlets around village greens.[13][14] Because of the topography of the Clent Hills the north Worcestershire village of Clent is an example of a village with no centre but instead consists of series of hamlets scattered on and around the Hills.
Some villages have disappeared (for example, deserted medieval villages), sometimes leaving behind a church or manor house and sometimes nothing but bumps in the fields. Some show archaeological evidence of settlement at three or four different layers, each distinct from the previous one. Clearances may have been to accommodate sheep or game estates, or enclosure, or may have resulted from depopulation, such as after the Black Death or following a move of the inhabitants to more prosperous districts. Other villages have grown and merged and often form hubs within the general mass of suburbia—such as Hampstead, London and Didsbury in Manchester. Many villages are now predominantly dormitory locations and have suffered the loss of shops, churches and other facilities.
For many British people, the village represents an ideal of Great Britain. Seen as being far from the bustle of modern life, it is represented as quiet and harmonious, if a little inward-looking. This concept of an unspoilt Arcadia is present in many popular representations of the village such as the radio serial The Archers or the best kept village competitions.[15]




Bisley, Gloucestershire, a village in the Cotswolds


Many villages in South Yorkshire, North Nottinghamshire, North East Derbyshire, County Durham, South Wales and Northumberland are known as pit villages. These (such as Murton, County Durham) grew from hamlets when the sinking of a colliery in the early 20th century resulted in a rapid growth in their population and the colliery owners built new housing, shops, pubs and churches. Some pit villages outgrew nearby towns by area and population; for example, Rossington in South Yorkshire came to have over four times more people than the nearby town of Bawtry. Some pit villages grew to become towns; for example, Maltby in South Yorkshire grew from 600 people in the 19th century[16] to over 17,000 in 2007.[17] Maltby was constructed under the auspices of the Sheepbridge Coal and Iron Company and included ample open spaces and provision for gardens.[18]
In the UK, the main historical distinction between a hamlet and a village was that the latter had a church,[1] and so usually was the centre of worship for an ecclesiastical parish. However, some civil parishes may contain more than one village. The typical village had a pub or inn, shops, and a blacksmith. But many of these facilities are now gone, and many villages are dormitories for commuters. The population of such settlements ranges from a few hundred people to around five thousand. A village is distinguished from a town in that:

A village should not have a regular agricultural market, although today such markets are uncommon even in settlements which clearly are towns.
A village does not have a town hall nor a mayor.
If a village is the principal settlement of a civil parish, then any administrative body that administers it at parish level should be called a parish council or parish meeting, and not a town council or city council. However, some civil parishes have no functioning parish, town, or city council nor a functioning parish meeting. In Wales, where the equivalent of an English civil parish is called a Community, the body that administers it is called a Community Council. However, larger councils may elect to call themselves town councils.[19] Unlike Wales, Scottish community councils have no statutory powers.[20]
There should be a clear green belt or open fields, as, for example, seen on aerial maps for Ouston surrounding its parish[21] borders. However this may not be applicable to urbanised villages: although these may not considered to be villages, they are often widely referred to as being so; an example of this is Horsforth in Leeds.

Middle East[edit]
Lebanon[edit]




The main square of Saifi Village in Centre Ville, Beirut, Lebanon


Like France, villages in Lebanon are usually located in remote mountainous areas. The majority of villages in Lebanon retain their Aramaic names or are derivative of the Aramaic names, and this is because Aramaic was still in use in Mount Lebanon up to the 18th century.[22]
Many of the Lebanese villages are a part of districts, these districts are known as "kadaa" which includes the districts of Baabda (Baabda), Aley (Aley), Matn (Jdeideh), Keserwan (Jounieh), Chouf (Beiteddine), Jbeil (Byblos), Tripoli (Tripoli), Zgharta (Zgharta / Ehden), Bsharri (Bsharri), Batroun (Batroun), Koura (Amioun), Miniyeh-Danniyeh (Minyeh / Sir Ed-Danniyeh), Zahle (Zahle), Rashaya (Rashaya), Western Beqaa (Jebjennine / Saghbine), Sidon (Sidon), Jezzine (Jezzine), Tyre (Tyre), Nabatiyeh (Nabatiyeh), Marjeyoun (Marjeyoun), Hasbaya (Hasbaya), Bint Jbeil (Bint Jbeil), Baalbek (Baalbek), and Hermel (Hermel).
The district of Danniyeh consists of thirty six small villages, which includes Almrah, Kfirchlan, Kfirhbab, Hakel al Azimah, Siir, Bakhoun, Miryata, Assoun, Sfiiri, Kharnoub, Katteen, Kfirhabou, Zghartegrein, Ein Qibil.
Danniyeh (known also as Addinniyeh, Al Dinniyeh, Al Danniyeh, Arabic: سير الضنية) is a region located in Miniyeh-Danniyeh District in the North Governorate of Lebanon. The region lies east of Tripoli, extends north as far as Akkar District, south to Bsharri District and Zgharta District and as far east as Baalbek and Hermel. Dinniyeh has an excellent ecological environment filled with woodlands, orchards and groves. Several villages are located in this mountainous area, the largest town being Sir Al Dinniyeh.
An example of a typical mountainous Lebanese village in Dannieh would be Hakel al Azimah which is a small village that belongs to the district of Danniyeh, situated between Bakhoun and Assoun's boundaries. It is in the centre of the valleys that lie between the Arbeen Mountains and the Khanzouh.
Syria[edit]




view from Al-Annaze village, near Tartus, Syria


Syria contains a large number of villages that vary in size and importance, including the ancient, historical and religious villages, such as Ma'loula, Sednaya, and Brad (Mar Maroun's time). The diversity of the Syrian environments creates significant differences between the Syrian villages in terms of the economic activity and the method of adoption. Villages in the south of Syria (Hauran, Jabal al-Druze), the north-east (the Syrian island) and the Orontes River basin depend mostly on agriculture, mainly grain, vegetables and fruits. Villages in the region of Damascus and Aleppo depend on trading. Some other villages, such as Marmarita depend heavily on tourist activity.
Mediterranean cities in Syria, such as Tartus and Latakia have similar types of villages. Mainly, villages were built in very good sites which had the fundamentals of the rural life, like water. An example of a Mediterranean Syrian village in Tartus would be al-Annazah, which is a small village that belongs to the area of al-Sauda. The area of al-Sauda is called a nahiya, which is a subdistrict.
Australasia and Oceania[edit]




The village of Puamau on Hiva Oa, Marquesas Islands, French Polynesia


Pacific Islands Communities on pacific islands were historically called villages by English speakers who traveled and settled in the area. Some communities such as several Villages of Guam continue to be called villages despite having large populations that can exceed 40,000 residents.
New Zealand The traditional Māori village was the pā, a fortified hill-top settlement. Tree-fern logs and flax were the main building materials. As in Australia (see below) the term is now used mainly in respect of shopping or other planned areas.
Australia The term village often is used in reference to small planned communities such as retirement communities or shopping districts, and tourist areas such as ski resorts. Small rural communities are usually known as townships. Larger settlements are known as towns.
South America[edit]
Argentina Usually set in remote mountainous areas, some also cater to winter sports or tourism. See Uspallata, La Cumbrecita, Villa Traful and La Cumbre.
North America[edit]
In contrast to the Old World, the concept of village in today's North America north of Mexico is largely disconnected from its rural and communal origins. The situation is different in Mexico because of its large bulk of indigenous population living in traditional villages.
Canada[edit]
Main article: Municipal government in Canada




A Newfoundland fishing village


United States[edit]
Main article: Village (United States)




A church in Newfane, Vermont


Incorporated villages[edit]
In twenty[23] U.S. states, the term "village" refers to a specific form of incorporated municipal government, similar to a city but with less authority and geographic scope. However, this is a generality; in many states, there are villages that are an order of magnitude larger than the smallest cities in the state. The distinction is not necessarily based on population, but on the relative powers granted to the different types of municipalities and correspondingly, different obligations to provide specific services to residents.
In some states such as New York, Wisconsin, or Michigan, a village is usually an incorporated municipality, within a single town or civil township. In some cases, the village may be coterminous with the town or township. There are also villages that span the boundaries of more than one town or township; some villages may straddle county borders.
There is no population limit to villages in New York. Hempstead, the largest village, has 55,000 residents; making it more populous than some of the state's cities. However; villages in the state may not exceed five square miles (13 km²) in area. Michigan and Illinois also have no set population limit for villages and there are many villages that are larger than cities in those states. The village of Arlington Heights, IL had 75,101 residents as of the 2010 census.
In Michigan, a village is always legally part of a township. Villages can incorporate land in multiple townships and even multiple counties. The largest village in the state is Beverly Hills in Southfield Township which had a population of 10,267 as of the 2010 census.
In the state of Wisconsin, a village is always legally separate from the towns that it has been incorporated from. The largest village is Menomonee Falls, which has over 32,000 residents.
In Ohio villages are often legally part of the township from which they were incorporated, although exceptions such as Hiram exist, in which the village is separate from the township.[24] They have no area limitations, but become cities if they grow a population of more than 5,000.[25]
In Maryland, a locality designated "Village of ..." may be either an incorporated town or a special tax district.[26] An example of the latter is the Village of Friendship Heights.
In states that have New England towns, a "village" is a center of population or trade, including the town center, in an otherwise sparsely developed town or city — for instance, the village of Hyannis in the town of the Barnstable, Massachusetts.
Unincorporated villages[edit]




Oracle, Arizona is an unincorporated rural town often called a village in local media


In many states, the term "village" is used to refer to a relatively small unincorporated community, similar to a hamlet in New York state. This informal usage may be found even in states that have villages as an incorporated municipality, although such usage might be considered incorrect and confusing.
Africa[edit]
Nigeria[edit]




A village in Kaita, Nigeria


Villages in Nigeria vary significantly because of cultural and geographical differences.
Northern Nigeria
In the North, villages were under traditional rulers long before the Jihad of Shaikh Uthman Bin Fodio and after the Holy War. At that time Traditional rulers used to have absolute power in their administrative regions. After Dan Fodio's Jihad in 1804,[27] political structure of the North became Islamic where emirs were the political, administrative and spiritual leaders of their people. These emirs appointed a number of people to assisted them in running the administration and that included villages.[28]
Every Hausa village was reigned by Magaji (Village head) who was answerable to his Hakimi (mayor) at town level. The Magaji also had his cabinet who assisted him rule his village efficiently, among whom was Mai-Unguwa (Ward Head).[29]
With the creation of Native Authority in Nigerian provinces, the autocratic power of village heads along with all other traditional rulers was subdued hence they ruled 'under the guidance of colonial officials'.[30]
Even though the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has not recognised the functions of traditional rulers, they still command respect in their villages[30] and political office holders liaise with them almost every time to reach people.
In Hausa language, village is called ƙauye and every local government area is made up of several small and large ƙauyuka (villages). For instance, Girka is a village in Kaita town in Katsina state in Nigeria. They have mud houses with thatched roofing though, like in most of villages in the North, zinc roofing is becoming a common sight.
Still in many villages in the North, people do not have access to portable water.[31] So they fetch water from ponds and streams. Others are lucky to have wells within a walking distance. Women rush in the morning to fetch water in their clay pots from wells, boreholes and streams. However, government is now providing them with water bore holes.[32]
Electricity and GSM network are reaching more and more villages in the North almost everyday. So bad feeder roads may lead to remote villages with electricity and unstable GSM network.[33]
Southern Nigeria
Village dwellers in the Southeastern region lived separately in 'clusters of huts belonging to the patrilinage'.[34] As the rainforest region is dominated by Igbo speaking people, the villages are called ime obodo (inside town) in Igbo language. A typical large village might have a few thousand persons who shared the same market, meeting place and beliefs.
South Africa[edit]
In South Africa the majority of people in rural areas reside in villages. They vary in size from having an population of less than 500 to around 1000
See also[edit]


Global village
Linear village
Village green
Village lock-up
police village

Settlement types[edit]

Dugout
Fishing village
Hamlet
Microtown

Countries and localities[edit]

Dhani and villages
Dogon villages
Hakka architecture
Ksar
List of villages in Europe by country
Pueblo
Sołectwo (rough equivalent in Poland)
Ville


Developed environments


Developed environments
City
Exurban
Megalopolis
Rural
Suburban
Urban area


Footnotes[edit]


^ a b Dr Greg Stevenson, "What is a Village?" Archived 23 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine., Exploring British Villages, BBC, 2006, accessed 20 October 2009
^ R.K. Bhatnagar. INDIA’S MEMBERSHIP OF ITER PROJECT. PRESS INFORMATION BUREAU. GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, BANGALORE
^ "Indian Census". Censusindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 14 May 2007. Retrieved 2012-04-09. 
^ Қазақ тілі термиңдерінің салалық ғылыми түсіндірме сөздігі: География және геодезия. — Алматы: "Мектеп" баспасы, 2007. — 264 бет. ISBN 9965-36-367-6
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 14 March 2014. .
^ "Meriam-Webster Online". M-w.com. 2007-04-25. Retrieved 2010-03-28. 
^ Geertz, Clifford. "Local Knowledge: Fact and Law in Comparative Perspective", pp. 167–234 in Geertz Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology, NY: Basic Books. 1983.
^ a b c "Human Settlement Country Profile, Bulgaria (2004)" (PDF). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Retrieved 2008-11-30. 
^ HUMAN SETTLEMENT COUNTRY PROFILE: BULGARIA. United Nations (2004)
^ a b Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2011). "Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года. Том 1" [2010 All-Russian Population Census, vol. 1]. Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года (2010 All-Russia Population Census) (in Russian). Federal State Statistics Service. Retrieved June 29, 2012. 
^ "Российское село в демографическом измерении" (Rural Russia measured demographically) (in Russian). This article reports the following census statistics:


Census year
1959
1970
1979
1989
2002


Total number of rural localities in Russia
294,059
216,845
177,047
152,922
155,289


Of them, with population 1 to 10 persons
41,493
25,895
23,855
30,170
47,089


Of them, with population 11 to 200 persons
186,437
132,515
105,112
80,663
68,807



^ (in French) Ville - definition on the insee.fr site.
^ Wild, Martin Trevor (2004). Village England: A Social History of the Countryside. I.B.Tauris. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-86064-939-4. 
^ Taylor, Christopher (1984). Village and farmstead: A History of Rural Settlement in England. G. Philip. p. 192. ISBN 978-0-540-01082-0. 
^ OECD (2011). OECD Rural Policy Reviews: England, United Kingdom 2011. OECD Publishing. p. 237. ISBN 9264094423. 
^ The Parliamentary gazetteer of England and Wales. 3. A. Fullarton & Co. 1851. p. 344. 
^ "Maltby Ward". Rotherham Metropolitan Borough Council. Retrieved 2011-06-26. 
^ Baylies, Carolyn Louise (1993). The history of the Yorkshire miners, 1881–1918. Routledge. ISBN 0415093597. 
^ "National Statistics". Statistics.gov.uk. Retrieved 2010-03-28. 
^ "Portobello Community Council". Porty.org.uk. Retrieved 2010-03-28. 
^ "Ouston Parish Council". durham.gov.uk. 
^ "A project proposal". Almashriq.hiof.no. Retrieved 2010-03-28. 
^ "Village". Websters-online-dictionary.org. Retrieved 2010-03-28. 
^ "Detailed map of Ohio" (PDF). United States Census Bureau. 2000. Retrieved 2010-03-28. 
^ "Ohio Revised Code Section 703.01(A)". Retrieved 2010-03-28. 
^ 2002 Census of Governments, Individual State Descriptions (PDF)
^ The New Encyclopædia Britannica, Vol. 6, 15th Edition. ISBN 0-85229-961-3, p. 763
^ Sani Abubakar Lugga. The Great Province, Lugga Press Gidan Lugga, Kofar Marusa Road, Katsina Nigeria, ISBN 978-2105-48-1, p. 43
^ Sani Abubakar Lugga. The Great Province, Lugga Press Gidan Lugga, Kofar Marusa Road, Katsina Nigeria, ISBN 978-2105-48-1, p. 63
^ a b A Johnson Ugoji Anyaele. Comprehensive Government, A Johnson Publishers LTD. Surulere, Lagos. ISBN 978-2799-49-1, p. 123
^ Adesiyun, A. A.; Adekeye, J. O.; Umoh, J. U.; Nadarajab, M. (1983). "Studies on well water and possible health risks in Katsina, Nigeria". The Journal of hygiene. 90 (2): 199–205. doi:10.1017/S0022172400028862. PMC 2134251 . PMID 6833745. 
^ How Katsina state is doing so much with so little. abrahamplace.blogspot.jp (29 October 2012; original from peoplesdaily-online.com).
^ Nigerian Operator Expands Coverage. cellular-news.com (5 April 2006).
^ Village. igboguide.org


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Villages.





Look up village in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Types of villages (anthropogenic biomes)
 "Village Communities". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911. 
[1] audio recording of Indonesian kampung sounds







v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country








Authority control



GND: 4012775-8
HDS: 7947











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Village&oldid=818250853"					Categories: VillagesTypes of country subdivisionsRural geographyUrban geographyTypes of populated placesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Articles with Russian-language external linksArticles with French-language external linksArticles containing Kazakh-language textArticles containing Chinese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2010Articles with unsourced statements from May 2009Articles with unsourced statements from July 2009Articles containing Polish-language textArticles containing Czech-language textArticles containing Slovak-language textArticles containing Slovene-language textArticles containing Bulgarian-language textArticles with unsourced statements from November 2008Articles containing Russian-language textArticles containing Ukrainian-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceUse dmy dates from September 2010Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers