For other people named Walter Scott, see Walter Scott (disambiguation).






This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (February 2017)





Sir Walter Scott, Bart.



Raeburn's portrait of Sir Walter Scott in 1822



Born
15 August 1771
College Wynd, Edinburgh
Scotland


Died
21 September 1832(1832-09-21) (aged 61)
Abbotsford, Roxburghshire
Scotland


Occupation



Historical novelist
Poet



Advocate



Sheriff-Depute
Clerk of Session





Nationality
Scottish


Alma mater
University of Edinburgh


Period
19th century


Literary movement
Romanticism


Spouse
Charlotte Carpenter (Charpentier)






Signature



Sir Walter Scott, 1st Baronet, FRSE (15 August 1771 – 21 September 1832) was a Scottish historical novelist, playwright, poet and historian. Many of his works remain classics of both English-language literature and of Scottish literature. Famous titles include Ivanhoe, Rob Roy, Old Mortality, The Lady of the Lake, Waverley, The Heart of Midlothian and The Bride of Lammermoor.
Although primarily remembered for his extensive literary works and his political engagement, Scott was an advocate, judge and legal administrator by profession, and throughout his career combined his writing and editing work with his daily occupation as Clerk of Session and Sheriff-Depute of Selkirkshire.
A prominent member of the Tory establishment in Edinburgh, Scott was an active member of the Highland Society and served a long term as President of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1820–32).



Contents


1 Life and works

1.1 Early days
1.2 Meeting with Blacklock and Burns
1.3 Start of literary career, marriage and family
1.4 Poetry
1.5 Novelism
1.6 Recovery of the Crown Jewels, baronetcy and ceremonial pageantry
1.7 Financial problems and death


2 Personal life
3 Abbotsford
4 Legacy

4.1 Later assessment
4.2 Memorials and commemoration
4.3 Literature by other authors


5 Bibliography

5.1 Novels
5.2 Poetry
5.3 Short stories
5.4 Plays
5.5 Non-fiction


6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Life and works[edit]
Early days[edit]




Scott's childhood at Sandyknowes, in the shadow of Smailholm Tower, introduced him to the tales and folklore of the Scottish Borders.


Walter Scott was born on 15 August 1771. He was the ninth child of Walter Scott, a Writer to the Signet (solicitor), and Anne Rutherford. His father was a member of a cadet branch of the Scotts Clan, and his mother descended from the Haliburton family, the descent from whom granted Walter's family the hereditary right of burial in Dryburgh Abbey.[1] Via the Haliburton family, Walter (b.1771) was a cousin of the pre-eminent contemporaneous property developer James Burton, who was a Haliburton who had shortened his surname, and of his son, the architect Decimus Burton.[2] Walter subsequently became a member of the Clarence Club, of which the Burtons were also members.[3][4]
Five of Walter's siblings died in infancy, and a sixth died when he was five months of age. Walter was born in a third-floor flat on College Wynd in the Old Town of Edinburgh, a narrow alleyway leading from the Cowgate to the gates of the University of Edinburgh (Old College).[5] He survived a childhood bout of polio in 1773 that left him lame,[6] a condition that was to have a significant effect on his life and writing.[7] To cure his lameness he was sent in 1773 to live in the rural Scottish Borders at his paternal grandparents' farm at Sandyknowe, adjacent to the ruin of Smailholm Tower, the earlier family home.[8] Here he was taught to read by his aunt Jenny, and learned from her the speech patterns and many of the tales and legends that characterised much of his work. In January 1775 he returned to Edinburgh, and that summer went with his aunt Jenny to take spa treatment at Bath in England, where they lived at 6 South Parade.[9] In the winter of 1776 he went back to Sandyknowe, with another attempt at a water cure at Prestonpans during the following summer.[8]




The Scotts' family home in George Square, Edinburgh


In 1778, Scott returned to Edinburgh for private education to prepare him for school, and joined his family in their new house built as one of the first in George Square.[5] In October 1779 he began at the Royal High School of Edinburgh (in High School Yards). He was now well able to walk and explore the city and the surrounding countryside. His reading included chivalric romances, poems, history and travel books. He was given private tuition by James Mitchell in arithmetic and writing, and learned from him the history of the Church of Scotland with emphasis on the Covenanters. After finishing school he was sent to stay for six months with his aunt Jenny in Kelso, attending the local grammar school where he met James and John Ballantyne, who later became his business partners and printed his books.[10]
Meeting with Blacklock and Burns[edit]
Scott began studying classics at the University of Edinburgh in November 1783, at the age of 12, a year or so younger than most of his fellow students. In March 1786 he began an apprenticeship in his father's office to become a Writer to the Signet. While at the university Scott had become a friend of Adam Ferguson, the son of Professor Adam Ferguson who hosted literary salons. Scott met the blind poet Thomas Blacklock, who lent him books and introduced him to James Macpherson's Ossian cycle of poems. During the winter of 1786–87 the 15-year-old Scott saw Robert Burns at one of these salons, for what was to be their only meeting. When Burns noticed a print illustrating the poem "The Justice of the Peace" and asked who had written the poem, only Scott knew that it was by John Langhorne, and was thanked by Burns.[11] When it was decided that he would become a lawyer, he returned to the university to study law, first taking classes in Moral Philosophy and Universal History in 1789–90.[10]
After completing his studies in law, he became a lawyer in Edinburgh. As a lawyer's clerk he made his first visit to the Scottish Highlands directing an eviction. He was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in 1792. He had an unsuccessful love suit with Williamina Belsches of Fettercairn, who married Scott's friend Sir William Forbes, 7th Baronet.
Start of literary career, marriage and family[edit]




A copy of Scott's Minstrelsy in the National Museum of Scotland


As a boy, youth and young man, Scott was fascinated by the oral traditions of the Scottish Borders. He was an obsessive collector of stories, and developed an innovative method of recording what he heard at the feet of local story-tellers using carvings on twigs, to avoid the disapproval of those who believed that such stories were neither for writing down nor for printing.[12] At the age of 25 he began to write professionally, translating works from German,[13] his first publication being rhymed versions of ballads by Gottfried August Bürger in 1796. He then published an idiosyncratic three-volume set of collected ballads of his adopted home region, The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border. This was the first sign from a literary standpoint of his interest in Scottish history.
As a result of his early polio infection, Scott had a pronounced limp. He was described in 1820 as tall, well formed (except for one ankle and foot which made him walk lamely), neither fat nor thin, with forehead very high, nose short, upper lip long and face rather fleshy, complexion fresh and clear, eyes very blue, shrewd and penetrating, with hair now silvery white.[14] Although a determined walker, on horseback he experienced greater freedom of movement. Unable to consider a military career, Scott enlisted as a volunteer in the 1st Lothian and Border yeomanry.[15]
On a trip to the Lake District with old college friends he met Charlotte Charpentier (or Carpenter), daughter of Jean Charpentier of Lyon in France, and ward of Lord Downshire in Cumberland, an Episcopalian. After three weeks of courtship, Scott proposed and they were married on Christmas Eve 1797 in St Mary's Church, Carlisle (a church set up in the now destroyed nave of Carlisle Cathedral).[16] After renting a house in George Street, they moved to nearby South Castle Street. They had five children, of whom four survived by the time of Scott's death, most baptized by an Episcopalian clergyman. In 1799 he was appointed Sheriff-Depute of the County of Selkirk, based in the Royal Burgh of Selkirk. In his early married days Scott had a decent living from his earnings at the law, his salary as Sheriff-Depute, his wife's income, some revenue from his writing, and his share of his father's rather meagre estate.
After their third son was born in 1801, they moved to a spacious three-storey house built for Scott at 39 North Castle Street. This remained Scott's base in Edinburgh until 1826, when he could no longer afford two homes. From 1798 Scott had spent the summers in a cottage at Lasswade, where he entertained guests including literary figures, and it was there that his career as an author began. There were nominal residency requirements for his position of Sheriff-Depute, and at first he stayed at a local inn during the circuit. In 1804 he ended his use of the Lasswade cottage and leased the substantial house of Ashestiel, 6 miles (9.7 km) from Selkirk. It was sited on the south bank of the River Tweed, and the building incorporated an old tower house.[5]
Scott's father, also Walter (1729–1799), was a Freemason, being a member of Lodge St David, No.36 (Edinburgh), and Scott also became a Freemason in his father's Lodge in 1801, albeit only after the death of his father.[17]
Poetry[edit]




Sir Walter Scott, novelist and poet - painted by Sir William Allan


In 1796, Scott's friend James Ballantyne[18] founded a printing press in Kelso, in the Scottish Borders. Through Ballantyne, Scott was able to publish his first works, including "Glenfinlas" and "The Eve of St. John", and his poetry then began to bring him to public attention. In 1805, The Lay of the Last Minstrel captured wide public imagination, and his career as a writer was established in spectacular fashion.


The way was long, the wind was cold,
The Minstrel was infirm and old

— The Lay of the Last Minstrel (first lines)

He published many other poems over the next ten years, including the popular The Lady of the Lake, printed in 1810 and set in the Trossachs. Portions of the German translation of this work were set to music by Franz Schubert. One of these songs, "Ellens dritter Gesang", is popularly labelled as "Schubert's Ave Maria".
Beethoven's opus 108 "Twenty-Five Scottish Songs" includes 3 folk songs whose words are by Walter Scott.
Marmion, published in 1808, produced lines that have become proverbial. Canto VI. Stanza 17 reads:


Yet Clare's sharp questions must I shun
Must separate Constance from the nun
Oh! what a tangled web we weave
When first we practise to deceive!
A Palmer too! No wonder why
I felt rebuked beneath his eye.[19]


In 1809 Scott persuaded James Ballantyne and his brother to move to Edinburgh and to establish their printing press there. He became a partner in their business. As a political conservative,[20] Scott helped to found the Tory Quarterly Review, a review journal to which he made several anonymous contributions. Scott was also a contributor to the Edinburgh Review, which espoused Whig views.
Scott was ordained as an elder in the Presbyterian Church of Duddington and sat in the General Assembly for a time as representative elder of the burgh of Selkirk.
When the lease of Ashestiel expired in 1811, Scott bought Cartley Hole Farm, on the south bank of the River Tweed nearer Melrose. The farm had the nickname of "Clarty Hole", and when Scott built a family cottage there in 1812 he named it "Abbotsford". He continued to expand the estate, and built Abbotsford House in a series of extensions.[5]
In 1813 Scott was offered the position of Poet Laureate. He declined, due to concerns that "such an appointment would be a poisoned chalice", as the Laureateship had fallen into disrepute, due to the decline in quality of work suffered by previous title holders, "as a succession of poetasters had churned out conventional and obsequious odes on royal occasions."[21] He sought advice from the Duke of Buccleuch, who counseled him to retain his literary independence, and the position went to Scott's friend, Robert Southey.[22]
Novelism[edit]




A Legend of Montrose, illustration from the 1872 edition


Although Scott had attained worldwide celebrity through his poetry, he soon tried his hand at documenting his researches into the oral tradition of the Scottish Borders in prose fiction—stories and novels—at the time still considered aesthetically inferior to poetry (above all to such classical genres as the epic or poetic tragedy) as a mimetic vehicle for portraying historical events. In an innovative and astute action, he wrote and published his first novel, Waverley, anonymously in 1814. It was a tale of the Jacobite rising of 1745. Its English protagonist, Edward Waverley, like Don Quixote a great reader of romances, has been brought up by his Tory uncle, who is sympathetic to Jacobitism, although Edward's own father is a Whig. The youthful Waverley obtains a commission in the Whig army and is posted in Dundee. On leave, he meets his uncle's friend, the Jacobite Baron Bradwardine and is attracted to the Baron's daughter Rose. On a visit to the Highlands, Edward overstays his leave and is arrested and charged with desertion but is rescued by the Highland chieftain Fergus MacIvor and his mesmerizing sister Flora, whose devotion to the Stuart cause, "as it exceeded her brother's in fanaticism, excelled it also in purity". Through Flora, Waverley meets Bonnie Prince Charlie, and under her influence goes over to the Jacobite side and takes part in the Battle of Prestonpans. He escapes retribution, however, after saving the life of a Whig colonel during the battle. Waverley (whose surname reflects his divided loyalties) eventually decides to lead a peaceful life of establishment respectability under the House of Hanover rather than live as a proscribed rebel. He chooses to marry the beautiful Rose Bradwardine, rather than cast his lot with the sublime Flora MacIvor, who, after the failure of the '45 rising, retires to a French convent.
There followed a succession of novels over the next five years, each with a Scottish historical setting. Mindful of his reputation as a poet, Scott maintained the anonymity he had begun with Waverley, publishing the novels under the name "Author of Waverley" or as "Tales of..." with no author. Among those familiar with his poetry, his identity became an open secret, but Scott persisted in maintaining the façade, perhaps because he thought his old-fashioned father would disapprove of his engaging in such a trivial pursuit as novel writing. During this time Scott became known by the nickname "The Wizard of the North". In 1815 he was given the honour of dining with George, Prince Regent, who wanted to meet the "Author of Waverley".




"Edgar and Lucie at Mermaiden's well" by Charles Robert Leslie (1886), after Sir Walter Scott's Bride of Lammermoor. Lucie is wearing a full plaid.


Scott's 1819 series Tales of my Landlord is sometimes considered a subset of the Waverley novels and was intended to illustrate aspects of Scottish regional life. Among the best known is The Bride of Lammermoor, a fictionalized version of an actual incident in the history of the Dalrymple family that took place in the Lammermuir Hills in 1669. In the novel, Lucie Ashton and the nobly born but now dispossessed and impoverished Edgar Ravenswood exchange vows. But the Ravenswoods and the wealthy Ashtons, who now own the former Ravenswood lands, are enemies, and Lucie's mother forces her daughter to break her engagement to Edgar and marry the wealthy Sir Arthur Bucklaw. Lucie falls into a depression and on their wedding night stabs the bridegroom, succumbs to insanity, and dies. In 1821, French Romantic painter Eugène Delacroix painted a portrait depicting himself as the melancholy, disinherited Edgar Ravenswood. The prolonged, climactic coloratura mad scene for Lucia in Donizetti's 1835 bel canto opera Lucia di Lammermoor is based on what in the novel were just a few bland sentences.
Tales of my Landlord includes the now highly regarded novel Old Mortality, set in 1679–89 against the backdrop of the ferocious anti-Covenanting campaign of the Tory Graham of Claverhouse, subsequently made Viscount Dundee (called "Bluidy Clavers" by his opponents but later dubbed "Bonnie Dundee" by Scott). The Covenanters were presbyterians who had supported the Restoration of Charles II on promises of a Presbyterian settlement, but he had instead reintroduced Episcopalian church government with draconian penalties for Presbyterian worship. This led to the destitution of around 270 ministers who had refused to take an oath of allegiance and submit themselves to bishops, and who continued to conduct worship among a remnant of their flock in caves and other remote country spots. The relentless persecution of these conventicles and attempts to break them up by military force had led to open revolt. The story is told from the point of view of Henry Morton, a moderate Presbyterian, who is unwittingly drawn into the conflict and barely escapes summary execution. In writing Old Mortality Scott drew upon the knowledge he had acquired from his researches into ballads on the subject for The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border.[23] Scott's background as a lawyer also informed his perspective, for at the time of the novel, which takes place before the Act of Union of 1707, English law did not apply in Scotland, and afterwards Scotland has continued to have its own Scots law as a hybrid legal system. A recent critic, who is a legal as well as a literary scholar, argues that Old Mortality not only reflects the dispute between Stuart's absolute monarchy and the jurisdiction of the courts, but also invokes a foundational moment in British sovereignty, namely, the Habeas Corpus Act (also known as the Great Writ), passed by the English Parliament in 1679.[24] Oblique reference to the origin of Habeas corpus underlies Scott's next novel, Ivanhoe, set during the era of the creation of the Magna Carta, which political conservatives like Walter Scott and Edmund Burke regarded as rooted in immemorial British custom and precedent.
Ivanhoe (1819), set in 12th-century England, marked a move away from Scott's focus on the local history of Scotland. Based partly on Hume's History of England and the ballad cycle of Robin Hood, Ivanhoe was quickly translated into many languages and inspired countless imitations and theatrical adaptations. Ivanhoe depicts the cruel tyranny of the Norman overlords (Norman Yoke) over the impoverished Saxon populace of England, with two of the main characters, Rowena and Locksley (Robin Hood), representing the dispossessed Saxon aristocracy. When the protagonists are captured and imprisoned by a Norman baron, Scott interrupts the story to exclaim:

It is grievous to think that those valiant barons, to whose stand against the crown the liberties of England were indebted for their existence, should themselves have been such dreadful oppressors, and capable of excesses contrary not only to the laws of England, but to those of nature and humanity. But, alas ...fiction itself can hardly reach the dark reality of the horrors of the period. (Chapter 24.33)

The institution of the Magna Carta, which happens outside the time frame of the story, is portrayed as a progressive (incremental) reform, but also as a step towards the recovery of a lost golden age of liberty endemic to England and the English system. Scott puts a derisive prophecy in the mouth of the jester Wamba:


Norman saw on English oak.
On English neck a Norman yoke;
Norman spoon to English dish,
And England ruled as Normans wish;
Blithe world in England never will be more,
Till England's rid of all the four. (Ivanhoe, Ch. xxvii)


Although on the surface an entertaining escapist romance, alert contemporary readers would have quickly recognised the political subtext of Ivanhoe, which appeared immediately after the English Parliament, fearful of French-style revolution in the aftermath of Waterloo, had passed the Habeas Corpus Suspension acts of 1817 and 1818 and other extremely repressive measures, and when traditional English Charter rights versus revolutionary human rights was a topic of discussion.[25]
Ivanhoe was also remarkable in its sympathetic portrayal of Jewish characters: Rebecca, considered by many critics the book's real heroine, does not in the end get to marry Ivanhoe, whom she loves, but Scott allows her to remain faithful to her own religion, rather than having her convert to Christianity. Likewise, her father, Isaac of York, a Jewish moneylender, is shown as a victim rather than a villain. In Ivanhoe, which is one of Scott's Waverley novels, religious and sectarian fanatics are the villains, while the eponymous hero is a bystander who must weigh the evidence and decide where to take a stand. Scott's positive portrayal of Judaism, which reflects his humanity and concern for religious toleration, also coincided with a contemporary movement for the Emancipation of the Jews in England.
Recovery of the Crown Jewels, baronetcy and ceremonial pageantry[edit]




Rediscovering the 'lost' Honours of Scotland in 1818






George IV landing at Leith in 1822


Scott's fame grew as his explorations and interpretations of Scottish history and society captured popular imagination. Impressed by this, the Prince Regent (the future George IV) gave Scott permission to conduct a search for the Crown Jewels ("Honours of Scotland"). During the years of the Protectorate under Cromwell the Crown Jewels had been hidden away, but had subsequently been used to crown Charles II. They were not used to crown subsequent monarchs, but were regularly taken to sittings of Parliament, to represent the absent monarch, until the Act of Union 1707. Thereafter, the honours were stored in Edinburgh Castle, but the large locked box in which they were stored was not opened for more than 100 years, and stories circulated that they had been "lost" or removed. In 1818, Scott and a small team of military men opened the box, and "unearthed" the honours from the Crown Room in the depths of Edinburgh Castle. A grateful Prince Regent granted Scott the title of baronet,[26] and in March 1820 he received the baronetcy in London, becoming Sir Walter Scott, 1st Baronet.[27]
After George's accession to the throne, the city council of Edinburgh invited Scott, at the King's behest, to stage-manage the 1822 visit of King George IV to Scotland.[26] With only three weeks for planning and execution, Scott created a spectacular and comprehensive pageant, designed not only to impress the King, but also in some way to heal the rifts that had destabilised Scots society. He used the event to contribute to the drawing of a line under an old world that pitched his homeland into regular bouts of bloody strife. He, along with his "production team", mounted what in modern days could be termed a PR event, in which the King was dressed in tartan, and was greeted by his people, many of whom were also dressed in similar tartan ceremonial dress. This form of dress, proscribed after the 1745 rebellion against the English, became one of the seminal, potent and ubiquitous symbols of Scottish identity.[28]
In his novel Kenilworth, Elizabeth I is welcomed to the castle of that name by means of an elaborate pageant, the details of which Scott was well qualified to itemize.
Much of Scott's autograph work shows an almost stream-of-consciousness approach to writing. He included little in the way of punctuation in his drafts, leaving such details to the printers to supply.[29] He eventually acknowledged in 1827 that he was the author of the Waverley Novels.[28]
Financial problems and death[edit]




Sir Walter Scott's grave at Dryburgh Abbey


In 1825 a UK-wide banking crisis resulted in the collapse of the Ballantyne printing business, of which Scott was the only partner with a financial interest; the company's debts of £130,000 (equivalent to £9,800,000 in 2016) caused his very public ruin.[30] Rather than declare himself bankrupt, or to accept any kind of financial support from his many supporters and admirers (including the king himself), he placed his house and income in a trust belonging to his creditors, and determined to write his way out of debt. He kept up his prodigious output of fiction, as well as producing a biography of Napoleon Bonaparte, until 1831. By then his health was failing, but he nevertheless undertook a grand tour of Europe, and was welcomed and celebrated wherever he went. He returned to Scotland and, in September 1832, during the epidemic in Scotland that year, died of typhus[31] at Abbotsford, the home he had designed and had built, near Melrose in the Scottish Borders. (His wife, Lady Scott, had died in 1826 and was buried as an Episcopalian.) Two Presbyterian ministers and one Episcopalian officiated at his funeral.[32] Scott died owing money, but his novels continued to sell, and the debts encumbering his estate were discharged shortly after his death.[30]
Personal life[edit]
Scott married Charlotte Carpenter in St Mary’s Church, Carlisle Cathedral on Christmas Eve 1797.
Scott's eldest son, Lt Walter Scott, inherited his father's estate and possessions. He married Jane Jobson, only daughter of William Jobson of Lochore (died 1822) and his wife Rachel Stuart (died 1863), on 3 February 1825.[33]
Scott, Sr.'s lawyer from at least 1814 was Hay Donaldson WS (died 1822), who was also agent to the Duke of Buccleuch. Scott was Donaldson's proposer when he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.[34]
His distant cousin was the poet Randall Swingler.
Abbotsford[edit]




Abbotsford House






Tomb of Walter Scott, in Dryburgh Abbey by Henry Fox Talbot, 1844


When Scott was a boy, he sometimes travelled with his father from Selkirk to Melrose, where some of his novels are set. At a certain spot the old gentleman would stop the carriage and take his son to a stone on the site of the Battle of Melrose (1526).[35]
During the summers from 1804, Scott made his home at the large house of Ashestiel, on the south bank of the River Tweed 6 miles (9.7 km) north of Selkirk. When his lease on this property expired in 1811, Scott bought Cartley Hole Farm, downstream on the Tweed nearer Melrose. The farm had the nickname of "Clarty Hole", and when Scott built a family cottage there in 1812 he named it "Abbotsford". He continued to expand the estate, and built Abbotsford House in a series of extensions.[5] The farmhouse developed into a wonderful home that has been likened to a fairy palace. Scott was a pioneer of the Scottish Baronial style of architecture, therefore Abbotsford is festooned with turrets and stepped gabling. Through windows enriched with the insignia of heraldry the sun shone on suits of armour, trophies of the chase, a library of more than 9,000 volumes, fine furniture, and still finer pictures. Panelling of oak and cedar and carved ceilings relieved by coats of arms in their correct colours added to the beauty of the house.[36][verification needed]
It is estimated that the building cost Scott more than £25,000 (equivalent to £1,900,000 in 2016). More land was purchased until Scott owned nearly 1,000 acres (4.0 km2). A Roman road with a ford near Melrose used in olden days by the abbots of Melrose suggested the name of Abbotsford. Scott was buried in Dryburgh Abbey, where his wife had earlier been interred. Nearby is a large statue of William Wallace, one of Scotland's many romanticised historical figures.[37] Abbotsford later gave its name to the Abbotsford Club, founded in 1834 in memory of Sir Walter Scott.[38]
Legacy[edit]


Part of the Politics series on


Toryism







Characteristics


Monarchism
Traditionalism
High Church Anglicanism
Traditional Catholicism
Loyalism
Royalism
Interventionism
Agrarianism/Self-sufficiency
Counterrevolution
Classicism
High culture
Noblesse oblige
Organic unity
Unionism








General topics


Cavaliers
Cavalier Parliament
Château Clique
Jacobitism
Divine right of kings
Corporatism
Family Compact (Canada)
Oxford Movement
Powellism








People


Robert Filmer
1st Earl of Clarendon
Roger L'Estrange
1st Earl of Rochester
1st Viscount Bolingbroke
3rd Earl of Bute
1st Duke of Wellington
Walter Scott
Stanley Baldwin
G. K. Chesterton
Winston Churchill
Enoch Powell
George Grant








Related topics


Conservatism
Distributists
Miguelism
Vendéens
Chouans
Legitimism
Carlism
Sanfedismo
Viva Maria
Cristeros
Reactionary
High Tory
Red Tory
Loyalist
Royalist
Veronese Easter
Tory corporatism
Tory socialism
Pink Tory
Ultra-Tories









v
t
e





Later assessment[edit]







Although he continued to be extremely popular and widely read, both at home and abroad,[39] Scott's critical reputation declined in the last half of the 19th century as serious writers turned from romanticism to realism, and Scott began to be regarded as an author suitable for children. This trend accelerated in the 20th century. For example, in his classic study Aspects of the Novel (1927), E. M. Forster harshly criticized Scott's clumsy and slapdash writing style, "flat" characters, and thin plots. In contrast, the novels of Scott's contemporary Jane Austen, once appreciated only by the discerning few (including, as it happened, Scott himself) rose steadily in critical esteem, though Austen, as a female writer, was still faulted for her narrow ("feminine") choice of subject matter, which, unlike Scott, avoided the grand historical themes traditionally viewed as masculine.
Nevertheless, Scott's importance as an innovator continued to be recognized. He was acclaimed as the inventor of the genre of the modern historical novel (which others trace to Jane Porter, whose work in the genre predates Scott's) and the inspiration for enormous numbers of imitators and genre writers both in Britain and on the European continent. In the cultural sphere, Scott's Waverley novels played a significant part in the movement (begun with James Macpherson's Ossian cycle) in rehabilitating the public perception of the Scottish Highlands and its culture, which had been formerly suppressed as barbaric, and viewed in the southern mind as a breeding ground of hill bandits, religious fanaticism, and Jacobite rebellions. Scott served as chairman of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and was also a member of the Royal Celtic Society. His own contribution to the reinvention of Scottish culture was enormous, even though his re-creations of the customs of the Highlands were fanciful at times, despite his extensive travels around his native country. It is a testament to Scott's contribution in creating a unified identity for Scotland that Edinburgh's central railway station, opened in 1854 by the North British Railway, is called Waverley. The fact that Scott was a Lowland Presbyterian, rather than a Gaelic-speaking Catholic Highlander, made him more acceptable to a conservative English reading public. Scott's novels were certainly influential in the making of the Victorian craze for all things Scottish among British royalty, who were anxious to claim legitimacy through their rather attenuated historical connection with the royal house of Stuart.[citation needed]
At the time Scott wrote, Scotland was poised to move away from an era of socially divisive clan warfare to a modern world of literacy and industrial capitalism. Through the medium of Scott's novels, the violent religious and political conflicts of the country's recent past could be seen as belonging to history—which Scott defined, as the subtitle of Waverley ("'Tis Sixty Years Since") indicates, as something that happened at least 60 years ago. Scott's advocacy of objectivity and moderation and his strong repudiation of political violence on either side also had a strong, though unspoken, contemporary resonance in an era when many conservative English speakers lived in mortal fear of a revolution in the French style on British soil. Scott's orchestration of King George IV's visit to Scotland, in 1822, was a pivotal event intended to inspire a view of his home country that, in his view, accentuated the positive aspects of the past while allowing the age of quasi-medieval blood-letting to be put to rest, while envisioning a more useful, peaceful future.
After Scott's work had been essentially unstudied for many decades, a revival of critical interest began from the 1960s. Postmodern tastes favoured discontinuous narratives and the introduction of the "first person", yet they were more favourable to Scott's work than Modernist tastes. While F. R. Leavis had disdained Scott, seeing him as a thoroughly bad novelist and a thoroughly bad influence (The Great Tradition [1948]), György Lukács (The Historical Novel [1937, trans. 1962]) and David Daiches (Scott's Achievement as a Novelist [1951]) offered a Marxian political reading of Scott's fiction that generated a great deal of genuine interest in his work. Scott is now seen as an important innovator and a key figure in the development of Scottish and world literature, and particularly as the principal inventor of the historical novel.[40]
Memorials and commemoration[edit]




The Scott Monument on Edinburgh's Princes Street






Statue by Sir John Steell on the Scott Monument in Edinburgh






Scott Monument in Glasgow's George Square






Statue on the Glasgow monument


During his lifetime, Scott's portrait was painted by Sir Edwin Landseer and fellow Scots Sir Henry Raeburn and James Eckford Lauder. In Edinburgh, the 61.1-metre-tall Victorian Gothic spire of the Scott Monument was designed by George Meikle Kemp. It was completed in 1844, 12 years after Scott's death, and dominates the south side of Princes Street. Scott is also commemorated on a stone slab in Makars' Court, outside The Writers' Museum, Lawnmarket, Edinburgh, along with other prominent Scottish writers; quotes from his work are also visible on the Canongate Wall of the Scottish Parliament building in Holyrood. There is a tower dedicated to his memory on Corstorphine Hill in the west of the city and, as mentioned, Edinburgh's Waverley railway station takes its name from one of his novels.
In Glasgow, Walter Scott's Monument dominates the centre of George Square, the main public square in the city. Designed by David Rhind in 1838, the monument features a large column topped by a statue of Scott.[41] There is a statue of Scott in New York City's Central Park.[42]
Numerous Masonic Lodges have been named after him and his novels. For example: Lodge Sir Walter Scott, No. 859 (Perth, Australia) and Lodge Waverley, No. 597 (Edinburgh, Scotland).[43]
The annual Walter Scott Prize for Historical Fiction was created in 2010 by the Duke and Duchess of Buccleuch, whose ancestors were closely linked to Sir Walter Scott. At £25,000, it is one of the largest prizes in British literature. The award has been presented at Scott's historic home, Abbotsford House.
Scott has been credited with rescuing the Scottish banknote. In 1826, there was outrage in Scotland at the attempt of Parliament to prevent the production of banknotes of less than five pounds. Scott wrote a series of letters to the Edinburgh Weekly Journal under the pseudonym "Malachi Malagrowther" for retaining the right of Scottish banks to issue their own banknotes. This provoked such a response that the Government was forced to relent and allow the Scottish banks to continue printing pound notes. This campaign is commemorated by his continued appearance on the front of all notes issued by the Bank of Scotland. The image on the 2007 series of banknotes is based on the portrait by Henry Raeburn.[44]
During and immediately after World War I there was a movement spearheaded by President Wilson and other eminent people to inculcate patriotism in American school children, especially immigrants, and to stress the American connection with the literature and institutions of the "mother country" of Great Britain, using selected readings in middle school textbooks.[45] Scott's Ivanhoe continued to be required reading for many American high school students until the end of the 1950s.
A bust of Scott is in the Hall of Heroes of the National Wallace Monument in Stirling.
Literature by other authors[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
'On Walter Scott',
a poem by L. E. L.






Wikisource has original text related to this article:
'Sir Walter Scott',
a poem by L. E. L.



Letitia Elizabeth Landon was a great admirer of Scott and, on his death, she wrote two tributes to him: On Walter Scott in the Literary Gazette, and Sir Walter Scott in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1833. Towards the end of her life she began a series called The Female Picture Gallery with a series of character analyses based on the women in Scott's works.
In Charles Baudelaire's La Fanfarlo (1847), poet Samuel Cramer says of Scott:

Oh that tedious author, a dusty exhumer of chronicles! A fastidious mass of descriptions of bric-a-brac ... and castoff things of every sort, armor, tableware, furniture, gothic inns, and melodramatic castles where lifeless mannequins stalk about, dressed in leotards.

In the novella, however, Cramer proves as deluded a romantic as any hero in one of Scott's novels.[46]
In Anne Brontë's The Tenant of Wildfell Hall (1848) the narrator, Gilbert Markham, brings an elegantly bound copy of Marmion as a present to the independent "tenant of Wildfell Hall" (Helen Graham) whom he is courting, and is mortified when she insists on paying for it.
In a speech delivered at Salem, Massachusetts, on 6 January 1860, to raise money for the families of the executed abolitionist John Brown and his followers, Ralph Waldo Emerson calls Brown an example of true chivalry, which consists not in noble birth but in helping the weak and defenseless and declares that "Walter Scott would have delighted to draw his picture and trace his adventurous career".[47]
In his 1870 memoir, Army Life in a Black Regiment, New England abolitionist Thomas Wentworth Higginson (later editor of Emily Dickinson), described how he wrote down and preserved Negro spirituals or "shouts" while serving as a colonel in the First South Carolina Volunteers, the first authorized Union Army regiment recruited from freedmen during the Civil War (memorialized in the 1989 film Glory). He wrote that he was "a faithful student of the Scottish ballads, and had always envied Sir Walter the delight of tracing them out amid their own heather, and of writing them down piecemeal from the lips of aged crones".
According to his daughter Eleanor, Scott was "an author to whom Karl Marx again and again returned, whom he admired and knew as well as he did Balzac and Fielding".[48]
In his 1883 Life on the Mississippi, Mark Twain satirized the impact of Scott's writings, declaring (with humorous hyperbole) that Scott "had so large a hand in making Southern character, as it existed before the [American Civil] war", that he is "in great measure responsible for the war".[49] He goes on to coin the term "Sir Walter Scott disease", which he blames for the South's lack of advancement. Twain also targeted Scott in Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, where he names a sinking boat the "Walter Scott" (1884); and, in A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court (1889), the main character repeatedly utters "great Scott" as an oath; by the end of the book, however, he has become absorbed in the world of knights in armor, reflecting Twain's ambivalence on the topic.
The idyllic Cape Cod retreat of suffragists Verena Tarrant and Olive Chancellor in Henry James' The Bostonians (1886) is called Marmion, evoking what James considered the Quixotic idealism of these social reformers.
In To the Lighthouse by Virginia Woolf, Mrs. Ramsey glances at her husband:

He was reading something that moved him very much ... He was tossing the pages over. He was acting it – perhaps he was thinking himself the person in the book. She wondered what book it was. Oh, it was one of old Sir Walter’s she saw, adjusting the shade of her lamp so that the light fell on her knitting. For Charles Tansley had been saying (she looked up as if she expected to hear the crash of books on the floor above) that people don’t read Scott any more. Then her husband thought, “That’s what they’ll say of me;” so he went and got one of those books ... [Scott's] feeling for straight forward simple things, these fishermen, the poor old crazed creature in Mucklebackit’s cottage [in The Antiquary] made him feel so vigorous, so relieved of something that he felt roused and triumphant and could not choke back his tears ... It fortified him. He clean forgot all the little rubs and digs of the evening ... and his being so irritable with his wife and so touchy and minding when they passed his books over as if they didn’t exist at all. Raising the book a little to hide his face, he let them fall and shook his head from side to side and forgot himself completely (but not one or two reflections about morality and French novels and English novels and Scott’s hands being tied but his view perhaps being as true as the other view), forgot his own bothers and failures completely in poor Steenie’s drowning and Mucklebackit’s sorrow (that was Scott at his best) and the astonishing delight and feeling of vigor that it gave him. Well, let them improve upon that, he thought as he finished the chapter ... The whole of life did not consist in going to bed with a woman, he thought, returning to Scott and Balzac, to the English novel and the French novel.

In 1951, science-fiction author Isaac Asimov wrote Breeds There a Man...?, a short story with a title alluding vividly to Scott's The Lay of the Last Minstrel (1805).
In To Kill a Mockingbird (1960), the protagonist's brother is made to read Walter Scott's book Ivanhoe to the ailing Mrs. Henry Lafayette Dubose, and he refers to the author as "Sir Walter Scout", in reference to his own sister's nickname.
In Mother Night (1961) by Kurt Vonnegut Jr., memoirist and playwright Howard W. Campbell Jr. prefaces his text with the six lines beginning "Breathes there the man..."
In Knights of the Sea (2010) by Canadian author Paul Marlowe, there are several quotes from and references to Marmion, as well as an inn named after Ivanhoe, and a fictitious Scott novel entitled The Beastmen of Glen Glammoch.
Bibliography[edit]




Sir Walter Scott by Robert Scott Moncrieff.


Novels[edit]
The Waverley Novels is the title given to the long series of Scott novels released from 1814 to 1832 which takes its name from the first novel, Waverley. The following is a chronological list of the entire series:

1814: Waverley
1815: Guy Mannering
1816: The Antiquary
1816: The Black Dwarf and The Tale of Old Mortality – the 1st installment from the subset series, Tales of My Landlord
1817: Rob Roy
1818: The Heart of Midlothian – the 2nd installment from the subset series, Tales of My Landlord
1819: The Bride of Lammermoor and A Legend of Montrose – the 3rd installment from the subset series, Tales of My Landlord
1820: Ivanhoe
1820: The Monastery and The Abbot – from the subset series, Tales from Benedictine Sources
1821: Kenilworth
1822: The Pirate
1822: The Fortunes of Nigel
1822: Peveril of the Peak
1823: Quentin Durward
1824: St. Ronan's Well
1824: Redgauntlet
1825: The Betrothed and The Talisman – from the subset series, Tales of the Crusaders
1826: Woodstock
1828: The Fair Maid of Perth – the 2nd installment from the subset series, Chronicles of the Canongate (sometimes not considered as part of the Waverley Novels series)
1829: Anne of Geierstein
1832: Count Robert of Paris and Castle Dangerous – the 4th installment from the subset series, Tales of My Landlord

Other novels:

1831–1832: The Siege of Malta – a finished novel published posthumously in 2008
1832: Bizarro – an unfinished novel (or novella) published posthumously in 2008

Poetry[edit]
Many of the short poems or songs released by Scott (or later anthologized) were originally not separate pieces but parts of longer poems interspersed throughout his novels, tales, and dramas.

1796: "The Chase" – an English-language translation of the German-language poem by Gottfried August Bürger entitled "Der Wilde Jäger" (or, "The Wild Huntsmen", its more common English translation), first of the translations and imitations from German ballads by Scott
1802–1803: The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border
1805: The Lay of the Last Minstrel
1806: Ballads and Lyrical Pieces
1808: Marmion
1810: The Lady of the Lake
1811: The Vision of Don Roderick
1813: The Bridal of Triermain
1813: Rokeby
1815: The Field of Waterloo
1815: The Lord of the Isles
1817: Harold the Dauntless

Short stories[edit]

1827: "The Highland Widow", "The Two Drovers", and "The Surgeon's Daughter" – the 1st installment from the series Chronicles of the Canongate
1828: "My Aunt Margaret's Mirror", "The Tapestried Chamber", and "Death of the Laird's Jock" – from the series The Keepsake Stories

Plays[edit]

1799: Goetz of Berlichingen, with the Iron Hand: A Tragedy – an English-language translation of the 1773 German-language play by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe entitled Götz von Berlichingen
1822: Halidon Hill
1823: MacDuff's Cross
1830: The Doom of Devorgoil
1830: Auchindrane

Non-fiction[edit]

1796 Translations & imitations of German Ballads Librivox audio
1814–1817: The Border Antiquities of England and Scotland – a work co-authored by Luke Clennell and John Greig with Scott's contribution consisting of the substantial introductory essay, originally published in 2 volumes from 1814 to 1817
1815–1824: Essays on Chivalry, Romance, and Drama – a supplement to the 1815–1824 editions of the Encyclopædia Britannica
1816: Paul's Letters to his Kinsfolk
1819–1826: Provincial Antiquities of Scotland
1821–1824: Lives of the Novelists
1825–1832: The Journal of Sir Walter Scott
1826: The Letters of Malachi Malagrowther
1827: The Life of Napoleon Buonaparte
1828: Religious Discourses
1828: Tales of a Grandfather; Being Stories Taken from Scottish History – the 1st installment from the series, Tales of a Grandfather
1829: The History of Scotland: Volume I
1829: Tales of a Grandfather; Being Stories Taken from Scottish History – the 2nd installment from the series, Tales of a Grandfather
1830: Essays on Ballad Poetry
1830: The History of Scotland: Volume II
1830: Tales of a Grandfather; Being Stories Taken from Scottish History – the 3rd installment from the series, Tales of a Grandfather
1830: Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft
1831: Tales of a Grandfather; Being Stories Taken from the History of France – the 4th installment from the series, Tales of a Grandfather

See also[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Walter Scott





Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Walter Scott




Poetry portal



Operas inspired by Walter Scott
Jedediah Cleishbotham (fictional editor of Tales of My Landlord, and Scott's alter ego)
G. A. Henty
Alessandro Manzoni
Alexandre Dumas, père
Karl May
Baroness Orczy
Rafael Sabatini
Emilio Salgari
Samuel Shellabarger
Lawrence Schoonover
Jules Verne
Frank Yerby
GWR Waverley Class steam locomotives
"Famous Scots Series"
Principal Clerk of Session and Justiciary
Writers' Museum

References[edit]


^ "Family Background". Retrieved 2011-04-09. 
^ "Who were the Burtons". The Burtons' St Leonards Society. Retrieved 18 September 2017. 
^ Beattie, William (1849). Life and Letters of Thomas Campbell, In Three Volumes, Volume II. Edward Moxon, Dover Street, London. p. 55. 
^ The Athenaeum, Volume 3, Issues 115–165. J. Lection, London. 1830. p. 170. 
^ a b c d e Edinburgh University Library (22 October 2004). "Homes of Sir Walter Scott". x Edinburgh University Library. Retrieved 9 July 2013. 
^ Cone, T E (1973). "Was Sir Walter Scott's Lameness Caused by Poliomyelitis?". Pediatrics. 51 (1): 33. 
^ Robertson, Fiona. "Disfigurement and Disability: Walter Scott's Bodies". Otranto.co.uk. Retrieved 9 May 2014. 
^ a b "Sandyknowe and Early Childhood". Retrieved 2011-04-09. 
^ "No 1 Nos 2 and 3 (Farrell's Hotel) Nos 4 to 8 (consec) (Pratt's Hotel)". Images of England. English Heritage. Retrieved 29 July 2009. 
^ a b "School and University". Walterscott.lib.ed.ac.uk. 24 October 2003. Retrieved 29 November 2009. 
^ "Literary Beginnings". Walterscott.lib.ed.ac.uk. 11 December 2007. Retrieved 29 November 2009. 
^ Walter, Sir Walter (2012). The Lady of the Lake. Lititz, PA: AP Publishing House. p. 308. ISBN 9781105941573. Retrieved 22 November 2016. 
^ BBC profile
^ Leslie C. R. Letter to Miss C Leslie dated 26 June 1820 in Autobiographical recollections ed. Tom Taylor, Ticknor & Fields, Boston 1855
^ 1st Lothians and Border Yeomanry
^ ""Williamina, Charlotte and Marriage"". University of Edinburgh. 24 October 2003. Retrieved 31 October 2017. 
^ Cooper, Robert L D, Ed. 2010. Famous Scottish Freemasons, pp 58–59. ISBN 978-0-9560933-8-7
^ Edinburgh Archive – Ballantyne Brothers
^ The early editions of Marmion use Scott's original spelling of "practice" (still used in the U.S.A). Later editions, compiled without Scott's oversight, usually favour the modern standard British English spelling of "practise".
^ Hay, James (1899). Sir Walter Scott. London. p. 258. ISBN 978-1278170947. Retrieved 22 November 2016. 
^ http://www.walterscott.lib.ed.ac.uk/biography/poet.html
^ "Scott the Poet". Walterscott.lib.ed.ac.uk. 11 December 2007. Retrieved 29 November 2009. 
^ See Old Mortality on the University of Edinburgh Walter Scott website.
^ See Amy Witherbee, in "Habeas Corpus: British Imaginations of Power in Walter Scott's Old Mortality", New Literary History 39 (2008): 355–67, writes:

By the 1670s, conflicts between religious dissidents and the Stuart Crown had given way to a Crown policy of seizing and imprisoning opponents without recourse to the courts. In 1679, this policy of using extrajudicial imprisonments to quell rebellion finally provoked the English Parliament to pass the Act of Habeas Corpus in England. Usually translated as “produce the body,” habeas corpus could be invoked by any subject to require that the king or his agents produce the body of a prisoner for adjudication before the courts. In its barest terms the Great Writ protected a subject from indefinite terms of imprisonment, from imprisonment outside the kingdom, or from imprisonment without cause. It did so by asserting the jurisdiction of the courts as superior to the executive powers of the king. The Act was thus part of a long debate within the three kingdoms about the relationship of king to law and vice versa.


^ Witherbee (2008), pp. 363–64. Habeas corpus had been suspended in the mid-1790s at the time of the French Revolution by William Pitt, who had called the French declaration of human rights "monstrous". Widely publicised trials for sedition took place in Edinburgh (1793) and in London (1794) John Thelwall and two others were charged with treason. The Scottish defendants received harsh sentences whereas the English ones were acquitted. According to historian Anne Stott: "The difference between the English and Scottish trials reflects the different legal systems. Ironically, the acquittals made the loyalist case—that England was a country where a man could have a fair trial."
^ a b "Chronology of Walter Scott's life". Walter Scott Digital Archive. Retrieved 2 May 2015. 
^ "The Abbot". Walter Scott Digital Archive. Retrieved 2 May 2015. Scott had travelled to London in March [1820] to receive his baronetcy 
^ a b "Walter Scott Digital Archive – Chronology". Walterscott.lib.ed.ac.uk. 13 Oct 2008. Retrieved 29 Nov 2009. 
^ Stuart Kelly quoted by Arnold Zwicky in The Book of Lost Books
^ a b McKinstry, Sam; Fletcher, Marie (2002). "The Personal Account Books of Sir Walter Scott". The Accounting Historians Journal. 29: 59–89. JSTOR 40698269.  (subscription required)
^ London Medical and Surgical Journal, January 1833
^ Edinburgh Profile, Financial Hardship
^ Monuments and monumental inscriptions in Scotland: The Grampian Society, 1871
^ BIOGRAPHICAL INDEX OF FORMER FELLOWS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH 1783 – 2002 (PDF). The Royal Society of Edinburgh. July 2006. ISBN 0 902 198 84 X. 
^ Lockhart, John Gibson (1837). Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott, Bart. Philadelphia. p. 1.397. Retrieved 7 November 2016. 
^ Abbotsford House website.
^ Scott, Sir Walter; Grant, George (2001). From Bannockburn to Flodden: Wallace, Bruce, and the Heroes of Medieval Scotland. Nashville: Cumberland. p. viii. ISBN 978-1581821277. 
^ The Oxford Companion to English Literature, 6th Edition. Edited by Margaret Drabble, Oxford University Press, 2000 Pp1
^ "…it would be difficult to name, from among both modern and ancient works, many read more widely and with greater pleasure than the historical novels of … Walter Scott." – Alessandro Manzoni, On the Historical Novel.
^ Higgins, Charlotte (16 August 2010). "Scotland's image-maker Sir Walter Scott 'invented English legends'". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2011-04-09. 
^ "Glasgow, George Square, Walter Scott's Monument". Retrieved 2011-04-09. 
^ New York monument
^ Grand Lodge of Scotland Year Book. 2014. pp 25 & 34. ISBN 0902324-86-1
^ Scottish Banks
^ For example, see the textbook compiled by Emma Serl and William J. Pelo, American Ideals: Selected Patriotic Readings for Seventh and Eighth Grades, introduction by Charles W. Eliot, President Emeritus of Harvard (Gregg Publishing, 1919).
^ See Francis S. Heck, “Baudelaire's La Fanfarlo: An Example of Romantic Irony”, The French Review 49: 3 (1976): 328–36.
^ Kenneth S. Sacks, editor, Emerson: Political Writings (Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought) (Cambridge University Press, 2008), p, 193.
^ S.S. Prawer, Karl Marx and World Literature, Oxford, 1976, p.386.
^ Twain, Mark. "Life on the Mississippi", Chapter 46


Further reading[edit]

Bautz, Annika. Reception of Jane Austen and Walter Scott: A Comparative Longitudinal Study. Continuum, 2007. ISBN 0-8264-9546-X, ISBN 978-0-8264-9546-4.
Brown, David. Walter Scott and the Historical Imagination. Routledge, 1979, ISBN 0-7100-0301-3; Kindle ed. 2013.
Buchan, John. Sir Walter Scott, Coward-McCann Inc., New York, 1932.
Cornish, Sidney W. The "Waverley" Manual; or, Handbook of the Chief Characters, Incidents, and Descriptions in the "Waverley" Novels, with Critical Breviates from Various Sources. Edinburgh: A. and C. Black, 1871.
Duncan, Ian. Scott's Shadow: The Novel in Romantic Edinburgh. Princeton UP, 2007. ISBN 978-0-691-04383-8.
Kelly, Stuart. Scott-Land: The Man Who Invented a Nation. Polygon, 2010. ISBN 978-1-84697-107-5.
Lincoln, Andrew. Walter Scott And Modernity. Edinburgh UP, 2007.
Stephen, Leslie (1898). "The Story of Scott's Ruin". Studies of a Biographer. 2. London: Duckworth & Co. 
Letitia Elizabeth Landon The Female Portrait Gallery. A series of 22 analyses of Scott's female characters (sadly curtailed by Letitia's untimely death in 1838). Laman Blanchard: Life and Literary Remains of L.E.L., 1841. Vol. 2. pp. 81–194.

External links[edit]


Library resources about
Walter Scott





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





Find more aboutWalter Scottat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Data from Wikidata



Sir Walter Scott and Hinx, his Cat
Walter Scott Digital Archive at the University of Edinburgh.
The Edinburgh Sir Walter Scott Club
Sir Walter Scott, biography by Richard H. Hutton, 1878 (from Project Gutenberg)
Works by Walter Scott at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Walter Scott at Internet Archive
Works by Walter Scott at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Works by Walter Scott at The Online Books Page
 Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Scott, Sir Walter". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 
Walter Scott's profile and catalogue of his library at Abbotsford on LibraryThing.
Guardian Books - Sir Walter Scott
Portraits at the National Portrait Gallery
Bust of Walter Scott by Sir Francis Leggatt Chantrey, 1828, white marble, Philadelphia Museum of Art, # 2002.222.1, Philadelphia (PA).
Millgate Union Catalogue of Walter Scott Correspondence
Correspondence of Sir Walter Scott, with related papers, ca. 1807–1929



Coat of arms of Sir Walter Scott




Crest
A nymph, in her dexter hand a sun in splendour, in her sinister a crescent (moon)
Escutcheon
Quarterly; 1st & 4th or two mullets in chief and a crescent in base azure within an orle azure (Scott); 2nd & 3rd or on a bend azure three mascles or, in sinister chief point a buckle or (Haliburton); escutcheon of the Hand of Ulster
Supporters
Dexter a mermaid holding in the exterior hand a mirror proper; Sinister a savage wreathed around the head and middle, holding in the exterior hand a club
Motto
(above) Reparabit cornua phoebe - the moon shall fill her horns again
(below) Watch weel






Baronetage of the United Kingdom


New title
Baronet(of Abbotsford)
1st creation
1820–1832
Next:
Sir Walter Scott








v
t
e


Works by Walter Scott



Novels



Waverley (1814)
Guy Mannering (1815)
The Antiquary (1816)
The Black Dwarf (1816)
Old Mortality (1816)
Rob Roy (1817)
The Heart of Midlothian (1818)
The Bride of Lammermoor (1819)
A Legend of Montrose (1819)
Ivanhoe (1819)
The Monastery (1820)
The Abbot (1820)
Kenilworth (1821)
The Pirate (1821)
The Fortunes of Nigel (1822)
Peveril of the Peak (1823)
Quentin Durward (1823)
St. Ronan's Well (1823)
Redgauntlet (1824)
The Betrothed (1825)
The Talisman (1825)
Woodstock (1826)
The Fair Maid of Perth (1828)
Anne of Geierstein (1829)
Count Robert of Paris (1831)
Castle Dangerous (1831)
The Siege of Malta (1831-1832, pub. posthumously 2008)
Bizarro (1832, pub. posthumously 2008)





Poetry



Translations and Imitations from German Ballads (1796-1819)
"Glenfinlas" (1800)
The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border (1802-1803)
The Lay of the Last Minstrel (1805)
Ballads and Lyrical Pieces (1806)
Marmion (1808)
The Lady of the Lake (1810)
The Vision of Don Roderick (1811)
The Bridal of Triermain (1813)
Rokeby (1813)
The Field of Waterloo (1815)
The Lord of the Isles (1815)
Harold the Dauntless (1817)





Short stories



Chronicles of the Canongate, 1st series (1827)
"The Keepsake Stories" (1828)





Plays



Halidon Hill (1822)
MacDuff's Cross (1823)
The Doom of Devorgoil (1830)
Auchindrane, or, The Ayrshire Tragedy (1830)





Non-fiction



The Journal (1825-1832)
Tales of a Grandfather (1828-1831)





People



James Ballantyne
Lord Byron
James Hogg
William Laidlaw
John Gibson Lockhart
J. B. S. Morritt
Robert Southey
William Wordsworth





Characters



Jedediah Cleishbotham
Jeanie Deans
Dryasdust
Lord Glenallan
Saunders Mucklebackit
Edie Ochiltree
Jonathan Oldbuck
Dominie Sampson
Sir Arthur Wardour





Related



Abbotsford House
Dandie Dinmont Terrier
"Hail to the Chief"
Kennaquhair
Maida
Scott Monument
Scott's View
Sir Walter Scott Way
Walter Scott Prize
Writers' Museum












v
t
e


Walter Scott's Ivanhoe



Opera



Ivanhoé
Der Templer und die Jüdin
Il templario
Ivanhoe





Films



Ivanhoe (1913 British)
Ivanhoe (1913 American)
Ivanhoe (1952)
Ivanhoe (1982)
The Ballad of the Valiant Knight Ivanhoe (1983)





Television



Ivanhoe (1958)
Ivanhoe (1970)
Young Ivanhoe (1995)
Ivanhoe (1997)





Related



The Betrothed












v
t
e


Romanticism



Countries



Denmark
England (literature)
France (literature)
Germany
Norway
Poland
Russia (literature)
Scotland





Movements



Bohemianism
Counter-Enlightenment
Dark romanticism
Düsseldorf School
Gesamtkunstwerk
Gothic fiction
Gothic Revival (architecture)
Hudson River School
Indianism
Nazarene movement
Ossian
Romantic hero
Romanticism in science
Romantic nationalism
Opium and Romanticism
Transcendentalism
Ultra-Romanticism
Wallenrodism





Writers



Abovian
Alencar
Alfieri
Andersen
A. v. Arnim
B. v. Arnim
Azevedo
Baratashvili
Baratynsky
Barbauld (Aikin)
Batyushkov
Baudelaire
Beer
Bertrand
Blake
Botev
Brentano
Bryant
Burns
Byron
Castelo Branco
Castilho
Cazotte
Chateaubriand
Chavchavadze
Clare
Coleridge
Cooper
De Quincey
Dias
Dumas
Eichendorff
Emerson
Eminescu
Espronceda
Fouqué
Foscolo
Garrett
Gautier
Goethe
Grimm Brothers
Gutzkow
Hauff
Hawthorne
Heine
Heliade
Herculano
Hoffmann
Hölderlin
Hugo
Ilić
Irving
Jakšić
Jean Paul
Karamzin
Keats
Kleist
Krasiński
Lamartine
Larra
Leopardi
Lermontov
Lowell
Macedonski
Mácha
Magalhães
Malczewski
Manzoni
Maturin
Mérimée
Mickiewicz
Musset
Nalbandian
Nerval
Nodier
Norwid
Novalis
Oehlenschläger
Orbeliani
Poe
Polidori
Potocki
Prešeren
Pushkin
Raffi
Schiller
Schwab
Scott
Seward
M. Shelley
P. B. Shelley
Shevchenko
Słowacki
De Staël
Stendhal
Tieck
Tyutchev
Uhland
Vörösmarty
Vyazemsky
Wordsworth
Zhukovsky
Zorrilla





Music



Adam
Alkan
Auber
Beethoven
Bellini
Bennett
Berlioz
Bertin
Berwald
Brahms
Bruckner
Cherubini
Chopin
Dargomyzhsky
Félicien David
Ferdinand David
Donizetti
Fauré
Field
Franck
Franz
Glinka
Gomis
Halévy
Kalkbrenner
Liszt
Loewe
Marschner
Masarnau
Méhul
Fanny Mendelssohn
Felix Mendelssohn
Méreaux
Meyerbeer
Moniuszko
Moscheles
Mussorgsky
Niedermeyer
Onslow
Paganini
Prudent
Reicha
Rimsky-Korsakov
Rossini
Rubinstein
Schubert
Clara Schumann
Robert Schumann
Smetana
Sor
Spohr
Spontini
Thalberg
Verdi
Voříšek
Wagner
Weber






Theologians and
philosophers




Chaadayev
Coleridge
Feuerbach
Fichte
Goethe
Hegel
Khomyakov
Müller
Ritschl
Rousseau
Schiller
A. Schlegel
F. Schlegel
Schopenhauer
Schleiermacher
Tieck
Wackenroder





Visual artists



Aivazovsky
Bierstadt
Blake
Bonington
Bryullov
Chassériau
Church
Constable
Cole
Corot
Dahl
David d'Angers
Delacroix
Friedrich
Fuseli
Géricault
Girodet
Głowacki
Goya
Gude
Hayez
Janmot
Jones
Kiprensky
Koch
Lampi
Leutze
Loutherbourg
Maison
Martin
Michałowski
Palmer
Porto-Alegre
Préault
Révoil
Richard
Rude
Runge
Saleh
Scheffer
Stattler
Stroj
Tidemand
Tropinin
Turner
Veit
Ward
Wiertz







 « Age of Enlightenment
Realism » 








Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 95207079
LCCN: n78095541
ISNI: 0000 0001 2144 1874
GND: 118612409
SELIBR: 211278
SUDOC: 027129489
BNF: cb11924221r (data)
BIBSYS: 90058655
ULAN: 500069589
MusicBrainz: 627f5ca8-c745-4e1c-a646-facdfe1cabdf
NLA: 35486165
NDL: 00455918
NKC: jn19990007395
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\006674
RLS: 000081966
BNE: XX913959
RKD: 254119
IATH: w6jm27jt











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Walter_Scott&oldid=817963954"					Categories: Walter Scott1771 births1832 deaths18th-century Scottish poets19th-century antiquarians19th-century biographers19th-century judges19th-century Scottish lawyers19th-century Scottish novelists19th-century Scottish poetsAlumni of the University of EdinburghBaronets in the Baronetage of the United KingdomBritish literary editorsBritish medievalistsClan ScottElders of the Church of ScotlandFellows of the Royal Society of EdinburghHistorians of ScotlandMembers of The ClubMembers of the Faculty of AdvocatesMembers of the Royal Company of ArchersPeople educated at Kelso High SchoolPeople educated at the Royal High School, EdinburghWriters from EdinburghPeople of the Scottish EnlightenmentPresidents of the Royal Society of EdinburghPrincipal Clerks of Session and JusticiaryRomantic poetsScott family of AbbotsfordScottish biographersScottish diaristsScottish folkloristsScottish FreemasonsScottish historical novelistsScottish literary criticsScottish sheriffsScottish people with disabilitiesScottish publishers (people)Scottish song collectorsScottish translatorsWriters of Arthurian literatureWriters of historical fiction set in the Middle AgesWriters of historical novels set in Early Modern periodHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentWikipedia introduction cleanup from February 2017All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from February 2017All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyPages using Infobox writer with unknown parametersAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2016Articles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceUse British English from December 2014Use dmy dates from March 2016AC with 18 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with RKDartists identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers