For the company, see Waste Management (corporation). For other uses, see Waste management (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Sanitary engineering.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Waste management in Kathmandu, Nepal






Waste management in Stockholm, Sweden






Waste management in Paris


Waste management or waste disposal are all the activities and actions required to manage waste from its inception to its final disposal.[1] This includes amongst other things collection, transport, treatment and disposal of waste together with monitoring and regulation. It also encompasses the legal and regulatory framework that relates to waste management encompassing guidance on recycling.
Waste can take any form that is either solid, liquid, or gas and each have different methods of disposal and management. Waste management normally deals with all types of waste whether it was created in forms that are industrial, biological, household, and special cases where it may pose a threat to human health.[2] It is produced due to human activity such as when factories extract and process raw materials.[3] Waste management is intended to reduce adverse effects of waste on health, the environment or aesthetics.
Waste management practices are not uniform among countries (developed and developing nations); regions (urban and rural areas), and sectors (residential and industrial).[4]
A large portion of waste management practices deal with municipal solid waste (MSW) which is waste that is created by household, industrial, and commercial activity.[5]



Contents


1 Central principles of waste management

1.1 Waste hierarchy
1.2 Life-cycle of a product
1.3 Resource efficiency
1.4 Polluter-pays principle


2 History

2.1 Modern era


3 Waste handling and transport

3.1 Waste handling practices


4 Financial models
5 Disposal methods

5.1 Landfill
5.2 Incineration


6 Recycling
7 Re-use

7.1 Biological reprocessing
7.2 Energy recovery
7.3 Pyrolysis
7.4 Resource recovery
7.5 Sustainability


8 Liquid waste-management

8.1 Sewage sludge


9 Avoidance and reduction methods
10 International waste movement
11 Benefits
12 Challenges in developing countries
13 Technologies
14 Scientific journals
15 See also
16 References
17 External links



Central principles of waste management[edit]




Diagram of the waste hierarchy


There are a number of concepts about waste management which vary in their usage between countries or regions. Some of the most general, widely used concepts include:
Waste hierarchy[edit]
The waste hierarchy refers to the "3 Rs" reduce, reuse and recycle, which classify waste management strategies according to their desirability in terms of waste minimisation. The waste hierarchy remains the cornerstone of most waste minimisation strategies. The aim of the waste hierarchy is to extract the maximum practical benefits from products and to generate the minimum amount of waste; see: resource recovery.[6] The waste hierarchy is represented as a pyramid because the basic premise is for policy to take action first and prevent the generation of waste. The next step or preferred action is to reduce the generation of waste i.e. by re-use. The next is recycling which would include composting. Following this step is material recovery and waste-to-energy. Energy can be recovered from processes i.e. landfill and combustion, at this level of the hierarchy. The final action is disposal, in landfills or through incineration without energy recovery. This last step is the final resort for waste which has not been prevented, diverted or recovered.[7][page needed] The waste hierarchy represents the progression of a product or material through the sequential stages of the pyramid of waste management. The hierarchy represents the latter parts of the life-cycle for each product.[7][page needed]
Life-cycle of a product[edit]
The life-cycle begins with design, then proceeds through manufacture, distribution, use and then follows through the waste hierarchy's stages of reduce, reuse and recycle. Each of the above stages of the life-cycle offers opportunities for policy intervention, to rethink the need for the product, to redesign to minimize waste potential, to extend its use.[7][page needed] The key behind the life-cycle of a product is to optimize the use of the world's limited resources by avoiding the unnecessary generation of waste.
Resource efficiency[edit]
Resource efficiency reflects the understanding that current, global, economic growth and development can not be sustained with the current production and consumption patterns. Globally, we are extracting more resources to produce goods than the planet can replenish.[7][page needed] Resource efficiency is the reduction of the environmental impact from the production and consumption of these goods, from final raw material extraction to last use and disposal. This process of resource efficiency can address sustainability.
Polluter-pays principle[edit]
The polluter-pays principle is a principle where the polluting party pays for the impact caused to the environment. With respect to waste management, this generally refers to the requirement for a waste generator to pay for appropriate disposal of the unrecoverable material.
History[edit]
Main article: History of waste management
Throughout most of history, the amount of waste generated by humans was insignificant due to low population density and low societal levels of the exploitation of natural resources. Common waste produced during pre-modern times was mainly ashes and human biodegradable waste, and these were released back into the ground locally, with minimum environmental impact. Tools made out of wood or metal were generally reused or passed down through the generations.
However, some civilizations do seem to have been more profligate in their waste output than others. In particular, the Maya of Central America had a fixed monthly ritual, in which the people of the village would gather together and burn their rubbish in large dumps.[8]
Modern era[edit]




Sir Edwin Chadwick's 1842 report The Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population was influential in securing the passage of the first legislation aimed at waste clearance and disposal.


Following the onset of industrialisation and the sustained urban growth of large population centres in England, the buildup of waste in the cities caused a rapid deterioration in levels of sanitation and the general quality of urban life. The streets became choked with filth due to the lack of waste clearance regulations.[9] Calls for the establishment of a municipal authority with waste removal powers occurred as early as 1751, when Corbyn Morris in London proposed that "... as the preservation of the health of the people is of great importance, it is proposed that the cleaning of this city, should be put under one uniform public management, and all the filth be...conveyed by the Thames to proper distance in the country".[10]
However, it was not until the mid-19th century, spurred by increasingly devastating cholera outbreaks and the emergence of a public health debate that the first legislation on the issue emerged. Highly influential in this new focus was the report The Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population in 1842[11] of the social reformer, Edwin Chadwick, in which he argued for the importance of adequate waste removal and management facilities to improve the health and wellbeing of the city's population.
In the UK, the Nuisance Removal and Disease Prevention Act of 1846 began what was to be a steadily evolving process of the provision of regulated waste management in London. The Metropolitan Board of Works was the first citywide authority that centralized sanitation regulation for the rapidly expanding city and the Public Health Act 1875 made it compulsory for every household to deposit their weekly waste in "moveable receptacles: for disposal—the first concept for a dust-bin.[12]




Manlove, Alliott & Co. Ltd. 1894 destructor furnace. The use of incinerators for waste disposal became popular in the late 19th century.


The dramatic increase in waste for disposal led to the creation of the first incineration plants, or, as they were then called, "destructors". In 1874, the first incinerator was built in Nottingham by Manlove, Alliott & Co. Ltd. to the design of Albert Fryer.[10] However, these were met with opposition on account of the large amounts of ash they produced and which wafted over the neighbouring areas.[13]
Similar municipal systems of waste disposal sprung up at the turn of the 20th century in other large cities of Europe and North America. In 1895, New York City became the first U.S. city with public-sector garbage management.[12]
Early garbage removal trucks were simply open bodied dump trucks pulled by a team of horses. They became motorized in the early part of the 20th century and the first close body trucks to eliminate odours with a dumping lever mechanism were introduced in the 1920s in Britain.[14] These were soon equipped with 'hopper mechanisms' where the scooper was loaded at floor level and then hoisted mechanically to deposit the waste in the truck. The Garwood Load Packer was the first truck in 1938, to incorporate a hydraulic compactor.
Waste handling and transport[edit]
Main articles: Waste collection vehicle, Dustbin, and Waste sorting




Molded plastic, wheeled waste bin in Berkshire, England


Waste collection methods vary widely among different countries and regions. Domestic waste collection services are often provided by local government authorities, or by private companies for industrial and commercial waste. Some areas, especially those in less developed countries, do not have formal waste-collection systems.
Waste handling practices[edit]
Curbside collection is the most common method of disposal in most European countries, Canada, New Zealand and many other parts of the developed world in which waste is collected at regular intervals by specialised trucks. This is often associated with curb-side waste segregation. In rural areas waste may need to be taken to a transfer station. Waste collected is then transported to an appropriate disposal facility. In some areas, vacuum collection is used in which waste is transported from the home or commercial premises by vacuum along small bore tubes. Systems are in use in Europe and North America.
Main article: Automated vacuum collection
In some jurisdictions unsegregated waste is collected at the curb-side or from waste transfer stations and then sorted into recyclables and unusable waste. Such systems are capable of sorting large volumes of solid waste, salvaging recyclables, and turning the rest into bio-gas and soil conditioner. In San Francisco, the local government established its Mandatory Recycling and Composting Ordinance in support of its goal of "Zero waste by 2020", requiring everyone in the city to keep recyclables and compostables out of the landfill. The three streams are collected with the curbside "Fantastic 3" bin system – blue for recyclables, green for compostables, and black for landfill-bound materials – provided to residents and businesses and serviced by San Francisco's sole refuse hauler, Recology. The City's "Pay-As-You-Throw" system charges customers by the volume of landfill-bound materials, which provides a financial incentive to separate recyclables and compostables from other discards. The City's Department of the Environment's Zero Waste Program has led the City to achieve 80% diversion, the highest diversion rate in North America.[15] Other businesses such as Waste Industries use a variety of colors to distinguish between trash and recycling cans.
Financial models[edit]
In most developed countries, domestic waste disposal is funded from a national or local tax which may be related to income, or national house value. Commercial and industrial waste disposal is typically charged for as a commercial service, often as an integrated charge which includes disposal costs. This practice may encourage disposal contractors to opt for the cheapest disposal option such as landfill rather than the environmentally best solution such as re-use and recycling. In some areas such as Taipei, the city government charges its households and industries for the volume of rubbish they produce. Waste will only be collected by the city council if waste is disposed in government issued rubbish bags. This policy has successfully reduced the amount of waste the city produces and increased the recycling rate.[citation needed]
Disposal methods[edit]
Landfill[edit]
Main article: Landfill




A landfill compaction vehicle in action.






Spittelau incineration plant in Vienna


Incineration[edit]
Main article: Incineration
Incineration is a disposal method in which solid organic wastes are subjected to combustion so as to convert them into residue and gaseous products. This method is useful for disposal of residue of both solid waste management and solid residue from waste water management. This process reduces the volumes of solid waste to 20 to 30 percent of the original volume. Incineration and other high temperature waste treatment systems are sometimes described as "thermal treatment". Incinerators convert waste materials into heat, gas, steam, and ash.
Incineration is carried out both on a small scale by individuals and on a large scale by industry. It is used to dispose of solid, liquid and gaseous waste. It is recognized as a practical method of disposing of certain hazardous waste materials (such as biological medical waste). Incineration is a controversial method of waste disposal, due to issues such as emission of gaseous pollutants.
Incineration is common in countries such as Japan where land is more scarce, as these facilities generally do not require as much area as landfills. Waste-to-energy (WtE) or energy-from-waste (EfW) are broad terms for facilities that burn waste in a furnace or boiler to generate heat, steam or electricity. Combustion in an incinerator is not always perfect and there have been concerns about pollutants in gaseous emissions from incinerator stacks. Particular concern has focused on some very persistent organic compounds such as dioxins, furans, and PAHs, which may be created and which may have serious environmental consequences.
Recycling[edit]
Main article: Recycling




Waste not the Waste. Sign in Tamil Nadu, India






Steel crushed and baled for recycling


Recycling is a resource recovery practice that refers to the collection and reuse of waste materials such as empty beverage containers. The materials from which the items are made can be reprocessed into new products. Material for recycling may be collected separately from general waste using dedicated bins and collection vehicles, a procedure called kerbside collection. In some communities, the owner of the waste is required to separate the materials into different bins (e.g. for paper, plastics, metals) prior to its collection. In other communities, all recyclable materials are placed in a single bin for collection, and the sorting is handled later at a central facility. The latter method is known as "single-stream recycling."[16][17]
The most common consumer products recycled include aluminium such as beverages cans, copper such as wire, steel from food and aerosol cans, old steel furnishings or equipment, rubber tyres, polyethylene and PET bottles, glass bottles and jars, paperboard cartons, newspapers, magazines and light paper, and corrugated fiberboard boxes.
PVC, LDPE, PP, and PS (see resin identification code) are also recyclable. These items are usually composed of a single type of material, making them relatively easy to recycle into new products. The recycling of complex products (such as computers and electronic equipment) is more difficult, due to the additional dismantling and separation required.
The type of material accepted for recycling varies by city and country. Each city and country has different recycling programs in place that can handle the various types of recyclable materials. However, certain variation in acceptance is reflected in the resale value of the material once it is reprocessed.
Re-use[edit]
Biological reprocessing[edit]
Main articles: Composting, Home composting, Anaerobic digestion, and Microbial fuel cell




An active compost heap.


Recoverable materials that are organic in nature, such as plant material, food scraps, and paper products, can be recovered through composting and digestion processes to decompose the organic matter. The resulting organic material is then recycled as mulch or compost for agricultural or landscaping purposes. In addition, waste gas from the process (such as methane) can be captured and used for generating electricity and heat (CHP/cogeneration) maximising efficiencies. The intention of biological processing in waste management is to control and accelerate the natural process of decomposition of organic matter. (See resource recovery).
Energy recovery[edit]
Main article: Waste-to-energy
Energy recovery from waste is the conversion of non-recyclable waste materials into usable heat, electricity, or fuel through a variety of processes, including combustion, gasification, pyrolyzation, anaerobic digestion, and landfill gas recovery.[18] This process is often called waste-to-energy. Energy recovery from waste is part of the non-hazardous waste management hierarchy. Using energy recovery to convert non-recyclable waste materials into electricity and heat, generates a renewable energy source and can reduce carbon emissions by offsetting the need for energy from fossil sources as well as reduce methane generation from landfills.[18] Globally, waste-to-energy accounts for 16% of waste management.[19]
The energy content of waste products can be harnessed directly by using them as a direct combustion fuel, or indirectly by processing them into another type of fuel. Thermal treatment ranges from using waste as a fuel source for cooking or heating and the use of the gas fuel (see above), to fuel for boilers to generate steam and electricity in a turbine. Pyrolysis and gasification are two related forms of thermal treatment where waste materials are heated to high temperatures with limited oxygen availability. The process usually occurs in a sealed vessel under high pressure. Pyrolysis of solid waste converts the material into solid, liquid and gas products. The liquid and gas can be burnt to produce energy or refined into other chemical products (chemical refinery). The solid residue (char) can be further refined into products such as activated carbon. Gasification and advanced Plasma arc gasification are used to convert organic materials directly into a synthetic gas (syngas) composed of carbon monoxide and hydrogen. The gas is then burnt to produce electricity and steam. An alternative to pyrolysis is high temperature and pressure supercritical water decomposition (hydrothermal monophasic oxidation).
Pyrolysis[edit]
Main article: Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis is often used to convert many types of domestic and industrial residues into a recovered fuel. Different types of waste input (such as plant waste, food waste, tyres) placed in the pyrolysis process potentially yield a recovered energy source that can be an alternative to fossil fuels.[20] Pyrolysis is a process of thermo-chemical decomposition of organic materials by heat in the absence of oxygen which produces various hydrocarbon gases.[21] During pyrolysis, the molecules of object are subjected to very high temperatures leading to very high vibrations. Therefore, every molecule in the object is stretched and shaken to an extent that molecules starts breaking down. The rate of pyrolysis increases with temperature. In industrial applications, temperatures are above 430 °C (800 °F).[22] Fast pyrolysis produces liquid fuel for feedstocks like wood. Slow pyrolysis produces gases and solid charcoal.[23] Pyrolysis hold promise for conversion of waste biomass into useful liquid fuel. Pyrolysis of waste plastics can produce millions of litres of fuel. Solid products of this process contain metals, glass, sand and pyrolysis coke which cannot be converted to gas in the process.Compared to the process of incineration, certain types of pyrolysis processes prevent the release of harmful product residues that contain some alkali metals, sulphur, and chlorine. Pyrolysis results in smaller contaminant gas emissions which makes for smaller clean-up methods that would reduce cost. Some concerns to point out is that pyrolysis yields gasses which impact the environment such as HCl and SO2.[24]
Resource recovery[edit]
Main article: Resource recovery
Resource recovery is the systematic diversion of waste, which was intended for disposal, for a specific next use.[25] It is the processing of recyclables to extract or recover materials and resources, or convert to energy.[26] These activities are performed at a resource recovery facility.[26] Resource recovery is not only environmentally important, but it is also cost-effective.[27] It decreases the amount of waste for disposal, saves space in landfills, and conserves natural resources.[27]
Resource recovery (as opposed to waste management) uses LCA (life cycle analysis) attempts to offer alternatives to waste management. For mixed MSW (Municipal Solid Waste) a number of broad studies have indicated that administration, source separation and collection followed by reuse and recycling of the non-organic fraction and energy and compost/fertilizer production of the organic material via anaerobic digestion to be the favoured path.
As an example of how resource recycling can be beneficial, many of the items thrown away contain precious metals which can be recycled to create a profit, such as the components in circuit boards. Other industries can also benefit from resource recycling with the wood chippings in pallets and other packaging materials being passed onto sectors such as the horticultural profession. In this instance, workers can use the recycled chips to create paths, walkways, or arena surfaces.
Sustainability[edit]
The management of waste is a key component in a business' ability of maintaining ISO14001 accreditation. Companies are encouraged to improve their environmental efficiencies each year by eliminating waste through resource recovery practices, which are sustainability-related activities. One way to do this is by shifting away from waste management to resource recovery practices like recycling materials such as glass, food scraps, paper and cardboard, plastic bottles and metal. An important market for recycled materials is the construction sector. Many inorganic waste streams can be used for the production of materials for construction. This includes the recycling of concrete and bricks, mostly used as artificial gravel. This topic was on the agenda of the International WASCON conference in Spain in June 2015 and on the international Conference on Green Urbanism, held in Italy 12–14 October 2016.[citation needed]
Liquid waste-management[edit]
Sewage sludge[edit]
Main article: Sewage sludge treatment
Sewage sludge is the resulting product of waste water treatment processes. Due to rapid urbanization, there has been an increase in municipal waste water that results 0.1–30.8 kg of sewage per population equivalent per year (kg/p.e/year).[28] Common disposal practices of sewage sludge are incineration, composting, and landfill.
Avoidance and reduction methods[edit]
Main article: Waste minimization
An important method of waste management is the prevention of waste material being created, also known as waste reduction. Methods of avoidance include reuse of second-hand products, repairing broken items instead of buying new, designing products to be refillable or reusable (such as cotton instead of plastic shopping bags), encouraging consumers to avoid using disposable products (such as disposable cutlery), removing any food/liquid remains from cans and packaging,[29] and designing products that use less material to achieve the same purpose (for example, lightweighting of beverage cans).[30]
International waste movement[edit]
While waste transport within a given country falls under national regulations, trans-boundary movement of waste is often subject to international treaties. A major concern to many countries in the world has been hazardous waste. The Basel Convention, ratified by 172 countries, deprecates movement of hazardous waste from developed to less developed countries. The provisions of the Basel convention have been integrated into the EU waste shipment regulation. Nuclear waste, although considered hazardous, does not fall under the jurisdiction of the Basel Convention.
Benefits[edit]
Waste is not something that should be discarded or disposed of with no regard for future use. It can be a valuable resource if addressed correctly, through policy and practice. With rational and consistent waste management practices there is an opportunity to reap a range of benefits. Those benefits include:

Economic – Improving economic efficiency through the means of resource use, treatment and disposal and creating markets for recycles can lead to efficient practices in the production and consumption of products and materials resulting in valuable materials being recovered for reuse and the potential for new jobs and new business opportunities.
Social – By reducing adverse impacts on health by proper waste management practices, the resulting consequences are more appealing settlements. Better social advantages can lead to new sources of employment and potentially lifting communities out of poverty especially in some of the developing poorer countries and cities.
Environmental – Reducing or eliminating adverse impacts on the environment through reducing, reusing and recycling, and minimizing resource extraction can provide improved air and water quality and help in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
Inter-generational Equity – Following effective waste management practices can provide subsequent generations a more robust economy, a fairer and more inclusive society and a cleaner environment.[7][page needed]

Challenges in developing countries[edit]
Waste management in cities with developing economies and economies in transition experience exhausted waste collection services and inadequately managed and uncontrolled dumpsites. The problems are worsening.[7][page needed] Problems with governance complicate the situation. Waste management, in these countries and cities, is an ongoing challenge and many struggle due to weak institutions, chronic under-resourcing and rapid urbanization.[7][page needed] All of these challenges, along with the lack of understanding of different factors that contribute to the hierarchy of waste management, affect the treatment of waste.[31][full citation needed]
Technologies[edit]
Traditionally, the waste management industry has been a late adopter of new technologies such as RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) tags, GPS and integrated software packages which enable better quality data to be collected without the use of estimation or manual data entry.[32]
Scientific journals[edit]
See also: Category:Waste management journals
Related scientific journals in this area include:

Environmental and Resource Economics
Environmental Monitoring and Assessment
Journal of Environmental Assessment Policy and Management
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management

See also[edit]


Biomedical waste
Co-processing
Curb mining
Landfarming
List of waste disposal incidents
List of waste management acronyms
List of waste types
Milorganite
Solid waste policy in India
Solid waste policy in the United States
Waste management in Turkey
Zabbaleen
Zero Waste


References[edit]


^ "United Nations Statistics Division - Environment Statistics". unstats.un.org. Retrieved 3 March 2017. 
^ "Editorial Board/Aims & Scope". Waste Management. 34 (3): IFC. March 2014. doi:10.1016/S0956-053X(14)00026-9. 
^ "United Nations Statistics Division - Environment Statistics". unstats.un.org. Retrieved 3 March 2017. 
^ Davidson, Gary (June 2011). "Waste Management Practices: Literature Review" (PDF). Dalhousie University - Office of Sustainability. Retrieved 3 March 2017. 
^ Handbook of Solid Waste Management and Waste Minimization Technologies. 2003. pp. 337–465. 
^ Albert, Raleigh (4 August 2011). "The Proper Care and Use of a Garbage Disposal". Disposal Mag. Retrieved 2017-03-03. 
^ a b c d e f g Guidelines for National Waste Management Strategies Moving from Challenges to Opportunities (PDF). United Nations Environmental Programme. 2013. ISBN 978-92-807-3333-4. .
^ Barbalace, Roberta Crowell (2003-08-01). "The History of Waste". EnvironmentalChemistry.com. Retrieved 2013-12-09. 
^ Florence Nightingale, Selected Writings of Florence Nightingale, ed. Lucy Ridgely Seymer (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1954), pp. 38287
^ a b Herbert, Lewis (2007). "Centenary History of Waste and Waste Managers in London and South East England". Chartered Institution of Wastes Management. 
^ Chadwick, Edwin (1842). Report...from the Poor Law Commissioners on an Inquiry into the Sanitary Conditions of the Labouring Population of Great Britain. London. pp. 369–372.  via Laura Del Col (11 October 2002). "Chadwick's Report on Sanitary Conditions". The Victorian Web.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ a b National Waste & Recycling Association. "History of Solid Waste Management". Washington, D.C. Retrieved 2013-12-09. 
^ Gandy, Matthew (1994). Recycling and the Politics of Urban Waste. Earthscan. ISBN 9781853831683. 
^ "Covered Bodies". Archived from the original on 2015-01-06. 
^ http://www.siemens.com/entry/cc/features/greencityindex_international/all/en/pdf/report_northamerica_en.pdf
^ City of Chicago, Illinois. Department of Streets and Sanitation. "What is Single Stream Recycling." Accessed 2013-12-09.
^ Montgomery County, Maryland. Division of Solid Waste Services. "Curbside Collection." Accessed 2013-12-09.
^ a b "Energy Recovery from Waste". USEPA. 2014. 
^ "Waste Hierarchy". New Energy Corporation. 2014. 
^ "Potential of pyrolysis processes in the waste management sector". Thermal Science and Engineering Progress. 3: 171–197. September 2017. 
^ Oxford Reference – Pyrolysis
^ Encyclopedia Britannica
^ By Prabir Basu: Biomass Gasification, Pyrolysis and Torrefaction: Practical Design and Theory
^ "Pyrolysis technologies for municipal solid waste: A review". Waste Mananagement. 34 (12): 2466–2486. December 2014. 
^ "Frequent Questions". USEPA. 2012. 
^ a b "Resource Recovery". Government of Montana. 2012. 
^ a b "What is Resource Recovery?". Grand Traverse County. 2006. 
^ "Thermochemical processing of sewage sludge to energy and fuel: Fundamentals, challenges and considerations". Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews. 80: 888–913. December 2017. 
^ "Removing food remains to reduce waste". Recycling Guide. Retrieved 2012-09-25. 
^ Schneider, Michael; Johnson, Liz. "Lightweighting". Projects in Scientific Computing. Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, Carnegie Mellon University, University of Pittsburgh. Retrieved 2012-09-25. 
^ Waste Management. Science Direct. 33 (1): 220–232. 2013.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Claire Swedberg (4 February 2014). "Air-Trak Brings Visibility to Waste Management". RFID Journal. Retrieved 1 October 2015. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Waste.



Gasoline from Vinegar | MIT Technology Review







v
t
e


Biosolids, waste and waste management



Major types



Agricultural wastewater
Biodegradable waste
Brown waste
Chemical waste
Construction waste
Demolition waste
Electronic waste

by country


Food waste
Green waste
Hazardous waste
Heat waste
Industrial waste
Litter
Marine debris
Biomedical waste
Mining waste
Municipal solid waste
Open defecation
Post-consumer waste
Radioactive waste
Scrap metal
Sewage
Toxic waste
Wastewater








Processes



Anaerobic digestion
Biodegradation
Composting
Garden waste dumping
Illegal dumping
Incineration
Landfill
Landfill mining
Mechanical biological treatment
Mechanical sorting
Open dump
Photodegradation
Recycling
Resource recovery
Sewage treatment
Waste collection
Waste picking
Waste sorting
Waste trade
Waste treatment
Waste-to-energy





Countries



Armenia
Bangladesh
Brazil
Hong Kong
India
Kazakhstan
New Zealand
Russia
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
UK
US





Agreements



Bamako Convention
Basel Convention
EU directives

batteries
landfills
RoHS
framework
incineration
vehicles
waste water
WEEE


London Convention
Oslo Convention
OSPAR Convention





Other topics



Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future
Cleaner production
Downcycling
Eco-industrial park
Extended producer responsibility
High-level radioactive waste management
History of waste management
Landfill fire
Sewage regulation and administration
Upcycling
Waste hierarchy
Waste legislation
Waste minimisation
Zero waste








 Environment portal
 Category
 Commons
Concepts
Index
Journals
Lists
Organizations












v
t
e


Recycling



Materials



Aluminium
Asphalt
Concrete
Copper
Cotton
Energy
Glass
Gypsum
Paper
Plastic
Refrigerant
Scrap
Timber
Vegetable oil
Water








Products



Appliances
Automotive oil
Batteries
Bottles
PET bottles
Computers
Drugs
Fluorescent lamps
Lumber
Mobile phones
Paint
Ships
Textiles
Tires
Vehicles





Apparatus



Bins
Blue bags
Blue boxes
Codes
Collection
Materials recovery facility
Waste sorting





Countries



Brazil
Canada
Ireland
Japan
The Netherlands
Switzerland
United Kingdom

Northern Ireland


United States





Concepts



Dematerialization
Downcycling
Eco-industrial park
Ecodesign
Extended producer responsibility
Freecycling
Industrial ecology
Industrial metabolism
Land recycling
Material flow analysis
Precycling
Product stewardship
Recursive recycling
Recycling (ecological)
Resource recovery
Reuse of excreta
Repurposing
Reuse
Upcycling
Urban lumberjacking
Waste hierarchy
Waste minimisation
Waste picking
Zero waste





See also



Cogeneration
Composting
Container deposit legislation
Dumpster diving
Ethical consumerism
Freeganism
Simple living
Waste
Waste-to-energy
Waste collection
Waste management law
Waste management
Waste management concepts








 Environment portal
 Category

by country
by material
by product
organizations


Index
 Commons









Authority control



GND: 4000107-6
NDL: 00932471











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Waste_management&oldid=818098133"					Categories: Waste managementHidden categories: Pages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLPages with citations lacking titlesArticles needing additional references from May 2011All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016Articles needing more detailed referencesCommons category with local link different than on WikidataUse dmy dates from May 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers