
Wellcome Trust




Founded
1936; 81 years ago (1936)


Founder
Sir Henry Wellcome


Registration no.
210183


Focus
Biomedical Research


Headquarters
Wellcome Building, 215 Euston Rd., London, United Kingdom, NW1 2BE


Location



Euston Road, London NW1





Coordinates
51°31′32.55″N 0°8′6.07″W﻿ / ﻿51.5257083°N 0.1350194°W﻿ / 51.5257083; -0.1350194



Area served

United Kingdom and overseas



Key people

Baroness Eliza Manningham-Buller[1]
(Chair)
Dr Jeremy Farrar[2]
(Director)


Disbursements
£11 billion (1936-2015)[4]


Endowment
£23.2 billion[3]



Employees

2,057[5]


Slogan
Good health makes life better. We want to improve health for everyone by helping great ideas to thrive.


Website
www.wellcome.ac.uk


The Wellcome Trust is a biomedical research charity based in London, United Kingdom. It was established in 1936 with legacies from the pharmaceutical magnate Sir Henry Wellcome to fund research to improve human and animal health. The aim of the Trust is to "achieve extraordinary improvements in health by supporting the brightest minds", and in addition to funding biomedical research it supports the public understanding of science. It has an endowment of £23.2 billion (2017) making it the second wealthiest charitable foundation in the world, after the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.[3][6]
The Trust has been described by the Financial Times as the United Kingdom's largest provider of non-governmental funding for scientific research and one of the largest providers in the world.[7]



Contents


1 History
2 Activities

2.1 Biomedical research

2.1.1 Major investments
2.1.2 Major Overseas Programmes
2.1.3 Seeding Drug Discovery Initiative


2.2 Support for Open Access and Open Data
2.3 Membership in the Global Health Innovative Technology Fund (GHIT)
2.4 Public engagement and the Wellcome Collection

2.4.1 Wellcome Book Prize




3 Investments

3.1 Purchase of the Co-operative Farms business


4 Headquarters
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
The Trust was established to administer the fortune of the American-born pharmaceutical magnate Sir Henry Wellcome.[8] Its income was derived from what was originally called Burroughs Wellcome, later renamed in the UK as the Wellcome Foundation Ltd.[9] In 1986, the trust sold 25% of Wellcome plc stock to the public. Overseen by incoming Director of Finance Ian Macgregor, this marked the beginning of a period of financial growth that saw the Trust's value increase by almost £14bn in 14 years, as their interests moved beyond the bounds of the pharmaceutical industry.[10]
In 1995, the trust divested itself of any interest in pharmaceuticals by selling all remaining stock to Glaxo plc, the company's historic British rival, creating GlaxoWellcome plc. In 2000, the Wellcome name disappeared from the drug business altogether when GlaxoWellcome merged with SmithKline Beecham, to form GlaxoSmithKline plc.[11]
Activities[edit]
Biomedical research[edit]
Major investments[edit]
The Trust funds or co-funds a number of major biomedical research initiatives:[12]

Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC), a cohort study of children born in England during 1991 and 1992.
The Cancer Genome Project at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute.
The Diamond Light Source, the UK's national synchrotron science facility in Oxfordshire.
Developing Excellence in Leadership, Training and Science Initiative (DELTAS), a collaboration with the Department for International Development (DFID) to establish cutting-edge research and training programmes across the African continent.
The Ebola Emergency Initiative, a fast-tracked research programme with the goal of identifying clinical and public health interventions to counter the West African Ebola Epidemic.
The Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/ Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory facilitates research into the genetic component of type 1 diabetes and is based in the Cambridge Institute for Medical Research.
The Seeding Drug Discovery Initiative.
The Structural Genomics Consortium, an international organisation focussing on three-dimensional structures of proteins of medical relevance with an emphasis on open data.
The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, a non-profit, British genomics and genetics research institute.[13]
UK Biobank and the UK Biobank Ethics and Governance Council.

Major Overseas Programmes[edit]

The KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, established in 1989 in partnership with the Kenya Medical Research Institute.[14]
The Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, established in 1995.
The Africa Centre for Health and Population Studies in South Africa, established in 1998 in partnership with the South African Medical Research Council.
The Wellcome Trust-Mahidol University-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Programme in Thailand and Laos, established in 1979.
The Vietnam Research Programme and Oxford University Clinical Research Unit in Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi.

Seeding Drug Discovery Initiative[edit]
Also known as SDDI, this five year initiative started in October 2005 with the remit "to facilitate the development of drug-like small molecules that address unmet medical needs." SDDI was based in London and managed by Richard Davis.[15] Through early 2010, SDDI had provided more than £80 million across 30 projects split between academic institutions and companies.[15] To early 2010, all but one of the company recipients were either start-ups or spin-outs.[15] In May 2010, an additional £110 million was added to the SDDI fund with the intent to extend the initiative for an additional 5 years.[16]
Support for Open Access and Open Data[edit]
The Wellcome Trust plays an important role in encouraging publication of research in open access repositories[17] such as Europe PubMed Central (EuropePMC). The Wellcome Trust believes that maximising the distribution of these papers - by providing free, online access - is the most effective way of ensuring that the research can be accessed, read and built upon. In turn, this will foster a richer research culture.[citation needed]
In 2016, the Wellcome Trust partnered with the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute to launch the Open Science Prize[18] to "help develop services, tools and platforms that enable open content to be discovered, assessed and re-used in ways that will advance discovery and spark innovation."[18]
In 2016, Wellcome Trust announced that it would be launching Wellcome Open Research,[19] an open access publication system running on the F1000 Research platform.[20] Article Processing Charges will be covered directly by Wellcome Trust. Paper from the system are now indexed in PubMed Central.[21]
Membership in the Global Health Innovative Technology Fund (GHIT)[edit]
In the summer of 2015, the Wellcome Trust joined the Japanese government, 7 Japanese pharmaceutical and diagnostics companies, The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, and the United Nations Development Program as funding partner of the Global Health Innovative Technology Fund (GHIT), which funds scientific research and development for anti-infectives and diagnostics for diseases that primarily affect the developing world.[22][23]
Public engagement and the Wellcome Collection[edit]
Main article: Wellcome Collection
In June 2007, the Wellcome Building reopened after refurbishment as a public venue, housing the Wellcome Collection, the Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of Medicine at University College London and the Wellcome Library.[24] The aim of the Wellcome Collection is to enhance public understanding of medical science and history. The building contains gallery spaces, conference facilities, space for debates, drama and workshops, a café and a bookshop. The galleries show a small sample of works from Sir Henry Wellcome's collection, and host a programme of events and exhibitions. The Wellcome Collection and exhibitions are open to the public free of charge six days a week.[25]
The Wellcome Collection and Wellcome Library are members of The London Museums of Health & Medicine.
Wellcome Book Prize[edit]
Main article: Wellcome Book Prize
The Wellcome Trust sponsors an annual book prize, the Wellcome Book Prize, which "aims to excite public interest and encourage debate" around medicine and health.[26]
Investments[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (March 2016)



Purchase of the Co-operative Farms business[edit]
In August 2014, the Wellcome Trust bought the Co-operative Group's farm business (renamed Farmcare) for £249 million. This comprised "15,997 hectares (39,533 acres) of freehold and third party owned land, 15 farms, including three pack houses, over 100 residential properties, and 27 commercial properties."[27]
Headquarters[edit]




The Wellcome Trust's Gibbs Building on Euston Road


The Wellcome Trust's operations are run from two buildings on Euston Road in London. The Wellcome Building, at 183 Euston Road, built in 1932 in Portland stone houses the Wellcome Collection and the adjoining glass and steel building at 215 Euston Road is the Gibbs Building, by Hopkins Architects, which opened in 2004 as the administrative headquarters of the Wellcome Trust.
See also[edit]

Heads of International Research Organizations
List of wealthiest charitable foundations

References[edit]


^ "Eliza Manningham-Buller to be next Chair of the Wellcome Trust". 
^ Van Noorden, Richard (2013). "Clinician to head Wellcome Trust: Jeremy Farrar to lead one of world’s largest research charities". Nature. 497 (7447): 19. doi:10.1038/497019a. 
^ a b "Wellcome's charitable spend reaches record levels". Wellcome Trust. 2017. 
^ "Wellcome Trust aims to increase spend to £5 billion over next 5 years". 
^ "Charity Commission factsheet for the Wellcome Trust". Charity Commission for England and Wales. 17 December 2015. 
^ Alok Jha (9 April 2012), "Wellcome Trust joins 'academic spring' to open up science", The Guardian 
^ Andrew Jack (2012-04-10). "Wellcome challenges science journals". Financial Times. Retrieved 2012-04-16.  (registration required)
^ "History of Henry Wellcome". 
^ Hall, A. R. & Bembridge, B. A. Physic and philanthropy: a history of the Wellcome Trust 1936–1986. Cambridge (UK): Cambridge University Press, 1986. ISBN 0-521-32639-7
^ briandeer.com Sunday Times investigation, February 1994]
^ "Henry Wellcome's legacy". Wellcome.ac.uk. Retrieved 2016-05-21. 
^ "Biomedical science funded projects". 
^ "MRC Centre United Kingdom: Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute". Medical Research Council. Retrieved 2008-12-22. 
^ "Kenya and the KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme". 
^ a b c "A Wellcome experiment in seeding drug discovery". Nature Reviews Drug Discovery (PDF)|format= requires |url= (help). 9 (3): 178–180. March 2010. doi:10.1038/nrd3130. (subscription required)
^ "Wellcome Trust extends Seeding Drug Discovery initiative". TMRM. AngelNews. 14 May 2010. Retrieved 4 July 2013. 
^ "Wellcome Trust position statement in support of open and unrestricted access to published research". 
^ a b "The Open Science Prize". 
^ "Wellcome Open Research provides all Wellcome researchers with a place to rapidly publish any results they think are worth sharing". wellcomeopenresearch.org. Retrieved 2016-11-08. 
^ "Wellcome Open Research is now accepting submissions". Discussions – F1000 Research. 2016-10-17. Retrieved 2016-11-08. 
^ "Archive of "Wellcome Open Research"". www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. Retrieved 2017-06-14. 
^ “Japan in pioneering partnership to fund global health research”, by Andrew Jack, Financial Times, May 30, 2013
^ “Japanese Global Health Fund Welcomes the Wellcome Trust and Sysmex Corporation as New Funders and ANA, Morrison & Foerster, and Yahoo! Japan as New Sponsors”, PR Newswire, June 3, 2015, <http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/japanese-global-health-fund-welcomes-the-wellcome-trust-and-sysmex-corporation-as-new-funders-and-ana-morrison--foerster-and-yahoo-japan-as-new-sponsors-300093066.html>, accessed on 9/28/2015
^ "The Wellcome Library". 
^ "Wellcome Collection opening hours". 
^ "About the Wellcome Book Prize | Wellcome Book Prize". wellcomebookprize.org. Retrieved 2017-03-15. 
^ "Wellcome Trust acquires the Co-operative Group's farms business". Wellcome.ac.uk. 2014-08-04. Retrieved 2016-05-21. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Files from Wellcome Images.



Wellcome Trust main website
Other Wellcome Trust websites
Scientific Conferences supported by the Wellcome Trust
Ex Memoria - Wellcome Trust Awarded Film
Surgery Live, a Wellcome Collection collaboration with Channel 4
European Society for Clinical Microbioloy and Infectious Diseases
Federation of European Biochemical Societies
European Federation of Pharmaceutical Societies
International Society for Infectious Diseases







v
t
e


Wellcome Trust



Centres and institutes




Current



Francis Crick Institute
Gurdon Institute
Sainsbury Wellcome Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour
Science Learning Centres
WTC for Cell-Matrix Research
WTC for Gene Regulation and Expression
WTC for Human Genetics
WTC for Mitochondrial Research
WTC for Molecular Parasitology
WTC for Neuroimaging
WTC for Stem Cell Research
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute





Former



Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of Medicine
Wellcome Research Laboratories











Projects and facilities



1000 Genomes Project
Big Picture
Cambridge Biomedical Campus
Cancer Genome Project
ChEMBL
COSMIC cancer database
DECIPHER
Diamond Light Source
eLife
Ensembl
Farmcare
Genome Reference Consortium
Human Genome Project
Malawi Liverpool Wellcome Trust
MEROPS
Pfam
Rfam
UK Biobank
Wellcome Collection
Wellcome Genome Campus
Wellcome Library
WormBase





Board of Governors



Tobias Bonhoeffer
Alan Brown
Damon Buffini
William Burns
Kay Davies
Michael Ferguson
Bryan Grenfell
Richard Hynes
Anne Johnson
Eliza Manningham-Buller
Peter Rigby





Executive Board



Jeremy Farrar
Stephen Caddick
Simon Chaplin
Tim Livett
Clare Matterson
Ted Smith
Danny Truell





Former directors



Peter Williams (1965–1991)
Bridget Ogilvie (1991–1998)
Michael Dexter (1998–2008)
Mark Walport (2003–2013)





Other key people



William Castell
Dominic Cadbury
Harold Cook
Oliver Franks
Roger Gibbs
Henry Dale
Roy Porter
David Steel
David Stuart
John Sulston
Henry Wellcome





Awards and fellowships



Capital Awards
Collaborative Awards in Science
Investigator Awards in Science
Institutional Strategic Support Fund
Science Strategic Award
Sir Henry Dale Fellowship
Sir Henry Wellcome Postdoctoral Fellowship
Wellcome Book Prize
Wellcome Image Awards
Wellcome Trust Centre
Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellow
Wellcome Trust Senior Research Fellow






 Category










v
t
e


Francis Crick Institute



Funded by



Cancer Research UK
Imperial College London
King's College London
Medical Research Council
University College London
Wellcome Trust





Senior staff



Simon Boulton
Doreen Cantrell
David Cooksey
Julian Downward
Jeremy Farrar
Steve Gamblin
Peter Gruss
Adrian Hayday
Tim Hunt
Malcolm Irving
Harpal Kumar
Robin Lovell-Badge
Tomas Lindahl
Paul Nurse
Anne O'Garra
Keith Peters
Geraint Rees
John Skehel
Jim Smith
Richard Treisman
Frank Uhlmann
Jean-Paul Vincent
David Willetts
Philip Yea





Incorporating



National Institute for Medical Research
London Research Institute












v
t
e


 Science and technology in the United Kingdom




Economy of the United Kingdom



official
bodies and
personnel



Chief Scientific Adviser to the Ministry of Defence
Council for Science and Technology
DESG (Defence Engineering and Science Group)
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
Food and Environment Research Agency
Government Office for Science

Chief Scientific Adviser


Innovate UK
Intellectual Property Office
List of UK government scientific research institutes
Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology
Science and Technology Select Committee
UK Research Councils

Arts and Humanities
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Economic and Social
Engineering and Physical Sciences
Medical
Natural Environment
Science and Technology


UK Space Agency





industry
sectors



Aerospace

British space programme


Automotive
Computers
Nuclear technology
Pharmaceutical
Renewable energy
Telecommunications





non-
governmental
bodies




education
and museums



Science museums

National Museum of Science and Industry
National Space Centre


Universities

List
Golden triangle
Russell Group







societies and
professional
bodies



British Mass Spectrometry Society
British Science Association
Engineering Council
Institute of Physics
Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine
Royal Academy of Engineering
Royal Aeronautical Society
Royal Astronomical Society
Royal Entomological Society
Royal Institution

Christmas Lectures


Royal Society
Royal Society of Chemistry
Science Council
Royal Society of Biology





other



Campaign for Science and Engineering
EngineeringUK
Science Media Centre
Wellcome Trust








people



Engineers
Inventors
Nobel laureates
Science writers
Scientists
Technology writers





places



East London Tech City
M4 corridor
Science parks
Silicon Fen
Silicon Glen
Silicon Gorge
Sites of Special Scientific Interest





other



Innovations and discoveries
Science and technology awards
Science and technology magazines
JANET
National Science Week








 Category
 Commons









Authority control



ISNI: 0000 0004 0427 7672











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wellcome_Trust&oldid=815272903"					Categories: Organizations established in 1936Biomedical research foundationsFoundations based in the United KingdomFunding bodies in the United KingdomHealth charities in the United KingdomScience and technology in the United KingdomWellcome Trust1936 establishments in the United KingdomHidden categories: Pages with login required references or sourcesPages using citations with format and no URLPages containing links to subscription-only contentUse dmy dates from February 2013Use British English from February 2013Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2011Articles to be expanded from March 2016All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesCommons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers