This article is about the metropolitan county. For its former council, see West Yorkshire County Council. For the historic subdivision of Yorkshire, see West Riding of Yorkshire.


West Yorkshire


County



West Yorkshire in England


Coordinates: 53°45′N 1°40′W﻿ / ﻿53.750°N 1.667°W﻿ / 53.750; -1.667Coordinates: 53°45′N 1°40′W﻿ / ﻿53.750°N 1.667°W﻿ / 53.750; -1.667


Sovereign state
 United Kingdom


Country
 England


Region
Yorkshire and the Humber


Established
1 April 1974


Preceded by
West Riding of Yorkshire


Origin
Local Government Act 1972


Ceremonial county



Lord Lieutenant
Ingrid Roscoe


High Sheriff
Ed Anderson


Area
2,029 km2 (783 sq mi)


 • Ranked
29th of 48


Population (mid-2016 est.)
2,299,700


 • Ranked
4th of 48


Density
1,133/km2 (2,930/sq mi)


Ethnicity
81.8% White
11.6% S. Asian
2.1% Mixed
2.1% Black
2.4% Other





Metropolitan county



Government
West Yorkshire Combined Authority


Admin HQ
Leeds


ONS code
2F


GSS code
E11000006


NUTS
UKE4


Website
www.westyorks-ca.gov.uk









Districts of West Yorkshire
Metropolitan districts


Districts


City of Leeds
City of Wakefield
Kirklees
Calderdale
City of Bradford







Members of Parliament
List of MPs


Police
West Yorkshire Police


Time zone
Greenwich Mean Time (UTC)


 • Summer (DST)
British Summer Time (UTC+1)


West Yorkshire is a metropolitan county in England. It is an inland and in relative terms upland county having eastward-draining valleys while taking in moors of the Pennines and has a population of 2.2 million. West Yorkshire came into existence as a metropolitan county in 1974 after the passage of the Local Government Act 1972.[1]
West Yorkshire consists of five metropolitan boroughs (City of Bradford, Calderdale, Kirklees, City of Leeds and City of Wakefield) and is bordered by the counties of Derbyshire to the south, Greater Manchester to the south-west, Lancashire to the north-west, North Yorkshire to the north and east, and South Yorkshire to the south and south-east.
Remnants of a strong industrialisation in coal, wool and iron ore industries remain in the county having attracted people over the centuries, and this can be seen in the buildings and architecture. The greatest hub Leeds may become a terminus for a north-east limb of High Speed 2. Major railways and three major motorways traverse the county. In the heart of the county is Leeds Bradford International Airport.
West Yorkshire County Council was abolished in 1986 so its five districts became effectively unitary authorities. However, the metropolitan county, which covers an area of 2,029 square kilometres (783 sq mi), continues to exist in law, and as a geographic frame of reference.[2][3][4] Since 1 April 2014 West Yorkshire has been a combined authority area, with the local authorities pooling together some functions over transport and regeneration as the West Yorkshire Combined Authority.
West Yorkshire includes the West Yorkshire Urban Area, which is the biggest and most built-up urban area within the historic county boundaries of Yorkshire.



Contents


1 History
2 Geography

2.1 Green belt


3 Climate
4 Governance
5 Demography
6 Economy

6.1 Industries
6.2 Film and television productions
6.3 Tourism


7 Transport
8 Sport
9 Places of interest

9.1 Historic environment
9.2 Museums
9.3 Natural environment
9.4 Waterways


10 See also
11 References
12 Sources
13 External links



History[edit]
See also: History of Leeds and History of Yorkshire




Kirkstall Abbey, Kirkstall, Leeds






Titus Salt's mill in Saltaire, Shipley is an UNESCO World Heritage Site.






Leeds Town Hall


West Yorkshire was formed as a metropolitan county in 1974, by the Local Government Act 1972, and corresponds roughly to the core of the historic West Riding of Yorkshire and the county boroughs of Bradford, Dewsbury, Halifax, Huddersfield, Leeds, and Wakefield.
West Yorkshire Metropolitan County Council inherited the use of West Riding County Hall at Wakefield, opened in 1898, from the West Riding County Council in 1974. Since 1987 it has been the headquarters of Wakefield City Council.[5]
The county initially had a two-tier structure of local government with a strategic-level county council and five districts providing most services.[6] In 1986, throughout England the metropolitan county councils were abolished. The functions of the county council were devolved to the boroughs; joint-boards covering fire, police and public transport; and to other special joint arrangements.[7] Organisations such as the West Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive (governed by the West Yorkshire Police and Crime Commissioner) continue to operate on this basis.
Although the county council was abolished, West Yorkshire continues to form a metropolitan and ceremonial county with a Lord Lieutenant of West Yorkshire and a High Sheriff.
Wakefield's Parish Church was raised to cathedral status in 1888 and after the elevation of Wakefield to diocese, Wakefield Council immediately sought city status and this was granted in July 1888.[8] However the industrial revolution, which changed West and South Yorkshire significantly, led to the growth of Leeds and Bradford, which became the area's two largest cities (Leeds being the largest in Yorkshire). Leeds was granted city status in 1893 and Bradford in 1897. The name of Leeds Town Hall reflects the fact that at its opening in 1858 Leeds was not yet a city, while Bradford renamed its Town Hall as City Hall in 1965.[9]




post-1974
pre-1974


Metropolitan county
Metropolitan borough
County boroughs
Non-county boroughs
Urban districts
Rural districts



West Yorkshire is an amalgamation of 53 former local government districts, including six county boroughs and ten municipal boroughs.

Bradford
Bradford
Keighley
Baildon • Bingley • Denholme • Ilkley • Queensbury and Shelf[10] •Silsden • Shipley
Skipton


Calderdale
Halifax
Brighouse • Todmorden
Elland • Hebden Royd • Queensbury and Shelf[10] • Ripponden • Sowerby Bridge



Kirklees
Huddersfield • Dewsbury
Batley • Spenborough
Colne Valley • Denby Dale • Heckmondwike • Holmfirth • Kirkburton • Meltham • Mirfield



Leeds
Leeds
Morley • Pudsey
Aireborough • Garforth • Horsforth • Otley • Rothwell
Tadcaster • Wharfedale • Wetherby


Wakefield
Wakefield
Castleford • Ossett • Pontefract
Featherstone • Hemsworth • Horbury • Knottingley • Normanton • Stanley
Hemsworth • Osgoldcross • Wakefield


Geography[edit]




Geology of Yorkshire


The county borders, going anticlockwise from the west: Lancashire, Greater Manchester, Derbyshire, South Yorkshire and North Yorkshire. It lies almost entirely on rocks of carboniferous age which form the southern Pennine fringes in the west[11] and the Yorkshire coalfield further eastwards.[12] In the extreme east of the metropolitan county there are younger deposits of magnesian limestone.[13] The Bradford and Calderdale areas are dominated by the scenery of the eastern slopes of the Pennines, dropping from upland in the west down to the east, and dissected by numerous steep-sided valleys. There is a close conjunction of large scale industry, urban areas and transport routes with open countryside. The dense network of roads, canals and railways and urban development, confined by valleys creates dramatic interplay of views between settlements and the surrounding hillsides.[citation needed]
The carboniferous rocks of the Yorkshire coalfield further east have produced a rolling landscape with hills, escarpments and broad valleys. In this landscape there is widespread evidence of both current and former industrial activity. There are numerous derelict or converted mine buildings and recently landscaped former spoil heaps.[citation needed] The scenery is a mixture of built up areas, industrial land with some dereliction, and farmed open country. Ribbon developments along transport routes including canal, road and rail are prominent features of the area although some remnants of the pre industrial landscape and semi-natural vegetation still survive. However, many areas are affected by urban fringe pressures creating fragmented and downgraded landscapes and ever present are urban influences from major cities, smaller industrial towns and former mining villages.[citation needed]
In the magnesian limestone belt to the east of the Leeds and Wakefield areas is an elevated ridge with smoothly rolling scenery, dissected by dry valleys. Here, there is a large number of country houses and estates with parkland, estate woodlands, plantations and game coverts.[citation needed]
The rivers Aire and Calder drain the area, flowing from west to east.
The table below outlines many of the county's settlements, and is formatted according to their metropolitan borough.


Metropolitan county
Metropolitan borough
Centre of administration
Other places


West Yorkshire
City of Bradford

Bradford
Addingham, Baildon, Bingley, Burley-in-Wharfedale, Cottingley, Crossflatts, Cross Roads, Cullingworth, Denholme, East and West Morton, Eccleshill, Eldwick, Esholt, Gilstead, Harden, Haworth, Ilkley, Keighley, Menston, Oakworth, Oxenhope, Queensbury, Riddlesden, Saltaire, Sandy Lane, Shipley, Silsden, Stanbury, Steeton, Thornbury, Thornton, Tong, Undercliffe, Wilsden


Calderdale

Halifax
Bailiff Bridge, Boothtown, Brighouse, Copley, Cragg Vale, Elland, Greetland, Hebden Bridge, Heptonstall, Hipperholme, Holywell Green, Luddendenfoot, Mytholmroyd, Norwood Green, Rastrick, Ripponden, Shelf, Shibden, Sowerby Bridge, Todmorden


Kirklees

Huddersfield
Almondbury, Batley, Birkby, Birkenshaw, Birstall, Cleckheaton, Dalton, Denby Dale, Dewsbury, Emley, Golcar, Gomersal, Hartshead, Hartshead Moor, Heckmondwike, Holmfirth, Honley, Kirkburton, Kirkheaton, Linthwaite, Liversedge, Marsden, Meltham, Mirfield, New Mill, Norristhorpe, Roberttown, Scammonden, Shelley, Shepley, Skelmanthorpe, Slaithwaite, Thornhill


City of Leeds

Leeds
Allerton Bywater, Beeston, Boston Spa, Collingham, Garforth, Guiseley, Harewood, Headingley, Holbeck, Horsforth, Kippax, Kirkstall, Ledsham, Ledston, Methley, Middleton, Morley, New Farnley, Otley, Oulton, Pool-in-Wharfedale, Pudsey, Rothwell, Rawdon, Scarcroft, Scholes, Stourton, Swillington, Walton (Leeds), Wetherby, Yeadon


City of Wakefield

Wakefield
Ackworth, Alverthorpe, Castleford, Crigglestone, Crofton, Durkar, Fairburn Ings, Featherstone, Ferrybridge, Fitzwilliam, Hemsworth, Horbury, Knottingley, Newmillerdam, Normanton, Nostell, Ossett, Outwood, Pontefract, Ryhill, Sandal, Sharlston, Stanley, Walton (Wakefield), West Bretton


Green belt[edit]
Further information: South and West Yorkshire Green Belt
West Yorkshire contains green belt interspersed throughout the county, surrounding the West Yorkshire Urban Area. It was first drawn up in the 1950's. All the county's districts contain large portions of belt.
Climate[edit]
West Yorkshire has an Oceanic climate, similar to other parts of the United Kingdom. West Yorkshire tends to be cooler than counties further south, due to inland location and high elevation (especially in western areas). Snow is common, as are sub-zero temperatures. In December 2010, many rivers in West Yorkshire froze over.
Temperatures over the year usually remain between −1 °C (30 °F) and 20 °C (68 °F) with rare extremes near 30 °C (86 °F) and −16 °C (3 °F).


Climate data for West Yorkshire


Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year


Average high °C (°F)
5
(41)
5
(41)
8
(46)
11
(52)
15
(59)
18
(64)
19
(66)
19
(66)
17
(63)
13
(55)
8
(46)
6
(43)
12
(53.5)


Average low °C (°F)
0
(32)
0
(32)
1
(34)
3
(37)
5
(41)
8
(46)
10
(50)
10
(50)
8
(46)
6
(43)
2
(36)
1
(34)
4.5
(40.1)


Average rainfall mm (inches)
61
(2.4)
45
(1.77)
52
(2.05)
48
(1.89)
54
(2.13)
54
(2.13)
51
(2.01)
65
(2.56)
57
(2.24)
55
(2.17)
57
(2.24)
61
(2.4)
660
(25.99)


Source #1: www.worldtravels.com[14]


Source #2: www.wunderground.com[15]


Governance[edit]
See also: List of civil parishes in West Yorkshire




The coat of arms of the former West Yorkshire County Council


In Parliament, 17 out of 22 of West Yorkshire's MPs are Labour and 5 are Conservative. At local level, the councils are generally divided, apart from the Wakefield district, which has long been one of the safest Labour councils in the country.
Certain services are provided across the county by West Yorkshire Joint Services, and the West Yorkshire Police and West Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service are also county-wide.
Demography[edit]
See also: List of settlements in West Yorkshire by population


District
Area km2
Population
Population density


Bradford !City of Bradford
366.42
523,100
1,346


Calderdale
363.92
200,100
545


Kirklees
408.61
401,000
975


Leeds !City of Leeds
551.72
761,100
1,360


Wakefield !City of Wakefield
338.61
321,600
949







Population density in the 2011 census in West Yorkshire.





Distribution of ethnic groups in West Yorkshire according to the 2011 census.













White 













White-British 













White-Irish 













White-Other 













Asian 













Asian-Indian 













Asian-Pakistani 













Asian-Bangladeshi 













Asian-Chinese 













Black 













Black-African 













Black-Caribbean 













Other-Arab 








Distribution of religions in West Yorkshire according to the 2011 census.













Christianity 













Islam 













Judaism 













Hinduism 













Sikhism 













Buddhism 













Other religion 













No religion 






Economy[edit]
See also: List of ceremonial counties in England by gross value added




Bridgewater Place, a symbol of Leeds' growing financial importance.


This is a chart of regional gross value added for West Yorkshire at current basic prices with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling.[16]


Year
Regional Gross Value Added[17]
Agriculture[18]
Industry[19]
Services[20]


1995
21,302
132
7,740
13,429


2000
27,679
80
8,284
19,314


2003
31,995
91
8,705
23,199


Industries[edit]
West Yorkshire grew up around several industries. Bradford, Halifax and Huddersfield were grown through the development of woollen mills, Leeds' traditional industry was the manufacturing of cloth, while heavier engineering industries facilitated growth in South Leeds. Wakefield, Castleford, Pontefract and South and East Leeds were traditional coal mining areas. The woollen and cloth industries declined throughout the twentieth century. Many of the coal mines in West Yorkshire closed during the Robens era in the 1960s, but mining was still a significant employer in the Wakefield district at the time of the 1984-5 strike. The last pit in West Yorkshire to close was Hay Royds Colliery at Denby Dale in 2012 after a flood.[21]
Leeds has since attracted investment from financial institutions, to become a recognised financial centre, with many banks, building societies and insurance companies having offices in the city. Wakefield has also attracted many service based industries, inparticularly call centres. Two of the big four supermarkets are from West Yorkshire. Morrisons is based in Bradford, while Asda is based in Leeds. Netto have their British headquarters in South Elmsall.

Rhubarb

The Rhubarb Triangle is wholly in West Yorkshire and still produces the vegetable in considerable quantities. Twelve farmers who farm within the Rhubarb Triangle applied to have the name "Yorkshire forced rhubarb" added to the list of foods and drinks that have their names legally protected by the European Commission's Protected Food Name scheme.[22] The application was successful and the farmers in the Rhubarb Triangle were awarded Protected Designation of Origin status (PDO) in February 2010. Food protected status accesses European funding to promote the product and legal backing against other products made outside the area using the name. Other protected names include Stilton cheese, Champagne and Parma Ham.
Film and television productions[edit]
Several films and television series have been filmed in West Yorkshire's historic areas, particularly around the city of Huddersfield.[23][24] For example, portions of the BBC television series Happy Valley were filmed in Huddersfield; in addition to exteriors, some of the studio filming was done at North Light Film Studios at Brookes Mill, Huddersfield. As well, interiors for the BBC's Jamaica Inn, for the BBC's Remember Me and for ITV series Black Work, were also filmed at the studios.[25][26][27][28] More recently, many of the exteriors of the BBC series Jericho were filmed at the nearby Rockingstone Quarry and some interior work was done at North Light Film Studios.[29]
Tourism[edit]
See also: § Places of interest
Urban tourism varies. National interest features include sporting stadia, museums, theatre and galleries. Royal Armouries is in Leeds, as is the West Yorkshire Playhouse, Opera North and The Grand Theatre. The First Direct Arena in Leeds seats around 15,000 people. Sheffield (South Yorkshire) Arena is also popular, as is the Alhambra Theatre, St Georges Hall and The Media and Science Museum in Bradford, West Yorkshire. Leeds is the most popular shopping destination in West Yorkshire, probably Yorkshire and rivals Manchester having claim to Briggate, the Headrow, the Trinity Centre, Victoria Gate, the Victoria and Northern Quarters, the biggest indoor market in Europe and the White Rose Shopping Centre, as well as many 'first outside of London' labels such as Harvey Nichols and Victoria's Secret. Leeds is also a popular nightlife destination domestically, which is not surprising given its accessibility and central location. All cities are well connected via rail and road, Leeds Railway Station is an important hub seeing 29.7 million passengers 2015-16, making it the fourth busiest station in the UK (London altogether being classed as number one) after London, Birmingham New Street and Glasgow Central. It is the busiest in Northern England. Signposted walks follow rivers and the escarpment of the Pennines, which is scaled in meandering stages and tunnels by the recreational Leeds-Liverpool Canal and Rochdale Canal, navigatable by barge, canoe or kayak. Other tourism features include abbeys, castles, countryside walks, landscapes, picturesque villages, architecture, stately homes, tea rooms, real ale breweries, farmer's markets, restaurants and hiking in villages including Hebden Bridge, Ilkley with its scenic riversides, cherry blossoms and suspension bridge and equally in Wharfedale, Otley.
Transport[edit]




Leeds Bradford International Airport


West Yorkshire lies in arguably the most strategic part of Yorkshire: the M62, M1 and the A1(M) pass through the county, as well as the internal urban motorways in Leeds and Bradford. West Yorkshire has two mainline railway stations, Leeds and Wakefield Westgate. Leeds railway station is the only Network Rail principal station in Yorkshire and North East England, and one of only three in the North of England along with Manchester Piccadilly and Liverpool Lime Street. Other important railway stations in West Yorkshire include Bradford Interchange, Bradford Forster Square, Huddersfield, Halifax, Dewsbury, Keighley and Shipley. West Yorkshire also has Yorkshire's largest airport, Leeds Bradford International Airport.
Unlike South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire has no light transit system; the Leeds Supertram was proposed, but was later cancelled after the withdrawal of government funding; the Leeds Trolleybus is the current proposed scheme. Public transport is run under the authority of the West Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive (Metro).
Sport[edit]
The are three major football clubs in West Yorkshire are Bradford City, Huddersfield Town, which are in the premier league of English football and Leeds United. Rugby league is also big in West Yorkshire. The teams who are, or have been, in Super League are Bradford Bulls, Castleford Tigers, Halifax, Huddersfield Giants, Leeds Rhinos, and Wakefield Trinity. Other rugby league clubs in West Yorkshire are Batley Bulldogs, Dewsbury Rams, Featherstone Rovers, Hunslet Hawks and Keighley Cougars. Any combination of these teams playing against each other would be called a West Yorkshire derby even if the rivalry is not as great as other rivalries between teams in the area. The main rugby union club in the county is Yorkshire Carnegie.

The Headingley Stadium is home of the Yorkshire County Cricket Club, Leeds Rhinos and Yorkshire Carnegie, whereas the John Smith's Stadium is home of Huddersfield Town and Huddersfield Giants. Valley Parade is home of Bradford City, whereas the Odsal Stadium is home of the Bradford Bulls.
There are two racecourses in West Yorkshire: Pontefract and Wetherby
West Yorkshire also used to host regular speedway meetings, having the Halifax Dukes and the Bradford Dukes teams. Odsal Stadium used to host BriSCA stock cars. Leeds has a hill climb event at Harewood speed Hillclimb.
Places of interest[edit]
Historic environment[edit]
See also: List of Museums in West Yorkshire, List of historic houses in West Yorkshire, and List of castles in West Yorkshire


Key



Abbey/Priory/Cathedral



Accessible open space



Amusement/Theme Park



Castle



Country Park



English Heritage



Forestry Commission



Heritage railway



Historic House




Museum (free/not free)



National Trust



Theatre



Zoo




Bretton Hall
Cartwright Hall
Cliffe Hall, also known as Cliffe Castle, Keighley
East Riddlesden Hall  
Esholt Hall, Esholt
Firsby Hall
Harewood House 
Kershaw House
Keighley and Worth Valley Railway 
Kirklees Hall/Priory 
Kirkstall Abbey 
Roman Lagentium (Castleford)
Ledston Hall, Ledston
Linthwaite Hall, Linthwaite
Linton Hall
Lister Park, Bradford
Lotherton Hall
Middleton Railway, the world's oldest steam railway
Nostell Priory  
Oakwell Hall
Oulton Hall, Oulton
Piece Hall, Halifax
Pontefract Castle 
Pontefract Priory, Pontefract 
Queen's Park, Castleford
Roundhay Park Leeds
Saltaire, a UNESCO World Heritage Site
Sandal Castle 
Scarcroft Watermill, Scarcroft
Shelley Hall, Shelley
Shibden Hall
Shipley Glen Tramway
Tong Hall, Tong
Wetherby Castle, Wetherby 






Harewood House






Sandal Castle


Museums[edit]




Royal Armouries Museum, Leeds: Looking up the main stairwell



Abbey House Museum, Leeds
Armley Mills Industrial Museum, Leeds
Bagshaw Museum, Batley
Bankfield Museum, Halifax
Bradford Industrial Museum, Eccleshill/Fagley, Bradford
Brontë Parsonage Museum, Haworth
Colne Valley Museum, Golcar, Huddersfield
Eureka, Halifax
Leeds City Museum, Leeds
National Coal Mining Museum for England Overton, Wakefield
National Media Museum, Bradford
Pennine Farm Museum, Ripponden, Halifax
Pontefract Museum
Royal Armouries Museum, Leeds
Thackray Museum, Leeds
The Hepworth Wakefield
Thwaite Mills, Leeds
Tolson Museum, Dalton, Huddersfield
Wakefield Museum, Wakefield
West Yorkshire Folk Museum, Shibden Hall, Halifax
Yorkshire Sculpture Park, West Bretton, Wakefield

Natural environment[edit]




Emley Moor Mast



Emley Moor, site of the tallest self-supporting structure in the UK (a TV mast)
Harewood Estate – Leeds Country Way public footpath runs through the estate, beautiful landscaped gardens and home to Red Kites amongst many other birds
Ilkley Moor, part of Rombalds Moor
New Swillington Ings Nature Reserve
Otley Chevin – extensive wooded parkland on high ground with extensive views North over Wharfedale and South as far as the Peak District
RSPB Fairburn Ings – wetland centre for birds
Seckar Woods LNR, a Local Nature Reserve
Walton Hall, West Yorkshire, home of naturalist Charles Waterton and the world's first nature reserve

Waterways[edit]




Clarence Dock in Leeds



Scammonden Reservoir, Deanhead Reservoir – both in the moors near Ripponden
River Aire, River Calder, River Hebble, River Spen, River Worth
Aire and Calder Navigation
Calder and Hebble Navigation
Huddersfield Broad Canal
Huddersfield Narrow Canal, Standedge Tunnel
Leeds and Liverpool Canal
Rochdale Canal

See also[edit]

List of Lord Lieutenants of West Yorkshire
List of High Sheriffs of West Yorkshire
The Kingdom of Elmet
West Yorkshire Urban Area
West Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
West Yorkshire Regiment (The Prince of Wales's Own)
List of ceremonial counties in England by gross value added

References[edit]


^ Arnold-Baker, C., Local Government Act 1972, (1973)
^ "Gazetteer of the old and new geographies of the United Kingdom" (PDF). Office for National Statistics. p. 48. Retrieved 14 December 2006. 
^ "Metropolitan Counties and Districts". Beginners' Guide to UK Geography. Office for National Statistics. 17 September 2004. Archived from the original on 6 June 2002. Retrieved 11 January 2007. 
^ "Yorkshire and Humber Counties". The Boundary Commission for England. Retrieved 14 February 2007. 
^ "County Hall". Wakefield City Council. 20 November 2004. 
^ Redcliffe-Maud and Wood, B., English Local Government Reformed, (1974)
^ Kingdom, J., Local Government and Politics in Britain, (1991)
^ Beckett 2005, pp. 39,40
^ "History of City Hall". City of Bradford Metropolitan District Council. Retrieved 17 January 2009. 
^ a b The urban district of Queensbury and Shelf was split between Bradford and Calderdale in 1974: Queensbury civil parish was amalgamated into Bradford; Shelf civil parish was amalgamated into Calderdale.
^ "Yorkshire Southern Pennine Fringe". www.countryside.gov.uk. Retrieved 6 October 2008. 
^ "Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and Yorkshire Coalfield". www.countryside.gov.uk. Retrieved 6 October 2008. 
^ "Southern Magnesian Limestone". www.countryside.gov.uk. Retrieved 6 October 2008. 
^ "Leeds average weather data". www.worldtravels.com. Retrieved 21 January 2016. 
^ "Leeds average weather data". www.wunderground.com. Retrieved 21 January 2016. 
^ "Regional Gross Value Added" (PDF). Office for National Statistics. 21 December 2005. pp. 240–253. Retrieved 6 October 2008. 
^ Components may not sum to totals due to rounding
^ includes hunting and forestry
^ includes energy and construction
^ includes financial intermediation services indirectly measured
^ "The Drift remembers Yorkshire's industrial past". University of Bolton. Retrieved 29 July 2017. 
^ Application to register Yorkshire Forced Rhubarb (PDF), DEFRA, Archived from the original on 22 August 2013, retrieved 25 February 2010 CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "Productions at North Light Film Studios". North Light Film Studios. North Light Film Studios. 2017. Retrieved 10 February 2017. 
^ "Film & TV". Examiner. Huddersfield. 29 October 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2017. 
^ Ballinger, Lauren (5 December 2014). "North Light Film Studios - Remember Me filming locations". Examiner. Huddersfield. Retrieved 10 February 2017. 
^ Rees, Caroline (3 November 2013). "Sally Wainwright: not the same old". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 January 2014. 
^ Bremner, Jade (11 December 2013). "Last Tango in Halifax actress Sarah Lancashire begins shooting new crime drama in Yorkshire". Radio Times. Retrieved 19 January 2014. 
^ "Creative England provides filming location and crew support to new BBC drama Happy Valley when filming in Yorkshire". Creative England. 29 April 2014. Retrieved 12 June 2014. 
^ Gildea, Samantha (1 February 2016). "Jericho filming locations". Examiner. Huddersfield. Retrieved 10 February 2017. 


Sources[edit]


Beckett, J. V. (2005), City status in the British Isles,1830–2002, Ashgate Publishing, ISBN 0-7546-5067-7 


External links[edit]

West Yorkshire Joint Services
Images of West Yorkshire at the English Heritage Archive
West Yorkshire at Curlie (based on DMOZ)







v
t
e


Ceremonial county of West Yorkshire




Yorkshire Portal



Metropolitan districts



City of Bradford
City of Leeds
City of Wakefield
Metropolitan Borough of Calderdale
Metropolitan Borough of Kirklees





Major settlements



Baildon
Batley
Bingley
Bradford
Brighouse
Castleford
Cleckheaton
Denholme
Dewsbury
Elland
Farsley
Featherstone
Guiseley
Halifax
Hebden Bridge
Heckmondwike
Hemsworth
Holmfirth
Horsforth
Huddersfield
Ilkley
Keighley
Knottingley
Leeds
Liversedge
Meltham
Mirfield
Morley
Normanton
Ossett
Otley
Pontefract
Pudsey
Rothwell
Shipley
Silsden
South Elmsall
Sowerby Bridge
Todmorden
Wakefield
Warley Town
Wetherby
Yeadon
See also: List of civil parishes in West Yorkshire





Topics



Parliamentary constituencies
West Yorkshire Joint Services
Places
Population of major settlements
SSSIs
Country houses
Grade I listed buildings
Grade II* listed buildings
Windmills
History
Lord Lieutenants
High Sheriffs
Monastic houses
Museums
Rivers












v
t
e


 Yorkshire



Ceremonial counties



East Riding of Yorkshire
North Yorkshire
South Yorkshire
West Yorkshire





Historic divisions



East Riding
North Riding
West Riding
Ainsty
Wapentakes
High Sheriffs





Geography



Geology of Yorkshire
Topographical areas of Yorkshire
Cities, towns and villages





History



History
Brigantia
Parisiorum
Britannia
Elmet
Ebrauc
Deira
Northumbria
Jórvík
Wars of the Roses
Dogger Bank earthquake





Culture and heritage



Culture
Dialect
Tourism
On Ilkla Moor Baht 'at
People
Flags and symbols
White Rose
Yorkshire Day
God's Own County/Country








 WikiProject
 Portal
 Category












v
t
e


Districts of Yorkshire and the Humber



Lincolnshire



North Lincolnshire
North East Lincolnshire








North Yorkshire



Craven
Hambleton
Harrogate
Richmondshire
Ryedale
Scarborough
Selby
York





South Yorkshire



Barnsley
Doncaster
Rotherham
Sheffield





West Yorkshire



Bradford
Calderdale
Kirklees
Leeds
Wakefield





East Riding of Yorkshire



East Riding of Yorkshire
Kingston upon Hull












v
t
e


1974–1996 ←   Ceremonial counties of England   → current






Bedfordshire
Berkshire
Bristol
Buckinghamshire
Cambridgeshire
Cheshire
Cornwall
Cumbria
Derbyshire
Devon
Dorset
Durham
East Riding of Yorkshire
East Sussex
Essex
Gloucestershire
Greater London
Greater Manchester
Hampshire
Herefordshire
Hertfordshire
Isle of Wight
Kent
Lancashire
Leicestershire
Lincolnshire
City of London
Merseyside
Norfolk
Northamptonshire
Northumberland
North Yorkshire
Nottinghamshire
Oxfordshire
Rutland
Shropshire
Somerset
South Yorkshire
Staffordshire
Suffolk
Surrey
Tyne and Wear
Warwickshire
West Midlands
West Sussex
West Yorkshire
Wiltshire
Worcestershire












v
t
e


Metropolitan counties






Greater Manchester
Merseyside
South Yorkshire
Tyne and Wear
West Midlands
West Yorkshire











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=West_Yorkshire&oldid=818318696"					Categories: West YorkshireMetropolitan countiesCounties of England established in 1974Hidden categories: CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownUse dmy dates from January 2015Use British English from July 2014Coordinates on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015Articles with DMOZ links