Not to be confused with West Midlands (region) or West Midlands conurbation.


West Midlands


County








Flag






West Midlands in England


Sovereign state
 United Kingdom


Country
 England


Region
West Midlands


Established
1 April 1974


Established by
Local Government Act 1972


Ceremonial county



Area
902 km2 (348 sq mi)


 • Ranked
42nd of 48


Population (mid-2016 est.)
2,864,900


 • Ranked
2nd of 48


Density
3,177/km2 (8,230/sq mi)


Ethnicity
70.1% White (66.0% White British)
18.9% Asian
6.0% Black
3.4% Mixed
1.6% Other[1]





Metropolitan county



Government
West Midlands Combined Authority


Admin HQ
Birmingham


Area
902 km2 (348 sq mi)


ONS code
2E


NUTS
UKG3


Website
www.westmidlandscombinedauthority.org.uk









Districts of West Midlands


Districts


City of Wolverhampton
Dudley
Walsall
Sandwell
City of Birmingham
Solihull
City of Coventry







Members of Parliament
28 MPs


Police
West Midlands Police


Time zone
Greenwich Mean Time (UTC)


 • Summer (DST)
British Summer Time (UTC+1)


The West Midlands is a metropolitan county and city region in western central England with a 2014 estimated population of 2,808,356,[2] making it the second most populous county in England. It came into existence as a metropolitan county in 1974 after the passage of the Local Government Act 1972, formed from parts of Staffordshire, Worcestershire and Warwickshire. The county itself is a NUTS 2 region within the wider NUTS 1 region of the same name. The county consists of seven metropolitan boroughs: the City of Birmingham, the City of Coventry, and the City of Wolverhampton, as well as the boroughs of Dudley, Sandwell, Solihull, and Walsall.
The metropolitan county exists in law and as a geographic frame of reference.[3][4][5] and as a ceremonial county it has a Lord Lieutenant[6] and a High Sheriff.[7] Between 1974 and 1986, the West Midlands County Council was the administrative body covering the county, this was abolished on 31 March 1986, and the constituent metropolitan boroughs effectively became unitary authorities. A new administrative body for the county; the West Midlands Combined Authority was created in June 2016. Since May 2017 the authority has been headed by a directly elected Mayor of the West Midlands, a position currently held by Andy Street of the Conservative Party. Other county-wide bodies include the West Midlands Police, the West Midlands Fire Service and Transport for West Midlands.
The county is sometimes described as the "West Midlands metropolitan area" or the "West Midlands conurbation", although these have different, and less clearly defined, boundaries. The main conurbation, or urban area, does not include Coventry for example. The name "West Midlands" is also used for the much larger West Midlands region, which sometimes causes confusion, not surprising perhaps when geographically it is on the eastern side of the region, the western side comprising Shropshire and Herefordshire.



Contents


1 History

1.1 County Creation
1.2 West Midlands County Council
1.3 Boundary changes
1.4 West Midlands Combined Authority


2 Geography
3 Demography
4 Places of interest
5 Education
6 Sport

6.1 Football
6.2 Other sports


7 See also
8 References
9 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of West Midlands County
See also: History of Birmingham and History of Coventry
Although the modern county has only existed since 1974, the settlements of the West Midlands have long been important centres of commerce and industry as well as developing a good local infrastructure. Coventry was one of England's most important cities during the Middle Ages, with its prosperity built upon wool and cloth manufacture. Birmingham and Wolverhampton have a tradition of industry dating back to the 16th century, when small metal-working industries developed. Birmingham was known for its manufacture of small arms, whereas Wolverhampton became a centre of lock manufacture and brass working. The coal and iron ore deposits of the Black Country area provided a ready source of raw materials. The area grew rapidly during the Industrial Revolution, and by the 20th century had grown into one large conurbation. Coventry was slower to develop, but by the early 20th century, it had become an important centre of bicycle and car manufacture.
1966 saw a substantial reform in the local government of the area as the patchwork of county boroughs with municipal boroughs and urban district councils in between was replaced by a core of county boroughs covering a contiguous area, roughly as follows:

Birmingham, which remained substantially unaltered;
Dudley, which absorbed all of Brierley Hill as well as most of Coseley and Sedgley, and part of Amblecote, Tipton and Rowley Regis;
Solihull, which remained substantially unaltered
Walsall, which absorbed all of Darlaston and most of Willenhall, as well as parts of Wednesbury, Coseley, Wednesfield and Bilston;
Warley, which was created by amalgamating the vast majority of Smethwick, Oldbury and Rowley Regis as well parts of Dudley, Tipton, West Bromwich and Halesowen;
West Bromwich, which absorbed most of Wednesbury and Tipton, along with parts of Bilston, Oldbury, Smethwick and Walsall;
Wolverhampton, which absorbed most of Bilston, Wednesfield and Tettenhall as well as parts of Sedgley, Coseley and Willenhall.

Near this area, three other towns remained separate (Halesowen, Stourbridge and Sutton Coldfield), while Aldridge and Brownhills joined to form a single unit, called Aldridge-Brownhills. In the same year, a single West Midlands Constabulary was formed for the Black Country county boroughs, whilst Birmingham retained its Birmingham City Police and Solihull continued being policed by the Warwickshire Constabulary. The West Midlands Passenger Transport Authority was established in 1968.
County Creation[edit]
In 1974, the Local Government Act 1972 came into effect, creating the metropolitan county of West Midlands. This area was based on the seven county boroughs and the other non-county boroughs and urban districts around the fringe of the conurbation. The new area consisted of seven new metropolitan boroughs, with Aldridge-Brownhills added to Walsall; Halesowen and Stourbridge to Dudley and Sutton Coldfield to Birmingham. A new borough of Sandwell was formed by the merger of West Bromwich and Warley. The actual designation of Warley itself was abolished and the three towns of Smethwick, Oldbury and Rowley Regis reinstated as component parts of Sandwell, although these areas formed the Warley postal district.
Solihull took in much of the suburban fringe to the east of Birmingham, including the former villages of Chelmsley Wood and Castle Bromwich, also Birmingham Airport, and the area of countryside between Solihull and Coventry, whilst Coventry itself received only small changes and Wolverhampton was unaltered. This led to (apart from in the east, with Coventry and the Meriden Gap) quite a tightly defined metropolitan border, excluding such places as Burntwood, Bromsgrove, Cannock, Kidderminster, Lichfield and Wombourne which had been considered for inclusion in the West Midlands metropolitan area by the Redcliffe-Maud Report. The 1974 reform created the West Midlands County Council that covered the entire area and dealt with strategic issues. A new West Midlands Police service was formed covering the entire area, with the West Midlands Constabulary and Birmingham City Police abolished, and also taking over responsibility from the county forces.


post-1974
pre-1974


Metropolitan county
Metropolitan borough
County boroughss
Non-county boroughs
Urban districts
Rural districts



West Midlands is an amalgamation of 14 former local government districts, including eight county boroughs.

Birmingham
Birmingham
Sutton Coldfield
-
-


Coventry
Coventry
-
-
Meriden


Dudley
Dudley
Halesowen • Stourbridge •
-
-


Sandwell
Warley • West Bromwich •
-
-
-


Solihull
Solihull
-
-
Meriden • Stratford-on-Avon •


Walsall
Walsall
-
Aldridge-Brownhills



Wolverhampton
Wolverhampton
-
-
-


West Midlands County Council[edit]




The arms of the West Midlands County Council, depicted here, became redundant with the abolition of the council in 1986 (though similar arms are used by the West Midlands Fire Service).


Between 1974 and 1986, the county had a two-tier system of local government, and the seven districts shared power with the West Midlands County Council. However, the Local Government Act 1985 abolished the county councils, and the West Midlands County Council ceased to exist in 1986. Most of its functions were devolved to the West Midland boroughs, which effectively became unitary authorities, with responsibility for most local authority functions.
Following the abolition of the county council, some county-wide bodies continued to exist, which were administered by various joint-boards of the seven districts, among these were the West Midlands Police, the West Midlands Fire Service and the West Midlands Passenger Transport Executive.
Boundary changes[edit]
In 1994, the western/southern shores of Chasewater, plus the adjacent Jeffreys Swag, were transferred from the Metropolitan Borough of Walsall to the District of Lichfield, Staffordshire.[8] Further boundary changes came into effect in 1995, when part of the Hereford and Worcester parish of Frankley (including the south-west part of Bartley Reservoir) was transferred to Birmingham and became part of the county.
West Midlands Combined Authority[edit]
On 17 June 2016 a new administrative body, the West Midlands Combined Authority was created for the county, under the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Act 2009, which created several other combined authorities in England. The new body has powers over transport, economic development, skills and planning. A new directly elected position of Mayor of the West Midlands was created in 2017 to chair the new body.[9] The first Mayoral election was held in May 2017, and the position was won by Andy Street of the Conservative Party.
Geography[edit]
See also: List of places in the West Midlands; List of settlements in West Midlands (county) by population; Constituent areas of Birmingham, England; List of areas in Dudley; List of areas in Sandwell; List of areas in Walsall; List of areas in Wolverhampton; and West Midlands Green Belt




Map of West Midlands, showing urban areas in grey and metropolitan district boundaries


The West Midlands is a landlocked county that borders the counties of Warwickshire to the east, Worcestershire to the south, and Staffordshire to the north and west.
The West Midlands County is one of the most heavily urbanised counties in the UK. Birmingham, Wolverhampton, the Black Country and Solihull together form the third most populous conurbation in the United Kingdom with a combined population of around 2.44 million.[10] However, the West Midlands is not entirely urban; Coventry is separated from the West Midlands conurbation by a stretch of green belt land roughly 15 miles (24 km) across, known as the "Meriden Gap", which retains a strongly rural character. A smaller piece of green belt between Birmingham, Walsall and West Bromwich includes Barr Beacon and the Sandwell Valley.
The highest point in the West Midlands is Turners Hill, with a height of 271 m (889 ft). The hill is a Site of Special Scientific Interest. Barr Beacon is another hill in the West Midlands, located on the border of Birmingham and Walsall, with a height of 227 m (745 ft).
There are 23 Sites of Special Scientific Interest in the county.[11] One of these SSSIs is Sutton Park in Sutton Coldfield, which has an area of 970 hectares (2,400 acres).[12] As a result, it is one of the largest urban parks in Europe, and the largest outside of a capital city in Europe.[citation needed] The park also has national nature reserve status.
There are numerous rivers that pass through the county, including the River Tame. The river basin is the most urbanised basin in the United Kingdom, with approximately 42% of the basin being urbanised.[13] The River Tame is fed by the River Rea, River Anker, and the River Blythe, which in turn is fed by the River Cole. The River Sowe and River Sherbourne both flow through Coventry. The River Stour flows through the west of the West Midlands county.
Like other metropolitan counties, the West Midlands is divided into districts called metropolitan boroughs. There are seven boroughs in the West Midlands, which are named after the largest settlement in their administrative area. The West Midlands is unusual amongst the metropolitan counties in that three of its boroughs have city status; Coventry is a city by ancient prescriptive usage,[14] Birmingham was granted city status in 1889,[15] and Wolverhampton in 2000 as a "Millennium City".[16]


Metropolitan borough
Administrative centre
Other towns


City of Birmingham

Birmingham
Edgbaston, Great Barr, Hall Green, Handsworth, Northfield, Quinton, Soho, Sutton Coldfield


City of Coventry

Coventry
Allesley, Binley, Keresley, Stoke, Tile Hill


Dudley

Dudley
Brierley Hill, Cradley, Halesowen, Kingswinford, Lye, Netherton, Stourbridge, Quarry Bank


Sandwell

Oldbury
Bearwood, Rowley Regis, Cradley Heath, Old Hill, Smethwick, Tipton, Tividale, Wednesbury, West Bromwich, Yew Tree


Solihull

Solihull
Balsall Common, Bickenhill, Castle Bromwich, Chelmsley Wood, Dorridge, Elmdon, Hampton-in-Arden, Kingshurst, Knowle, Marston Green, Meriden, Monkspath, Hockley Heath


Walsall

Walsall
Aldridge, Bloxwich, Brownhills, Darlaston, Pelsall, Pheasey, Shelfield, Willenhall


City of Wolverhampton

Wolverhampton
Bilston, Blakenhall, Bushbury, Oxley, Wednesfield


Demography[edit]





Population density in the 2011 census in the West Midlands.





Distribution of ethnic groups in the West Midlands according to the 2011 census.













White 













White-British 













White-Irish 













White-Other 













Asian 













Asian-Indian 













Asian-Pakistani 













Asian-Bangladeshi 













Asian-Chinese 













Black 













Black-African 













Black-Caribbean 













Other-Arab 








Distribution of religions in the West Midlands according to the 2011 census.













Christianity 













Islam 













Judaism 













Hinduism 













Sikhism 













Buddhism 













Other religion 













No religion 






Places of interest[edit]
See also: Category:Tourist attractions in Birmingham, West Midlands


Key



Abbey/Priory/Cathedral



Accessible open space



Amusement/Theme Park



Castle



Country Park



English Heritage



Forestry Commission



Heritage railway



Historic House




Museum (free/not free)



National Trust



Theatre



Zoo




Ackers Adventure, Birmingham, 
Aston Hall, Birmingham 
Bantock House Museum and Park, Wolverhampton 
Bescot Stadium (Walsall F.C.)
Bilston Craft Gallery, Wolverhampton 
Birmingham Botanical Gardens 
Birmingham Bullring
Birmingham Museum & Art Gallery 
Birmingham Hippodrome 
Black Country Living Museum, Dudley 
Blakesley Hall, Birmingham 
Cadbury World, Bournville, Birmingham 
Coventry Cathedral 
Coventry SkyDome Arena
Coventry Transport Museum 
Dudley Castle 
Dudley Zoo 
Edgbaston Cricket Ground, Birmingham
International Convention Centre (including Symphony Hall), Birmingham 
Merry Hill Shopping Centre, Dudley
Molineux Stadium (Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C.)
Moseley Old Hall, Wolverhampton 
National Exhibition Centre
National Indoor Arena (NIA), Birmingham
Sea Life Centre, Birmingham 
Netherton Tunnel, Dudley
The New Art Gallery Walsall, Walsall 
Perrott's Folly, Birmingham
Red House Glass Cone, Stourbridge 
Ricoh Arena (Coventry City Football Club)
Sandwell Valley Country Park, West Bromwich 
Sarehole Mill, Birmingham 
St Andrew's (Birmingham City Football Club)
St Peter's Collegiate Church, Wolverhampton 
Star City
The Hawthorns (West Bromwich Albion Football Club)
Thinktank Millennium Point, Birmingham 
Tyseley Locomotive Works, Birmingham 
University of Birmingham
Villa Park (Aston Villa Football Club)
Walsall Art Gallery 
West Park, Wolverhampton 
Wightwick Manor, Wolverhampton 
Winterbourne Botanic Garden, Birmingham 
Wolverhampton Art Gallery, Wolverhampton 
Wolverhampton Civic Hall, Wolverhampton
Wolverhampton Grand Theatre, Wolverhampton 
Wolverhampton Racecourse, Wolverhampton


Education[edit]
The West Midlands contains ten universities, seven of which are located in Birmingham:

Aston University
University of Birmingham
Birmingham City University
University College Birmingham
BPP University
University of Law
Newman University

Both of Coventry University and the University of Warwick are located in Coventry whilst University of Wolverhampton is located in Wolverhampton with campuses in Telford and Walsall.
Each of the local authorities has at least one further education college for students aged over 16, and since September 1992 all of the local authorities have operated traditional 5-7 infant, 7-11 junior, and 11-16/18 secondary schools for students in compulsory education. This followed the demise of 5-8 first, 8-12 middle and 12-16/18 secondary schools in the Sutton Coldfield area.[17]
For 18 years before September 1990, Dudley had operated 5-8 first, 8-12 middle, and 12-16/18 secondary schools before then, while Halesowen (September 1972 until July 1982) and Aldridge-Brownhills (September 1972 until July 1986) had both operated 5-9 first, 9-13 middle and 13-16/18 secondary schools.
Many local authorities still have sixth form facilities in secondary schools, though sixth form facilities had been axed by most secondary schools in Dudley since the early 1990s (and in Halesowen in 1982) as the local authorities changed direction towards further education colleges.
All secondary state education in Dudley and Sandwell is mixed comprehensive, although there are a small number of single sex and grammar schools existing in parts of Birmingham, Solihull, Wolverhampton and Walsall.
In August 2009, Matthew Boulton College and Sutton Coldfield College merged to become Birmingham Metropolitan College, one of the largest further and higher education institutions in the country. Plans are afoot for the construction of a new campus in the Perry Barr area of Birmingham.
Sport[edit]
Football[edit]
The West Midlands is home to numerous sports teams. In football, there are six Premier League and Football League teams in the county of which one, West Bromwich Albion, plays in the Premier League. Aston Villa, Birmingham City, Coventry City, Walsall, West Bromwich Albion and Wolverhampton Wanderers are often referred to as the West Midlands "Big Six".


Club
League
City/town
Stadium
Capacity


Aston Villa
Championship
Birmingham
Villa Park
42,788


West Bromwich Albion
Premier League
West Bromwich
The Hawthorns
26,500


Birmingham City
Championship
Birmingham
St Andrew's
30,079


Wolverhampton Wanderers
Championship
Wolverhampton
Molineux
31,700


Coventry City
League Two
Coventry
Ricoh Arena
32,609


Walsall
League One
Walsall
Bescot Stadium
11,300


Other sports[edit]
In rugby union, the West Midlands is home to various clubs including Wasps RFC, Sutton Coldfield RFC, Moseley Rugby Football Club, Birmingham & Solihull RFC, and Coventry RFC.
In rugby league, Coventry Bears are the only team from the county playing the professional ranks, currently in the third tier League 1.
The West Midlands is also home to Warwickshire County Cricket Club, who are based at Edgbaston Cricket Ground, which also hosts Test matches and One Day Internationals. The Birmingham Panthers basketball team replaced the Birmingham Bullets and are currently based at a facility provided by the University of Wolverhampton in Walsall.
See also[edit]


England portal



List of ceremonial counties in England by gross value added
List of conservation areas in the West Midlands
Evolution of Worcestershire county boundaries


References[edit]



^ "2011 Census: Key Statistics for Local Authorities in England and Wales". ONS. Retrieved 26 December 2012. 
^ "2014 UK Population Estimates". ONS. Retrieved 27 July 2015. 
^ Office for National Statistics - Gazetteer of the old and new geographies of the United Kingdom, p48. URL accessed 10 March 2007.
^ Metropolitan Counties and Districts Archived 15 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine., Beginners' Guide to UK Geography, Office for National Statistics, 17 September 2004. URL accessed 10 March 2007.
^ West Midlands Counties, The Boundary Commission for England. URL accessed 10 March 2007.
^ "West Midlands Lieutenancy". The West Midlands Lieutenancy. Retrieved 24 November 2013. 
^ "West Midlands 2013/2014". High Sheriff's Association of England and Wales (The Shrievalty Association). Retrieved 24 November 2013. 
^ "The Hereford and Worcester, Staffordshire and West Midlands (County and Metropolitan Borough Boundaries) Order 1993". Office of Public Sector Information. 20 September 2000. Retrieved 20 January 2008. 
^ "All systems go for West Midlands Combined Authority as MPs say 'Yes'". The Chamberlain Files. Retrieved 23 June 2016. 
^ "2011 Census - Built-up areas". ONS. Retrieved 27 July 2013. 
^ "SSSIs in the West Midlands". Natural England. Retrieved 2 February 2008. 
^ Introduction To Sutton Park Birmingham City Council
^ John S. Rowan; R. W. Duck; A. Werritty (2006). Sediment Dynamics and the Hydromorphology of Fluvial Systems. IAHS. p. 98. ISBN 1-901502-68-6. 
^ Home Office List of English Cities by Ancient Prescriptive Right, 1927, cited in Beckett, J V (2005). City status in the British Isles, 1830–2002. Aldershot: Ashgate. p. 12. ISBN 0-7546-5067-7. 
^ "History of Mayoralty". Birmingham.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 10 May 2008. Retrieved 17 May 2008. 
^ "City winners named". BBC News. 18 December 2000. Retrieved 17 May 2008. 
^ Sutton Coldfield



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to West Midlands.



Photographs of Birmingham and the West Midlands
Identity in the West Midlands
West Midlands Joint Committee
Images of West Midlands at the English Heritage Archive

West Midlands (county) at Curlie (based on DMOZ)






v
t
e


Ceremonial county of West Midlands



Metropolitan districts



City of Birmingham
City of Coventry
City of Wolverhampton
Metropolitan Borough of Dudley
Metropolitan Borough of Sandwell
Metropolitan Borough of Solihull
Metropolitan Borough of Walsall





Major settlements



Aldridge
Bilston
Birmingham
Blackheath
Bloxwich
Brierley Hill
Brownhills
Coventry
Cradley Heath
Darlaston
Dudley
Fordbridge
Halesowen
Oldbury
Rowley Regis
Smethwick
Solihull
Stourbridge
Sutton Coldfield
Tipton
Walsall
Wednesbury
West Bromwich
Willenhall
Wolverhampton
See also: West Midlands





Rivers



River Blythe
River Cole
River Penk
River Rea
Smestow Brook
River Sherbourne
River Sow
River Sowe
River Stour
River Tame





Canals



Birmingham Canal Navigations
Shropshire Union Canal
Staffordshire & Worcestershire
Worcester & Birmingham





Topics



Places
Population of major settlements
Parliamentary constituencies
SSSIs
Country houses
Grade I listed buildings
Grade II* listed buildings
Conservation areas
History
Lord Lieutenants
High Sheriffs
Museums

Black Country
Birmingham Airport
Coventry/Bedworth Urban Area
Transport for West Midlands
West Midlands conurbation
West Midlands Combined Authority
Mayor of the West Midlands












v
t
e


Districts of the West Midlands Region



Herefordshire



Herefordshire








Shropshire



Shropshire
Telford and Wrekin





Staffordshire



Cannock Chase
East Staffordshire
Lichfield
Newcastle-under-Lyme
South Staffordshire
Stafford
Staffordshire Moorlands
Stoke-on-Trent
Tamworth





Warwickshire



North Warwickshire
Nuneaton and Bedworth
Rugby
Stratford-on-Avon
Warwick





West Midlands



Birmingham
Coventry
Dudley
Sandwell
Solihull
Walsall
Wolverhampton





Worcestershire



Bromsgrove
Malvern Hills
Redditch
Worcester
Wychavon
Wyre Forest












v
t
e


1974–1996 ←   Ceremonial counties of England   → current






Bedfordshire
Berkshire
Bristol
Buckinghamshire
Cambridgeshire
Cheshire
Cornwall
Cumbria
Derbyshire
Devon
Dorset
Durham
East Riding of Yorkshire
East Sussex
Essex
Gloucestershire
Greater London
Greater Manchester
Hampshire
Herefordshire
Hertfordshire
Isle of Wight
Kent
Lancashire
Leicestershire
Lincolnshire
City of London
Merseyside
Norfolk
Northamptonshire
Northumberland
North Yorkshire
Nottinghamshire
Oxfordshire
Rutland
Shropshire
Somerset
South Yorkshire
Staffordshire
Suffolk
Surrey
Tyne and Wear
Warwickshire
West Midlands
West Sussex
West Yorkshire
Wiltshire
Worcestershire












v
t
e


Metropolitan counties






Greater Manchester
Merseyside
South Yorkshire
Tyne and Wear
West Midlands
West Yorkshire






Coordinates: 52°30′N 1°50′W﻿ / ﻿52.500°N 1.833°W﻿ / 52.500; -1.833





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=West_Midlands_(county)&oldid=818194523"					Categories: Metropolitan countiesWest Midlands (county)West Midlands (region)NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United KingdomHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from January 2017Use British English from July 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2010Articles with DMOZ linksCoordinates on Wikidata