See also: Americas




The Western Hemisphere


The Western Hemisphere[1] is a geographical term for the half of the earth which lies west of the prime meridian (which crosses Greenwich, UK) and east of the antimeridian. The other half is called the Eastern Hemisphere.[2]
In this sense, the Western Hemisphere consists of the Americas, the western portions of Eurasia and Africa, the extreme eastern tip of Russia, numerous territories in Oceania, and a portion of Antarctica, while excluding some of the Aleutian Islands to the southwest of the Alaskan mainland.
In an effort to define the Western Hemisphere as the parts of the world which are not part of the Old World, there also exist projections which use the 20th meridian west and the diametrically opposed 160th meridian east to define the hemisphere.[3] This projection excludes the European and African mainlands and a small portion of northeast Greenland, but includes more of eastern Russia and Oceania.
The center of the Western Hemisphere is located in the Pacific Ocean at the intersection of the 90th meridian west and the equator very close to the Galápagos.
The highest mountain in the Western Hemisphere is Aconcagua in the Andes of Argentina at 6,960.8 metres (22,837 ft).[4]
In colloquial or less precise usage, the term is often used to refer to North and South America and associated Atlantic and Pacific Islands (e.g., Bermuda and Hawaii).



Contents


1 Countries in both hemispheres
2 Countries in the Western Hemisphere but not in the Americas
3 Sources
4 External links



Countries in both hemispheres[edit]
Below is a list of the countries which are in both the Western and Eastern Hemispheres on the IERS Reference Meridian, in order from north to south:

 Denmark (due to Greenland and the Faroe Islands; mainland Denmark lies entirely in the Eastern Hemisphere).
 Norway (due to Jan Mayen; mainland Norway lies entirely in the Eastern Hemisphere).
 United Kingdom
 Netherlands (The islands of the Caribbean Netherlands lie entirely within the Western Hemisphere while the European Netherlands lies entirely in the Eastern Hemisphere.)
 France
 Spain
 Algeria
 Mali
 Burkina Faso
 Togo
 Ghana

Below is a list of the countries which are in both the Western and Eastern Hemispheres along the 180th meridian, in order from north to south:

 Russia
 United States (United States islands)
 Kiribati
 Fiji
 New Zealand (Kermadec and Chatham Island groups are east of the 180th meridian)

Countries in the Western Hemisphere but not in the Americas[edit]
The following nations lie outside the Americas yet are partially or entirely within the Western Hemisphere.

 Algeria
 American Samoa (United States of America)
 Burkina Faso
 Cape Verde
 Cook Islands
 Faroe Islands (Denmark)
 France (Metropolitan)

 French Polynesia
 Wallis and Futuna


 Gambia
 Ghana
 Greenland (Denmark)[5]
 Guinea
 Guinea-Bissau
 Iceland
 Ireland
 Ivory Coast
 Kiribati
 Liberia
 Mali
 Mauritania
 Morocco

 Western Sahara


 Niue
 Portugal (Metropolitan)

 Azores
 Madeira


 Russia
 Samoa
 Senegal
 Sierra Leone
 Spain
 Togo
 Tokelau (New Zealand)
 Tonga
 United Kingdom

 Gibraltar
 Guernsey
 Isle of Man
 Jersey
 Pitcairn Islands
 Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
 Falkland Islands



Sources[edit]



^ Oxford Dictionary of English (2nd ed.), London, UK: Oxford University Press, 2006, p. 2001 
- "Western /western%20hemisphere", Merriam Webster's Online Dictionary (based on Collegiate vol., 11th ed.), Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, 2006 
^ "Western Hemisphere", Britannica.com 
^ Olson, Judy M (1997), "Projecting the hemisphere", in Robinson, Arthur H; Snyder, John P, Matching the map projection to the need, Bethesda, MD: Cartography and Geographic Information Society, American Congress on Surveying and Mapping .
- "Western Hemisphere", Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary (3rd ed.), Springfield, Massachusetts: Merriam-Webster, 2001, p. 1294 .
^ "Informe científico que estudia el Aconcagua, el Coloso de América mide 6960,8 metros" [Scientific Report on Aconcagua, the Colossus of America measures 6960,8m] (in Spanish). Universidad Nacional de Cuyo. 2012. Retrieved September 3, 2012. 
^ "Greenland". Eldey.de. 
- "Frequently Asked Questions". National Geographic. 



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Western Hemisphere.


Coordinates: 0°N 90°W﻿ / ﻿0°N 90°W﻿ / 0; -90






v
t
e


Hemispheres of Earth






Northern Hemisphere
Southern Hemisphere
Eastern Hemisphere
Western Hemisphere
Land Hemispheres
Water Hemispheres








 Book:Hemispheres of Earth
 Portal:Geography
 Commons:Maps of Earth's hemispheres











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Western_Hemisphere&oldid=813349461"					Categories: Hemispheres of EarthHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Coordinates on Wikidata