For other uses, see Westminster Abbey (disambiguation).


Westminster Abbey


Collegiate Church of St Peter at Westminster



Western façade



Location
Dean's Yard, Westminster, London


Country
England


Denomination
Church of England


Previous denomination
Roman Catholic


Website
www.westminster-abbey.org


History


Founded
960; 1058 years ago (960)


Architecture


Status
Collegiate church


Functional status
Active


Architectural type
Church


Style
Gothic


Years built



960
1517 (rebuilt)
18th century (towers)





Specifications


Nave width
85 feet (26 m)[1]


Floor area
32,000 square feet (3,000 m2)[1]


Number of towers
2


Tower height
225 feet (69 m)[1]


Bells
10


Administration


Diocese
Extra-diocesan (royal peculiar)


Clergy


Dean
John Hall


Laity


Director of music
James O'Donnell
(Organist and Master of the Choristers)


Organist(s)
Peter Holder
(sub-organist)


Organ scholar
Benjamin Cunningham














Location within Central London






Coordinates
51°29′58″N 00°07′39″W﻿ / ﻿51.49944°N 0.12750°W﻿ / 51.49944; -0.12750Coordinates: 51°29′58″N 00°07′39″W﻿ / ﻿51.49944°N 0.12750°W﻿ / 51.49944; -0.12750


Founded
10th century[2]






UNESCO World Heritage Site



Official name: Palace of Westminster, Westminster Abbey and Saint Margaret's Church


Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, ii, iv


Designated
1987 (11th session)


Reference no.
426


Country
United Kingdom


Region
Europe and North America









Listed Building – Grade I



Official name: Westminster Abbey (The Collegiate Church of St Peter)


Designated
24 February 1958


Reference no.
1291494[3]








Westminster Abbey, formally titled the Collegiate Church of St Peter at Westminster, is a large, mainly Gothic abbey church in the City of Westminster, London, just to the west of the Palace of Westminster. It is one of the United Kingdom's most notable religious buildings and the traditional place of coronation and burial site for English and, later, British monarchs. The building itself was a Benedictine monastic church until the monastery was dissolved in 1539. Between 1540 and 1556, the abbey had the status of a cathedral. Since 1560, the building is no longer an abbey or a cathedral, having instead the status of a Church of England "Royal Peculiar"—a church responsible directly to the sovereign.
According to a tradition first reported by Sulcard in about 1080, a church was founded at the site (then known as Thorn Ey (Thorn Island)) in the seventh century, at the time of Mellitus, a Bishop of London. Construction of the present church began in 1245, on the orders of King Henry III.[4]
Since the coronation of William the Conqueror in 1066, all coronations of English and British monarchs have been in Westminster Abbey.[4][5] There have been at least 16 royal weddings at the abbey since 1100. Two were of reigning monarchs (Henry I and Richard II), although, before 1919, there had been none for some 500 years.[6]



Contents


1 History

1.1 1042: Edward the Confessor starts rebuilding St Peter's Abbey
1.2 Construction of the present church
1.3 16th and 17th centuries: dissolution and restoration

1.3.1 1540–1550: 10 years as a cathedral
1.3.2 After 1550: turbulent times


1.4 1722–1745: Western towers constructed


2 Coronations
3 Royal weddings

3.1 Chronology


4 Dean and Chapter
5 Burials and memorials
6 Schools
7 Music

7.1 Organ


8 Bells
9 Chapter house
10 Museum

10.1 Exhibits


11 Development plans
12 Transport
13 Gallery
14 See also
15 Notes
16 References
17 External links



History[edit]
A late tradition claims that Aldrich, a young fisherman on the River Thames, has a vision of Saint Peter near the site. This seems to have been quoted as the origin of the salmon that Thames fishermen offered to the abbey in later years – a custom still observed annually by the Fishmongers' Company. The recorded origins of the Abbey date to the 960s or early 970s, when Saint Dunstan and King Edgar installed a community of Benedictine monks on the site.
1042: Edward the Confessor starts rebuilding St Peter's Abbey[edit]




St Peter's Abbey at the time of Edward's funeral, depicted in the Bayeux Tapestry


Between 1042 and 1052, King Edward the Confessor began rebuilding St Peter's Abbey to provide himself with a royal burial church. It was the first church in England built in the Romanesque style. The building was completed around 1060 and was consecrated on 28 December 1065, only a week before Edward's death on 5 January 1066.[7] A week later, he was buried in the church; and, nine years later, his wife Edith was buried alongside him.[8] His successor, Harold II, was probably crowned in the abbey, although the first documented coronation is that of William the Conqueror later the same year.[9]
The only extant depiction of Edward's abbey, together with the adjacent Palace of Westminster, is in the Bayeux Tapestry. Some of the lower parts of the monastic dormitory, an extension of the South Transept, survive in the Norman Undercroft of the Great School, including a door said to come from the previous Saxon abbey. Increased endowments supported a community increased from a dozen monks in Dunstan's original foundation, up to a maximum about eighty monks,[10] although there was also a large community of lay brothers who supported the monastery's extensive property and activities.
Construction of the present church[edit]
Construction of the present church was begun in 1245 by Henry III[11] who selected the site for his burial.[12]




Layout plan dated 1894






North entrance of Westminster Abbey


The abbot and monks, in proximity to the royal Palace of Westminster, the seat of government from the later 12th century, became a powerful force in the centuries after the Norman Conquest. The Abbot of Westminster often was employed on royal service and in due course took his place in the House of Lords as of right. Released from the burdens of spiritual leadership, which passed to the reformed Cluniac movement after the mid-10th century, and occupied with the administration of great landed properties, some of which lay far from Westminster, "the Benedictines achieved a remarkable degree of identification with the secular life of their times, and particularly with upper-class life", Barbara Harvey concludes, to the extent that her depiction of daily life[13] provides a wider view of the concerns of the English gentry in the High and Late Middle Ages.[citation needed]
The proximity of the Palace of Westminster did not extend to providing monks or abbots with high royal connections; in social origin the Benedictines of Westminster were as modest as most of the order. The abbot remained Lord of the Manor of Westminster as a town of two to three thousand persons grew around it: as a consumer and employer on a grand scale the monastery helped fuel the town economy, and relations with the town remained unusually cordial, but no enfranchising charter was issued during the Middle Ages.[14] The abbey built shops and dwellings on the west side, encroaching upon the sanctuary.[citation needed]
The abbey became the coronation site of Norman kings. None was buried there until Henry III, intensely devoted to the cult of the Confessor, rebuilt the abbey in Anglo-French Gothic style as a shrine to venerate King Edward the Confessor and as a suitably regal setting for Henry's own tomb, under the highest Gothic nave in England. The Confessor's shrine subsequently played a great part in his canonisation.
The work continued between 1245 and 1517 and was largely finished by the architect Henry Yevele in the reign of Richard II. Henry III also commissioned the unique Cosmati pavement in front of the High Altar (the pavement has recently undergone a major cleaning and conservation programme and was re-dedicated by the Dean at a service on 21 May 2010).[15] The building was consecrated on 13 October 1269.[16]
Henry VII added a Perpendicular style chapel dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary in 1503 (known as the Henry VII Chapel or the "Lady Chapel"). Much of the stone came from Caen, in France (Caen stone), the Isle of Portland (Portland stone) and the Loire Valley region of France (tuffeau limestone).[citation needed]
16th and 17th centuries: dissolution and restoration[edit]
In 1535, the abbey's annual income of £2400–2800 (equivalent to £1,340,000 to £1,570,000 as of 2016),[17] during the assessment attendant on the Dissolution of the Monasteries rendered it second in wealth only to Glastonbury Abbey.
1540–1550: 10 years as a cathedral[edit]
Henry VIII assumed direct royal control in 1539 and granted the abbey the status of a cathedral by charter in 1540, simultaneously issuing letters patent establishing the Diocese of Westminster. By granting the abbey cathedral status, Henry VIII gained an excuse to spare it from the destruction or dissolution which he inflicted on most English abbeys during this period.
After 1550: turbulent times[edit]
Westminster diocese was dissolved in 1550, but the abbey was recognised (in 1552, retroactively to 1550) as a second cathedral of the Diocese of London until 1556.[18][19][20] The already-old expression "robbing Peter to pay Paul" may have been given a new lease of life when money meant for the abbey, which is dedicated to Saint Peter, was diverted to the treasury of St Paul's Cathedral.




The Nave of Westminster Abbey


The abbey was restored to the Benedictines under the Catholic Mary I of England, but they were again ejected under Elizabeth I in 1559. In 1560, Elizabeth re-established Westminster as a "Royal Peculiar" – a church of the Church of England responsible directly to the Sovereign, rather than to a diocesan bishop – and made it the Collegiate Church of St Peter (that is, a non-cathedral church with an attached chapter of canons, headed by a dean.) The last of Mary's abbots was made the first dean.
It suffered damage during the turbulent 1640s, when it was attacked by Puritan iconoclasts, but was again protected by its close ties to the state during the Commonwealth period. Oliver Cromwell was given an elaborate funeral there in 1658, only to be disinterred in January 1661 and posthumously hanged from a gibbet at Tyburn.
1722–1745: Western towers constructed[edit]
The abbey's two western towers were built between 1722 and 1745 by Nicholas Hawksmoor, constructed from Portland stone to an early example of a Gothic Revival design. Purbeck marble was used for the walls and the floors of Westminster Abbey, even though the various tombstones are made of different types of marble. Further rebuilding and restoration occurred in the 19th century under Sir George Gilbert Scott.
A narthex (a portico or entrance hall) for the west front was designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens in the mid-20th century but was not built. Images of the abbey prior to the construction of the towers are scarce, though the abbey's official website states that the building was without towers following Yevele's renovation, with just the lower segments beneath the roof level of the Nave completed.
Until the 19th century, Westminster was the third seat of learning in England, after Oxford and Cambridge. It was here that the first third of the King James Bible Old Testament and the last half of the New Testament were translated. The New English Bible was also put together here in the 20th century. Westminster suffered minor damage during the Blitz on 15 November 1940. Then on May 10/11 1941, the Westminster Abbey precincts and roof were hit by incendiary bombs. All the bombs were extinguished by ARP wardens, except for one bomb which ignited out of reach among the wooden beams and plaster vault of the lantern roof (of 1802) over the North Transept. Flames rapidly spread and burning beams and molten lead began to fall on the wooden stalls, pews and other ecclesiastical fixtures 130 feet below. Despite the falling debris, the staff dragged away as much furniture as possible before withdrawing. Finally the Lantern roof crashed down into the crossing, preventing the fires from spreading further.
In the 1990s, two icons by the Russian icon painter Sergei Fyodorov were hung in the abbey.[21] In 1997, the abbey, which was then receiving approximately 1.75 million visitors each year, began charging admission fees to visitors.[22]
On 6 September 1997, the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales, was held at the abbey. On 17 September 2010, Pope Benedict XVI became the first pope to set foot in the abbey.[23]







Westminster Abbey with a procession of Knights of the Bath, by Canaletto, 1749









Flag of Westminster Abbey, featuring the Tudor arms between Tudor Roses above the attributed arms of Edward the Confessor









Layout of Westminster Abbey, 2008









Westminster Abbey by night, 2014




Coronations[edit]




King Edward's Chair


Main articles: Coronation of the British monarch and List of British coronations
Since the coronations in 1066 of both King Harold and William the Conqueror, every English and British monarch (except Edward V and Edward VIII, who were never crowned) has been crowned in Westminster Abbey.[4][5] In 1216, Henry III could not be crowned in London when he came to the throne, because the French prince Louis had taken control of the city, and so the king was crowned in Gloucester Cathedral. This coronation was deemed by Pope Honorius III to be improper, and a further coronation was held in Westminster Abbey on 17 May 1220.[24] The Archbishop of Canterbury is the traditional cleric in the coronation ceremony.[citation needed]
King Edward's Chair (or St Edward's Chair), the throne on which English and British sovereigns have been seated at the moment of crowning, is now housed within the Abbey in St George's Chapel near the West Door, and has been used at every coronation since 1308. From 1301 to 1996 (except for a short time in 1950 when the stone was temporarily stolen by Scottish nationalists), the chair also housed the Stone of Scone upon which the kings of Scots are crowned. Although the Stone is now kept in Scotland, in Edinburgh Castle, it is intended that the Stone will be returned to St Edward's Chair for use during future coronation ceremonies.[25]
Royal weddings[edit]
Chronology[edit]




The 1382 wedding of Richard II to Anne of Bohemia



11 November 1100: King Henry I of England was married to Matilda of Scotland
4 January 1243: Richard, Earl of Cornwall (later King of Germany), brother of King Henry III of England, to Sanchia of Provence (his second wife). Sanchia was sister of Eleanor of Provence, Henry III's queen.
9 April 1269: Edmund of Crouchback, 1st Earl of Leicester and Lancaster, son of King Henry III was married to Lady Aveline de Forz
30 April 1290: Joan of Acre, daughter of King Edward I, was married to the 7th Earl of Gloucester
8 July 1290: Margaret of England, daughter of King Edward I, was married to John II, son of Duke of Brabant
20 January 1382: King Richard II of England was married to Anne of Bohemia
18 January 1486: King Henry VII of England was married to Elizabeth of York
27 February 1919: Princess Patricia of Connaught was married to Capt the Hon Alexander Ramsay
28 February 1922: The Princess Mary, daughter of King George V, was married to Viscount Lascelles
26 April 1923: The Prince Albert, Duke of York (later King George VI), second son of King George V, was married to Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon (later to become Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother)
29 November 1934: The Prince George, Duke of Kent, son of King George V, was married to Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark
20 November 1947: Princess Elizabeth (now Queen Elizabeth II), elder daughter of King George VI, was married to the Duke of Edinburgh (who was Lt Philip Mountbatten until that morning)
6 May 1960: Princess Margaret, second daughter of King George VI, was married to Antony Armstrong-Jones (later Earl of Snowdon)
24 April 1963: Princess Alexandra of Kent was married to the Hon Angus Ogilvy
14 November 1973: Princess Anne, only daughter of Queen Elizabeth II, was married to Captain Mark Phillips
23 July 1986: Prince Andrew, Duke of York, second son of Queen Elizabeth II, was married to Miss Sarah Ferguson
29 April 2011: Prince William, Duke of Cambridge, grandson of Queen Elizabeth II, was married to Miss Catherine Middleton[26]

Dean and Chapter[edit]
Main article: Dean and Chapter of Westminster
Westminster Abbey is a collegiate church governed by the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, as established by Royal charter of Queen Elizabeth I dated 21 May 1560,[27] which created it as the Collegiate Church of St Peter Westminster, a Royal Peculiar under the personal jurisdiction of the Sovereign. The members of the Chapter are the Dean and four canons residentiary; they are assisted by the Receiver General and Chapter Clerk. One of the canons is also Rector of St Margaret's Church, Westminster, and often also holds the post of Chaplain to the Speaker of the House of Commons.
In addition to the Dean and canons, there are at present three full-time minor canons: the precentor, the sacrist and the chaplain. The office of Priest Vicar was created in the 1970s for those who assist the minor canons. Together with the clergy and Receiver General and Chapter Clerk, various lay officers constitute the college, including the Organist and Master of the Choristers, the Registrar, the Auditor, the Legal Secretary, the Surveyor of the Fabric, the Head Master of the choir school, the Keeper of the Muniments (archives) and the Clerk of the Works, as well as 12 lay vicars, 10 choristers and the High Steward and High Bailiff.
The 40 Queen's Scholars who are pupils at Westminster School (the School has its own Governing Body) are also members of the collegiate.[clarification needed][citation needed]
The three minor canons as well as the organist and Master of the Choristers are most directly concerned with liturgical and ceremonial matters.[citation needed]
Burials and memorials[edit]
Main article: Burials and memorials in Westminster Abbey







Audio description of the shrine of Edward the Confessor by John Hall






A recumbent effigy on a tomb in Westminster Abbey






The cloister and garth


Henry III rebuilt the abbey in honour of a royal saint, Edward the Confessor, whose relics were placed in a shrine in the sanctuary. Henry III himself was interred nearby, as were many of the Plantagenet kings of England, their wives and other relatives. Until the death of George II of Great Britain in 1760, most kings and queens were buried in the abbey, some notable exceptions being Henry VI, Edward IV, Henry VIII and Charles I who are buried in St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle. Other exceptions include Edward II buried at Gloucester Cathedral, John buried at Worcester Cathedral, Henry IV buried at Canterbury Cathedral and Richard III, now buried at Leicester Cathedral, and the de facto queen Lady Jane Grey, buried in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower of London. Most monarchs and royals who died after 1760 are buried either in St George's Chapel or at Frogmore to the east of Windsor Castle.[citation needed]
From the Middle Ages, aristocrats were buried inside chapels, while monks and other people associated with the abbey were buried in the cloisters and other areas. One of these was Geoffrey Chaucer, who was buried here as he had apartments in the abbey where he was employed as master of the King's Works. Other poets, writers and musicians were buried or memorialised around Chaucer in what became known as Poets' Corner. Abbey musicians such as Henry Purcell were also buried in their place of work.[28]
Subsequently, it became one of Britain's most significant honours to be buried or commemorated in the abbey.[29] The practice of burying national figures in the abbey began under Oliver Cromwell with the burial of Admiral Robert Blake in 1657.[30] The practice spread to include generals, admirals, politicians, doctors and scientists such as Isaac Newton, buried on 4 April 1727, and Charles Darwin, buried 26 April 1882. Another was William Wilberforce who led the movement to abolish slavery in the United Kingdom and the Plantations, buried on 3 August 1833. Wilberforce was buried in the north transept, close to his friend, the former Prime Minister, William Pitt.[31]
During the early 20th century it became increasingly common to bury cremated remains rather than coffins in the abbey. In 1905 the actor Sir Henry Irving was cremated and his ashes buried in Westminster Abbey, thereby becoming the first person ever to be cremated prior to interment at the abbey.[32] The majority of interments at the Abbey are of cremated remains, but some burials still take place – Frances Challen, wife of Sebastian Charles, Canon of Westminster, was buried alongside her husband in the south choir aisle in 2014.[33] Members of the Percy family have a family vault, The Northumberland Vault, in St Nicholas's chapel within the abbey.[34]
In the floor, just inside the great west door, in the centre of the nave, is the tomb of The Unknown Warrior, an unidentified British soldier killed on a European battlefield during the First World War. He was buried in the abbey on 11 November 1920. This grave is the only one in the abbey on which it is forbidden to walk.[35]
At the east end of the Lady Chapel is a memorial chapel to the airmen of the Royal Air Force who were killed in the Second World War. It incorporates a memorial window to the Battle of Britain, which replaces an earlier Tudor stained glass window destroyed in the war.[36]




Funeral procession of Diana, Princess of Wales at Westminster


On 6 September 1997 the formal, though not "state" funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales, was held. It was a royal ceremonial funeral including royal pageantry and Anglican funeral liturgy. A second public service was held on Sunday at the demand of the people. The burial occurred privately later the same day. Diana's former husband, sons, mother, siblings, a close friend, and a clergyman were present. Diana's body was clothed in a black long-sleeved dress designed by Catherine Walker, which she had chosen some weeks before. A set of rosary beads was placed in her hands, a gift she had received from Mother Teresa. Her grave is on the grounds of her family estate, Althorp, on a private island.[37]
In 1998 ten vacant statue niches on the façade above the Great West Door were filled with representative 20th-century Christian martyrs of various denominations. Those commemorated are Maximilian Kolbe, Manche Masemola, Janani Luwum, Grand Duchess Elizabeth of Russia, Martin Luther King Jr., Óscar Romero, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Esther John, Lucian Tapiedi, and Wang Zhiming.[38][39]
On 9 April 2002 the ceremonial funeral of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother was held in the abbey. She was interred later the same day in the George VI Memorial Chapel at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle next to her husband, King George VI, who had died 50 years previously. At the same time, the ashes of the Queen Mother's daughter, Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, who had died on 9 February 2002, were also interred in a private family service.[40]
Schools[edit]
Westminster School and Westminster Abbey Choir School are also in the precincts of the abbey. It was natural for the learned and literate monks to be entrusted with education, and Benedictine monks were required by the Pope to maintain a charity school in 1179. The Choir School educates and trains the choirboys who sing for services in the Abbey.
Music[edit]
Westminster Abbey is renowned for its choral tradition, and the repertoire of Anglican church music is heard in daily worship, particularly at the service of Choral Evensong.[41][42]
Organ[edit]
See also: List of Westminster Abbey organists
The organ was built by Harrison & Harrison in 1937, then with four manuals and 84 speaking stops, and was used for the first time at the coronation of King George VI. Some pipework from the previous Hill organ of 1848 was revoiced and incorporated in the new scheme. The two organ cases, designed and built in the late 19th century by John Loughborough Pearson, were re-instated and coloured in 1959.[43]
In 1982 and 1987, Harrison and Harrison enlarged the organ under the direction of the then abbey organist Simon Preston to include an additional Lower Choir Organ and a Bombarde Organ: the current instrument now has five manuals and 109 speaking stops. In 2006, the console of the organ was refurbished by Harrison and Harrison, and space was prepared for two additional 16 ft stops on the Lower Choir Organ and the Bombarde Organ.[43] One part of the instrument, the Celestial Organ, is currently not connected or playable.
As of 2016[update], the Organist and Master of the Choristers is James O'Donnell.
Bells[edit]
The bells at the abbey were overhauled in 1971. The ring is now made up of ten bells, hung for change ringing, cast in 1971, by the Whitechapel Bell Foundry, tuned to the notes: F#, E, D, C#, B, A, G, F#, E and D. The Tenor bell in D (588.5 Hz) has a weight of 30 cwt, 1 qtr, 15 lb (3403 lb or 1544 kg).[44]
In addition there are two service bells, cast by Robert Mot, in 1585 and 1598 respectively, a Sanctus bell cast in 1738 by Richard Phelps and Thomas Lester and two unused bells—one cast about 1320, by the successor to R de Wymbish, and a second cast in 1742, by Thomas Lester.[44] The two service bells and the 1320 bell, along with a fourth small silver "dish bell", kept in the refectory, have been noted as being of historical importance by the Church Buildings Council of the Church of England.[45]
Chapter house[edit]




Chapter house


The chapter house was built concurrently with the east parts of the abbey under Henry III, between about 1245 and 1253.[46] It was restored by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1872. The entrance is approached from the east cloister walk and includes a double doorway with a large tympanum above.[46]
Inner and outer vestibules lead to the octagonal chapter house, which is of exceptional architectural purity. It is built in a Geometrical Gothic style with an octagonal crypt below. A pier of eight shafts carries the vaulted ceiling. To the sides are blind arcading, remains of 14th-century paintings and numerous stone benches above which are innovatory large 4-light quatre-foiled windows.[46] These are virtually contemporary with the Sainte-Chapelle, Paris.[46]
The chapter house has an original mid-13th-century tiled pavement. A door within the vestibule dates from around 1050 and is believed to be the oldest in England.[47] The exterior includes flying buttresses added in the 14th century and a leaded tent-lantern roof on an iron frame designed by Scott. The Chapter house was originally used in the 13th century by Benedictine monks for daily meetings. It later became a meeting place of the King's Great Council and the Commons, predecessors of Parliament.
The Pyx Chamber formed the undercroft of the monks' dormitory. It dates to the late 11th century and was used as a monastic and royal treasury. The outer walls and circular piers are of 11th-century date, several of the capitals were enriched in the 12th century and the stone altar added in the 13th century. The term pyx refers to the boxwood chest in which coins were held and presented to a jury during the Trial of the Pyx, in which newly minted coins were presented to ensure they conformed to the required standards.
The chapter house and Pyx Chamber at Westminster Abbey are in the guardianship of English Heritage, but under the care and management of the Dean and Chapter of Westminster. English Heritage have funded a major programme of work on the chapter house, comprising repairs to the roof, gutters, stonework on the elevations and flying buttresses as well as repairs to the lead light.
Museum[edit]
The Westminster Abbey Museum was located in the 11th-century vaulted undercroft beneath the former monks' dormitory in Westminster Abbey. This is one of the oldest areas of the abbey, dating back almost to the foundation of the church by Edward the Confessor in 1065. This space had been used as a museum since 1908.[48]
Exhibits[edit]
The exhibits included a collection of royal and other funeral effigies (funeral saddle, helm and shield of Henry V), together with other treasures, including some panels of mediaeval glass, 12th-century sculpture fragments, Mary II's coronation chair and replicas of the coronation regalia, and historic effigies of Edward III, Henry VII and his queen, Elizabeth of York, Charles II, William III, Mary II and Queen Anne.
Later wax effigies included a likeness of Horatio, Viscount Nelson, wearing some of his own clothes and another of Prime Minister William Pitt, Earl of Chatham, modelled by the American-born sculptor Patience Wright.[citation needed] During recent conservation of Elizabeth I's effigy, a unique corset dating from 1603 was found on the figure, which was displayed separately.[citation needed]
A recent addition to the exhibition was the late 13th-century Westminster Retable, England's oldest altarpiece, which was most probably designed for the high altar of the abbey. Although it has been damaged in past centuries, the panel has been expertly cleaned and conserved.
This Museum has now closed, and will re-open in 2018 in the Diamond Jubilee Galleries, high up in the main Abbey building.
Development plans[edit]
In June 2009 the first major building work at the abbey for 250 years was proposed. A corona – a crown-like architectural feature – was suggested to be built around the lantern over the central crossing, replacing an existing pyramidal structure dating from the 1950s. This was part of a wider £23m development of the abbey expected to be completed in 2013.[49][50] On 4 August 2010 the Dean and Chapter announced that, "[a]fter a considerable amount of preliminary and exploratory work", efforts toward the construction of a corona would not be continued.[51] In 2012, architects Panter Hudspith completed refurbishment of the 14th-century food-store originally used by the abbey's monks, converting it into a restaurant with English oak furniture by Covent Garden-based furniture makers Luke Hughes and Company. This is now the Cellarium Café and Terrace.
A project that is proceeding is the creation of The Queen's Diamond Jubilee Galleries in the medieval triforium of the abbey. The aim is to create a new display area for the abbey's treasures in the galleries high up around the abbey's nave. To this end a new Gothic access tower with lift has been designed by the abbey architect and Surveyor of the Fabric, Ptolemy Dean. It is planned that the new galleries will open in 2018.
Transport[edit]


London Underground
St James's Park  
Westminster   


London River Services
Westminster Millennium Pier 



Gallery[edit]

Gallery






Great West Door and towers, as seen from Tothill Street









View from the nearby London Eye to the north east









At night, from Dean's Yard to the south; artificial light highlights the flying buttresses









Handel Commemoration in 1784









The Quire in 1848









Tomb of King Henry III of England.









West face from below









Cloisters looking south west towards Victoria Tower.









North façade, built in Gothic style









Exterior wall inscription









10 martyrs of the 20th century









One of the chapels









Relief of Christ (façade)









Facade by night









Coloured light projected onto the Abbey for Lumiere festival 2016









View through the gate into the Little Cloister, with St. Catherine's Chapel garden beyond




See also[edit]


Anglicanism portal
London portal



Archdeacon of Westminster
List of Deans of Westminster
List of churches in London
The Abbey - a three-part BBC TV documentary written and hosted by playwright Alan Bennett

Notes[edit]


^ a b c "Dimensions of Westminster Abbey" (PDF). westminster-abbey.org. Dimensions of Westminster Abbey
^ Newcomb, Rexford (1997). "Abbey". In Johnston, Bernard. Collier's Encyclopedia. I A to Ameland (First ed.). New York, NY: P.F. Collier. pp. 8–11. 
^ Historic England. "Details from listed building database (1291494)". National Heritage List for England (NHLE). Retrieved 9 July 2015. 
^ a b c "History". Dean and Chapter of Westminster Abbey. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. Retrieved 19 April 2008. 
^ a b "Coronations". Dean and Chapter of Westminster Abbey. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 19 April 2008. Westminster-abbey.org
^ "Royal Weddings at Westminster Abbey". Westminster Abbey. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 29 April 2011. 
^ Eric Fernie, in Mortimer ed., Edward the Confessor, pp. 139–143
^ Pauline Stafford, 'Edith, Edward's Wife and Queen', in Mortimer ed., Edward the Confessor, p. 137
^ "William I (the Conqueror)". Westminster-abbey.org. 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016. 
^ Harvey 1993, p. 2
^ History – Westminster Abbey. Retrieved 29 April 2011
^ "Henry III". Westminster-abbey.org. 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016. 
^ Harvey 1993
^ Harvey 1993, p. 6 ff.
^ "Cosmati pavement". Westminster Abbey. Retrieved 16 June 2013. 
^ Westminster Abbey (2014-09-26), Welcome to Westminster Abbey, retrieved 2017-07-30 
^ UK Consumer Price Index inflation figures are based on data from Clark, Gregory (2017). "The Annual RPI and Average Earnings for Britain, 1209 to Present (New Series)". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved November 6, 2017. 
^ "Abbey History". Westminster-abbey.org. Retrieved 8 January 2017. 
^ Duffy, Eamon & Loades, David (eds.) The Church of Mary Tudor. pp. 79–82. Retrieved 24 July 2014
^ Knighton, C. S. (ed.). Acts of the Dean and Chapter of Westminster, 1543–1609: Part One. pp. xviii–xx. Retrieved 24 July 2014. 
^ "John Windsor'S Guide To Collecting Contemporary Art: Sergei Fyodorov At". The Independent. 10 November 1998. Retrieved 28 April 2011. 
^ "Westminster Abbey now example of how to handle tourists". Episcopal News Service. 6 March 2002. Retrieved 18 September 2017. 
^ Schjonberg, Mary Frances (17 September 2010). "Benedict becomes first pope to visit Lambeth, Westminster Abbey". Episcopal Life Online. Retrieved 17 September 2010. 
^ "Henry III, Archonotology.org". Retrieved 21 April 2008. 
^ "The Stone still waiting for its final destiny". BBC. 28 November 2016. Retrieved 2017-10-08. 
^ "Newsbeat – Royal wedding: Prince William and Kate Middleton marry". BBC. 29 April 2011. Retrieved 8 January 2012. 
^ Westminster Abbey and Saint Margaret Westminster Act 1972. London: HMSO. 1972. p. 1. 
^ "Henry Purcell & family". www.westminster-abbey.org. Retrieved 2017-01-26. 
^ Dunton, Larkin (1896). The World and Its People. Silver, Burdett. p. 26. 
^ Westminster Abbey Mrs. A. Murray Smith, published 30 August 1904.
^ "William Wilberforce & family". Westminster-abbey.org. 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016. 
^ "Woking Crematorium". Internet. The Cremation Society of Great Britain. Retrieved 28 November 2010. 
^ "Sebastian Charles". Internet. The Dean and Chapter of Westminster. Retrieved 19 September 2015. 
^ "Westminster Abbey » Elizabeth, Duchess of Northumberland & Percy family". 
^ "The Tomb of The Unknown Warrior". British Legion. Retrieved 29 August 2016. 
^ "The Royal Air Force Chapel". Official website. Retrieved 8 August 2015. 
^ "Diana Returns Home". BBC News. 1997. Retrieved 21 July 2016. 
^ Heller, Jenny E. (22 September 1998). "Westminster Abbey Elevates 10 Foreigners". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 July 2016. 
^ Streeter, Michael (17 October 1997). "Heritage: Westminster Abbey prepares modern martyrs' corner". The Independent. Retrieved 21 July 2016. 
^ "Queen Mother is laid to rest". BBC News. 10 April 2002. 
^ "Westminster Abbey : Choral Evensong". choralevensong.org. Retrieved 12 October 2017. 
^ "Choral services". Westminster Abbey. Retrieved 12 October 2017. 
^ a b "N00646". Npor.org.uk. Retrieved 31 July 2012. 
^ a b Westminster—Collegiate Church of S Peter (Westminster Abbey), Dove's Guide for Church Bell Ringers, 25 October 2006. Retrieved 16 October 2008.
^ "Database of Historically Significant Bells and Bell Frames". Churchcare website. Church of England. 1 April 2008. Archived from the original on 29 July 2010. Retrieved 16 October 2008. search on "Westminster Abbey" for bell details 
^ a b c d Scott, Sir George Gilbert (1863). Gleanings from Westminster abbey. pp. 41–43, 56–58. 
^ England, Historic. "The Chapter House and Pyx Chamber in the abbey cloisters, Westminster Abbey - 1003579| Historic England". historicengland.org.uk. Retrieved 2017-01-20. 
^ Trowles 2008, p. 156
^ "Building work announced for Abbey". BBC News. 28 June 2009. Retrieved 29 June 2009. 
^ Kennedy, Maev (29 June 2009). "Dean lines up new crown shaped roof for Westminster Abbey". theguardian.com. Retrieved 29 June 2009. 
^ "Abbey Development Plan Update". Westminster Abbey. 4 August 2010. Retrieved 7 September 2010. 


References[edit]


Bradley, S. and N. Pevsner (2003) The Buildings of England – London 6: Westminster, New Haven: Yale University Press, pp. 105–207. ISBN 0-300-09595-3
Mortimer, Richard ed., Edward the Confessor: The Man and the Legend, The Boydell Press, 2009. Eric Fernie, 'Edward the Confessor's Westminster Abbey', pp. 139–150. Warwick Rodwell, 'New Glimpses of Edward the Confessor's Abbey at Westminster', pp. 151–167. Richard Gem, Craftsmen and Administrators in the Building of the Confessor's Abbey', pp. 168–172. ISBN 978-1-84383-436-6
Harvey, B. (1993) Living and Dying in England 1100–1540: The Monastic Experience, Ford Lecture series, Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-820161-3
Morton, H. V. [1951] (1988) In Search of London, London: Methuen. ISBN 0-413-18470-6
Trowles, T. (2008) Treasures of Westminster Abbey, London: Scala. ISBN 978-1-85759-454-6


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Westminster Abbey.



Listen to this article (info/dl)












This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Westminster Abbey" dated 2005-04-21, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles


Official website
Walter Thornbury, Old and New London, Volume 3, 1878, pp. 394–462, British History Online
Westminster Abbey Article at Encyclopædia Britannica
Historic images of Westminster Abbey
Westminster Abbey: A Peek Inside – slideshow by Life magazine
Keith Short – Sculptor Images of stone carving for Westminster Abbey
Carved Crests for the Knights of the Bath
A history of the choristers and choir school of Westminster Abbey
Catholic Encyclopedia: Westminster Abbey
Adrian Fletcher’s Paradoxplace Westminster Abbey Pages—Photos
A panorama of Westminster Abbey in daytime – JPG and 3D QuickTime versions
Westminster Abbey on Twitter
Audio Guide of Westminster Abbey







v
t
e


Westminster Abbey



Deans




Early modern



William Benson
Richard Cox
Hugh Weston
William Bill
Gabriel Goodman
Lancelot Andrewes
Richard Neile
George Montaigne
Robert Tounson
John Williams
Richard Steward
John Earle
John Dolben
Thomas Sprat
Francis Atterbury
Samuel Bradford
Joseph Wilcocks
Zachary Pearce
John Thomas
Samuel Horsley





Late modern



William Vincent
John Ireland
Thomas Turton
Samuel Wilberforce
William Buckland
Richard Chenevix Trench
Arthur Stanley
George Bradley
Armitage Robinson
Herbert Ryle
William Foxley Norris
Paul de Labilliere
Alan Don
Eric Abbott
Edward Carpenter
Michael Mayne
Wesley Carr
John Hall











Canons (current)



Vernon White (Sub-Dean, Archdeacon and Canon Theologian)
David Stanton (Canon Treasurer and Almoner)
Jane Sinclair (Rector of St Margaret's)
Anthony Ball (Canon Steward)
Chris Stoltz (Minor Canon and Precentor)
Mark Birch (Minor Canon and Chaplain)
Paul Arbuthnot (Minor Canon and Sacrist)





Topics



Coronation of the British monarch
Liber Regalis
Edward the Confessor (patron saint)
Burials and Memorials
Poets' Corner
St Margaret's, Westminster
Henry Yevele (architect)
Diocese of Westminster (1540–1550)
Westminster Abbey Muniments
Westminster Abbey Museum
Westminster School
Westminster Abbey Choir School
Dean's Yard
Jerusalem Chamber








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Benedictine abbeys and priories in medieval England and Wales



Independent
houses



Abergavenny
Abbotsbury
Abingdon
Alcester
Athelney
Bardney
Bath
Battle
Bedford
Birkenhead
Bradwell
Brewood (Black Ladies)
Buckfast
Burton
Bury St Edmunds
Canterbury (Christ Church)
Canterbury (St Augustine's)
Canwell
Cerne
Chertsey
Chester
Cholsey
Colchester
Coventry
Crowland
Durham
Ely
Evesham
Eynsham
Farewell Priory
Faversham
Glastonbury
Gloucester
Humberston
Luffield
Malmesbury
Milton
Monk Bretton
Muchelney
Molycourt
Norwich (Holy Trinity)
Pershore
Peterborough
Ramsey
Reading
Repton
Rochester
St Albans
St Benet of Hulme
Sandwell
Selby
Sherborne
Shrewsbury
Snelshall
Tavistock
Tewkesbury
Thorney
Upholland
Walden
Westminster
Whitby
Winchcombe
Winchester (New Minister)
Winchester (St Swithun)
Worcester
York (St Mary's)








Dependent
houses



Aldeby
Alkborough
Alcester
Alvecote
Beadlow
Bedemans Berg
Belvoir
Binham
Breedon
Brecon
Bristol
Bromfield
Cardiff
Cardigan
Cranborne
Darenth
Deeping
Dover
Dunster
Earls Colne
Ewenny
Ewyas Harold
Exeter
Farne
Felixstowe
Finchale
Freiston
Great Malvern
Hatfield Peverel
Henes (Sandtoft)
Hereford
Hertford
Holy Island
Horton
Hoxne
Hurley
Jarrow
Kidwelly
Kilpeck
King's Mead
Kings Lynn
Lammana
Langley
Leominster
Leonard Stanley
Lincoln
Little Malvern
Littlemore
Lytham
Middlesbrough
Monkwearmouth
Morville
Norwich (St Leonard's)
Oxford (of Canterbury)
Oxford (of Durham)
Oxford (of Gloucester)
Penwortham
Pilton
Redbourne
Richmond
Rumburgh
St Bees
St Ives
Scilly
Snaith
Snape
Stamford
Studley (Oxfordshire)
Studley (Warwickshire)
Sudbury
Tickhill
Tynemouth
Wallingford
Westbury-on-Trym
Wetheral
Wymondham
Yarmouth





Alien
priories



Allerton Mauleverer
Andover
Andwell
Appuldurcombe
Arundel
Astley
Aston Priors
Atherington
Avebury
Axmouth
Blyth
Boxgrove
Brimpsfield
Burstall
Burwell
Caldy
Carisbrooke
Chepstow
Clatford
Cogges
Corsham
Covenham
Cowick
Creeting (St. Mary)
Creeting (St. Olave)
Debden
Deerhurst
Dunwich
Ecclesfield
Edith Weston
Ellingham
Everdon
Eye
Folkestone
Frampton
Goldcliff
Grovebury
Hamble
Harmondsworth
Hatfield Regis
Haugham
Hayling
Headley
Hinckley
Holbeck
Horsham St Faith
Horsley
Lancaster
Lapley
Lewisham
Isleham
Livers Ocle
Llangennith
Llangua
Loders
Minster
Minster Lovell
Minting
Modbury
Monks Kirby
Monk Sherborne (Pamber)
Monmouth
Newent
Ogbourne St George
Otterton
Panfield
Pembroke
Pill
Ruislip
Runcton
St Cross
St Dogmells
St Michael's Mount
St Neots
Sele
Spalding
Sporle
Standon
Steventon
Stogursey
Stoke-by-Clare
Stratfield Saye
Swavesey
Takeley
Throwley
Tickford
Titley
Toft Monks
Totnes
Tutbury
Tywardreath
Upavon
Ware
Wareham
Warminghurst
Warmington
Wath
Weedon Beck
Weedon Lois
West Mersea
Wilsford
Wing
Winghale
Wolston
Wootton Wawen
York (Holy Trinity)












v
t
e


History of London



Evolution



Londinium
Lundenwic
City of London
City of Westminster
Middlesex
County of London
Greater London
Timeline








Periods



Roman London
Anglo-Saxon London
Norman and Medieval London
Tudor London
Stuart London
18th-century London
19th-century London
1900–39
The Blitz
1945–2000
21st century





Events



Peasants' Revolt
Black Death
Great Plague
Great Fire
1854 cholera outbreak
Great Stink
Great Exhibition
1908 Franco-British Exhibition
The Battle of Cable Street
Festival of Britain
Great Smog
Swinging London
London Plan
1966 FIFA World Cup Final
7/7 bombings
Olympic Games (1908
1948
2012)
2012 Summer Paralympics
Grenfell Tower fire





Government



Metropolitan Board of Works
London County Council
Greater London Council
Greater London Authority
London Assembly
Mayor of London
London independence





Services



Bow Street Runners
Metropolitan Police Service
London Ambulance Service
London Fire Brigade
Port of London Authority
London sewerage system
London Underground





City of London



City of London Corporation
Lord Mayor of the City of London
Wards of the City of London
Guildhall
Livery Companies
Lord Mayor's Show
City of London Police
Bank of England





Structures



St Paul's Cathedral
Tower of London
Palace of Whitehall
Westminster Hall
London Bridge
Tower Bridge
Westminster Abbey
Big Ben
The Monument
Fortifications








 Category












v
t
e


World Heritage Sites in the United Kingdom



England



Bath
Blenheim Palace
Canterbury Cathedral, St. Augustine's Abbey and St. Martin's Church
Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape
Derwent Valley Mills
Durham Castle and Cathedral
Frontiers of the Roman Empire

Hadrian's Wall


Ironbridge Gorge
Jurassic Coast
Kew Royal Botanic Gardens
Lake District
Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City
Maritime Greenwich
Saltaire
Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites
Studley Royal Park and Fountains Abbey
Tower of London
Westminster Palace, Westminster Abbey and St. Margaret's Church










Scotland



Edinburgh Old Town and New Town
Forth Bridge
Frontiers of the Roman Empire

Antonine Wall


Heart of Neolithic Orkney
New Lanark
St. Kilda





Wales



Blaenavon Industrial Landscape
Castles and Town Walls of King Edward I in Gwynedd
Pontcysyllte Aqueduct





Northern Ireland



Giant's Causeway





British Overseas Territories



Gorham's Cave Complex
Gough Island
Inaccessible Island
Henderson Island
Town of St. George and Related Fortifications












v
t
e


London landmarks



Buildings and
structures




Bridges



Albert Bridge
Blackfriars Bridge
Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges
Lambeth Bridge
London Bridge
Millennium Footbridge
Southwark Bridge
Tower Bridge
Vauxhall Bridge
Waterloo Bridge
Westminster Bridge





Entertainment
venues




Cinemas



Empire, Leicester Square
BFI IMAX
Odeon Leicester Square





Football stadia



Wembley Stadium (national stadium)
Craven Cottage (Fulham)
The Den (Millwall)
Emirates Stadium (Arsenal)
Loftus Road (Queens Park Rangers)
Olympic Stadium (West Ham United)
Selhurst Park (Crystal Palace)
Stamford Bridge (Chelsea)
The Valley (Charlton Athletic)
White Hart Lane (Tottenham Hotspur)





Other major
sports venues



All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
The Championship Course (rowing)
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
Lord's (cricket)
Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park
The Oval (cricket)
Twickenham Stadium (rugby)





Theatres



London Coliseum
London Palladium
The Old Vic
Royal National Theatre
Royal Opera House
Shakespeare's Globe
Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
Theatre Royal Haymarket





Other



Alexandra Palace
Brixton Academy
ExCeL
Hammersmith Apollo
O2 Arena
Royal Albert Hall
Royal Festival Hall
Wembley Arena








Government



10 Downing Street
Admiralty Arch
Bank of England
City Hall
County Hall
Guildhall
Horse Guards
Mansion House
National Archives
Old Bailey
Palace of Westminster
Royal Courts of Justice
Scotland Yard
SIS Building





Museums and
galleries



British Museum
Cutty Sark
Golden Hinde
HMS Belfast
Imperial War Museum
Madame Tussauds
Museum of London
National Gallery
National Maritime Museum
Natural History Museum
Royal Academy of Arts
Royal Observatory
Science Museum
Tate Britain
Tate Modern
Tower of London
Victoria and Albert Museum





Places of worship



All Hallows-by-the-Tower
BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir
Bevis Marks Synagogue
Methodist Central Hall
Regent's Park Mosque
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Mary-le-Bow
St Paul's Cathedral
Southwark Cathedral
Westminster Abbey
Westminster Cathedral





Retailing




Shops



Fortnum & Mason
Hamleys
Harrods
Liberty
Peter Jones
Selfridges





Shopping centres
and markets



Borough Market
Brent Cross
Burlington Arcade
Kensington Arcade
Leadenhall Market
The Mall Wood Green
One New Change
Petticoat Lane Market
Royal Exchange
Westfield London
Westfield Stratford City








Royal buildings




Partly occupied by
the Royal Family



Buckingham Palace
Clarence House
Kensington Palace
St James's Palace





Unoccupied



Banqueting House
Hampton Court Palace
Kew Palace
The Queen's Gallery
Royal Mews, Buckingham Palace








Skyscrapers



1 Canada Square
8 Canada Square
20 Fenchurch Street
30 St Mary Axe
125 London Wall
Broadgate Tower
BT Tower
Centre Point
Citigroup Centre
Heron Tower
Leadenhall Building
Lloyd's building
Millbank Tower
Senate House
The Shard
Shell Centre
St George Wharf Tower
Strata SE1
Tower 42





Structures



Albert Memorial
ArcelorMittal Orbit
Cleopatra's Needle
Crystal Palace transmitting station
London Eye
London Wall
Marble Arch
Monument to the Great Fire
Nelson's Column
Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain ("Eros")
Thames Barrier
Wellington Arch





Transport



City Airport
Heathrow Airport
Charing Cross station
Clapham Junction station
Euston station
King's Cross station
Liverpool Street station
London Bridge station
Paddington station
St Pancras station
Victoria station
Waterloo station
Emirates Air Line
Victoria Coach Station





Other



Barbican Estate
Battersea Power Station
British Library
Kew Gardens
Lambeth Palace
London Zoo
Oxo Tower
St Bartholomew's Hospital
Smithfield Market
Somerset House








Parks




Royal Parks



Bushy Park
Green Park
Greenwich Park
Hampton Court Park
Hyde Park
Kensington Gardens
Regent's Park
Richmond Park
St. James's Park





Other



Battersea Park
Burgess Park
Clapham Common
College Green
Epping Forest
Finsbury Park
Gunnersbury Park
Hampstead Heath
Holland Park
Mitcham Common
Osterley Park
Trent Park
Victoria Park
Wandsworth Common
Wimbledon Common








Squares and
public spaces



Covent Garden
Horse Guards Parade
Leicester Square
Oxford Circus
Parliament Square
Piccadilly Circus
Sloane Square
Trafalgar Square





Streets



Aldwych
Baker Street
Bishopsgate
Bond Street
Cannon Street
Carnaby Street
Chancery Lane
Charing Cross Road
Cheapside
Cornhill
Denmark Street
Fenchurch Street
Fleet Street
Haymarket
Jermyn Street
Kensington High Street
King's Road
Lombard Street
The Mall
Oxford Street
Park Lane
Piccadilly
Portobello Road
Regent Street
Shaftesbury Avenue
Sloane Street
Strand
Threadneedle Street
Tottenham Court Road
Victoria Embankment
Whitehall






Buildings and structures under construction shown in italics










v
t
e


The Westminster Assembly



Documents



Westminster Confession of Faith
Westminster Larger Catechism
Westminster Shorter Catechism
Directory for Public Worship
Form of Presbyterial Church Government





People



John Arrowsmith
Simeon Ashe
Robert Baillie
Thomas Baylie
Robert Blair
Samuel Bolton
John Bond
William Bridge
Ralph Brownrigg
Anthony Burges
Cornelius Burges
Jeremiah Burroughs
Adoniram Byfield
Richard Byfield
Edmund Calamy
Archibald Campbell
John Campbell
Richard Capel
Joseph Caryl
Thomas Case
Daniel Cawdry
William Cecil
Francis Cheynell
John Clotworthy
Thomas Coleman
John Conant
Edward Conway
John Cook
Edward Corbet
Robert Crosse
Robert Devereux
Robert Douglas
Calybute Downing
John Dury
John Earle
John Elphinstone
Daniel Featley
Basil Feilding
Nathaniel Fiennes
William Fiennes
Thomas Ford
Thomas Gataker
George Gillespie
John Glynne
Thomas Goodwin
William Gouge
William Greenhill
William Grey
John Hacket
Matthew Hale
Henry Hammond
Robert Harley
John Harris
Robert Harris
Arthur Haselrig
Alexander Henderson
Philip Herbert
Charles Herle
Thomas Hill
Richard Holdsworth
Edward Howard
Joshua Hoyle
Archibald Johnston
John Ley
John Lightfoot
Richard Love
William Lyford
John Maitland
Stephen Marshall
John Maynard
William Mew
Edward Montagu
George Morley
Matthew Newcomen
William Nicholson
Philip Nye
Herbert Palmer
Algernon Percy
Andrew Perne
William Pierrepont
John Pym
Edward Reynolds
Robert Reynolds
Henry Rich
Francis Rous
Benjamin Rudyerd
Samuel Rutherford
Robert Sanderson
Henry Scudder
Lazarus Seaman
Obadiah Sedgwick
John Selden
Josias Shute
Sidrach Simpson
William Spurstowe
Edmund Staunton
Peter Sterry
Oliver St John (1580–1646)
Oliver St John (1598–1673)
William Strode
William Strong
Zouch Tate
Henry Tozer
Anthony Tuckney
William Twisse
Henry Vane the Elder
Henry Vane the Younger
Richard Vines
George Walker
Samuel Ward
Thomas Westfield
Philip Wharton
Jeremiah Whitaker
John White
Bulstrode Whitelocke
John Wilde
Henry Wilkinson
Walter Yonge
Thomas Young








Westminster Abbey
Jerusalem Chamber












v
t
e


Churches in the City of Westminster



Ancient parish churches (pre-1800)



St Anne, Soho
St Clement Danes
St George, Hanover Square
St James, Piccadilly
St Margaret, Westminster
St Martin-in-the-Fields
St Marylebone
St Mary le Strand
St Paul, Covent Garden




Deconsecrated



St John the Evangelist, Smith Square








Anglican daughter churches



All Saints, Margaret Street
All Souls, Langham Place
Annunciation, Marble Arch
Grosvenor Chapel, Mayfair
Guards Chapel, Wellington Barracks
Holy Trinity, Marylebone
Holy Trinity, South Kensington
St Augustine, Kilburn
St Cyprian, Clarence Gate
St Gabriel, Warwick Square
St James, Paddington
St James the Less, Pimlico
St John's Wood Church
St Mark, Hamilton Terrace
St Mary, Bourne Street
St Mary, Bryanston Square
St Mary, Paddington Green
St Mary Magdalene, Paddington
St Matthew, Bayswater
St Matthew, Westminster
St Paul, Knightsbridge
St Peter, Vere Street
St Peter, Eaton Square
St Saviour, Pimlico
St Stephen, Rochester Row
St Stephen, Westbourne Park




Deconsecrated



Christ Church, Cosway Street








Royal Peculiars



Henry VII Chapel
Queen's Chapel, St James's Palace
Savoy Chapel
St Mary Undercroft
Westminster Abbey





Roman Catholic churches



Immaculate Conception, Farm Street
Notre Dame de France
Our Lady of the Assumption and St Gregory, Westminster
St Charles Borromeo, Westminster
St James, Spanish Place
St Mary of the Angels, Bayswater
St Patrick, Soho
Westminster Cathedral





Other denominations



Crown Court Church, Covent Garden
Dormition Cathedral
Emmanuel Evangelical Church
Enon Chapel
French Protestant Church, Soho
Hinde Street Methodist Church
One Mayfair Church
Regent Hall
St John's Wood Road Baptist Church
St Sophia's Cathedral, Bayswater
Ukrainian Catholic Cathedral of the Holy Family in Exile, Mayfair
Ulrika Eleonora
Welsh Church of Central London
West London Methodist Mission
West Street Chapel
Methodist Central Hall
Westminster Chapel





See also



Fitzrovia Chapel









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 132460849
LCCN: n80008753
ISNI: 0000 0001 2308 3054
GND: 4206437-5
SUDOC: 032533187
BNF: cb12354524b (data)
ULAN: 500302052











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Westminster_Abbey&oldid=817985226"					Categories: Westminster AbbeyChurches completed in 1745Christian monasteries established in the 10th centuryChurch of England churches in the City of WestminsterCollegiate churches in EnglandCoronation church buildingsEnglish Gothic architecture in Greater LondonFormer cathedrals in EnglandGothic architecture in EnglandGrade I listed churches in the City of WestminsterNicholas Hawksmoor buildingsMonasteries in LondonReligion in the City of WestminsterRoyal PeculiarsTourist attractions in the City of WestminsterWorld Heritage Sites in London13th-century architecture in the United KingdomEdward Blore buildingsBurial sites of the House of StuartCathedrals in London1745 establishments in EnglandBurial sites of the House of HanoverHidden categories: Use dmy dates from October 2017EngvarB from August 2014Coordinates on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2010Spoken articlesArticles with hAudio microformatsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiers