





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Time in Africa


   
UTC−01:00
Cape Verde Time


   
UTC±00:00
Greenwich Mean Time


   
UTC±00:00
UTC+01:00
Greenwich Mean Time
Moroccan Summer Time


   
UTC+01:00
West Africa Time /
Central European Time


   
UTC+02:00
Central Africa Time /
South African Standard Time /
Eastern European Time


   
UTC+03:00
East Africa Time


   
UTC+04:00
Mauritius Time / Seychelles Time


Light colors indicate where standard time is observed all year; dark colors indicate where daylight savings is observed.

Note: The islands of Cape Verde are to the west of the African mainland.


West Africa Time, or WAT, is a time zone used in west-central Africa; with countries west of Benin instead using Greenwich Mean Time (GMT; equivalent to UTC with no offset). West Africa Time is one hour ahead of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC+01), which makes it the same as Central European Time (CET) during winter, or Western European Summer Time (WEST) and British Summer Time (BST) during the summer.
As most of this time zone is in the equatorial and tropical region, there is little change in day length throughout the year, so daylight saving time is not observed.
West Africa Time is used by the following countries:

 Algeria (as Central European Time)
 Angola
 Chad
 Cameroon
 Central African Republic
 Democratic Republic of the Congo (western side only)
 Equatorial Guinea
 Gabon
 Niger
 Nigeria
 Republic of the Congo
 Tunisia (as Central European Time)

References[edit]






This standards- or measurement-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=West_Africa_Time&oldid=808568201"					Categories: African cultureTime zonesTime in AfricaStandards and measurement stubsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2015All articles needing additional referencesAll stub articles