





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Computer network types
by spatial scope




Nanoscale
Near-field (NFC)
Body (BAN)
Personal (PAN)
Near-me (NAN)
Local (LAN)

Home (HAN)
Storage (SAN)
Wireless (WLAN)


Campus (CAN)
Backbone
Metropolitan (MAN)
Wide (WAN)
Cloud (IAN)
Internet
Interplanetary Internet







v
t
e





A wide area network (WAN) is a telecommunications network or computer network that extends over a large geographical distance. Wide area networks are often established with leased telecommunication circuits.[1]
Business, education and government entities use wide area networks to relay data to staff, students, clients, buyers, and suppliers from various locations across the world. In essence, this mode of telecommunication allows a business to effectively carry out its daily function regardless of location. The Internet may be considered a WAN.[2]
Related terms for other types of networks are personal area networks (PANs), local area networks (LANs), campus area networks (CANs), or metropolitan area networks (MANs) which are usually limited to a room, building, campus or specific metropolitan area respectively.



Contents


1 Design options
2 Connection technology
3 List of WAN types
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Design options[edit]
The textbook definition of a WAN is a computer network spanning regions, countries, or even the world.[3] However, in terms of the application of computer networking protocols and concepts, it may be best to view WANs as computer networking technologies used to transmit data over long distances, and between different LANs, MANs and other localised computer networking architectures. This distinction stems from the fact that common LAN technologies operating at lower layers of the OSI model (such as the forms of Ethernet or Wi-Fi) are often designed for physically proximal networks, and thus cannot transmit data over tens, hundreds or even thousands of miles or kilometres.
WANs do not just necessarily connect physically disparate LANs. A CAN, for example, may have a localized backbone of a WAN technology, which connects different LANs within a campus. This could be to facilitate higher bandwidth applications or provide better functionality for users in the CAN.
WANs are used to connect LANs and other types of networks together so that users and computers in one location can communicate with users and computers in other locations. Many WANs are built for one particular organization and are private. Others, built by Internet service providers, provide connections from an organization's LAN to the Internet. WANs are often built using leased lines. At each end of the leased line, a router connects the LAN on one side with a second router within the LAN on the other. Leased lines can be very expensive. Instead of using leased lines, WANs can also be built using less costly circuit switching or packet switching methods. Network protocols including TCP/IP deliver transport and addressing functions. Protocols including Packet over SONET/SDH, Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS), Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) and Frame Relay are often used by service providers to deliver the links that are used in WANs. X.25 was an important early WAN protocol, and is often considered to be the "grandfather" of Frame Relay as many of the underlying protocols and functions of X.25 are still in use today (with upgrades) by Frame Relay.
Academic research into wide area networks can be broken down into three areas: mathematical models, network emulation and network simulation.
Performance improvements are sometimes delivered via wide area file services or WAN optimization.
Connection technology[edit]
Many technologies are available for wide area network links. Examples include circuit switched telephone lines, radio wave transmission, and optic fiber. New developments in technologies have successively increased transmission rates. In ca. 1960, a 110 bit/s (bits per second) line was normal on the edge of the WAN, while core links of 56 kbit/s to 64 kbit/s were considered fast. As of 2014, households are connected to the Internet with Dial-Up, ADSL, Cable, Wimax, 4G or fiber. The speeds that people can currently use range from 28.8 Kilobits per second through a 28K modem over a telephone connection to speeds as high as 100 Gigabits per second over an Ethernet 100GBaseY connection.
AT&T plans to start conducting trials in the year 2017 for businesses to use 400 Gigabit Ethernet.[4] Researchers Robert Maher, Alex Alvarado, Domaniç Lavery & Polina Bayvel of University College London were able to increase networking speeds to 1.125 Terabits per second.[5] Christos Santis, graduate student Scott Steger, Amnon Yariv, Martin and Eileen Summerfield developed a new laser that quadruples transfer speeds over fiber optic cabling.[6] If these two technologies were combined, then a transfer speed of up to 4.5 Terabits per second could potentially be achieved, although it is unlikely that this will be commercially implemented in the near future.
List of WAN types[edit]

ATM
Cable modem
Dial-up
DSL
Frame relay
ISDN
Leased line
SONET
X.25
SD-WAN

See also[edit]


Computer networking portal
Computer Science portal




Metropolitan area network (MAN)
Storage area network (SAN)
Internet area network (IAN)
ISDN
Packet switching
Cell switching
Label Switching
X.25
Frame Relay
Asynchronous Transfer Mode
SONET/SDH
Wireless wide area network
Low Power Wide Area Network (LPWAN)
Wide area file services
Wide area application services


References[edit]



^ "A WAN Is a Wide Area Network. Here's How They Work". Lifewire. Retrieved 2017-04-21. 
^ Groth, David and Skandler, Toby (2005). Network+ Study Guide, Fourth Edition. Sybex, Inc. ISBN 0-7821-4406-3. 
^ Forouzan, Behrouz. Data Communications and Networking. McGraw-Hill. p. 14. ISBN 9780073376226. 
^ "AT&T Aims to Quadruple Network Speeds for Businesses with 400 Gigabit Ethernet Data Trials for More Bandwidth and Faster Video Streaming". www.prnewswire.com. October 28, 2016. 
^ Maher, Robert; Alvarado, Alex; Lavery, Domaniç; Bayvel, Polina (11 February 2016). "Increasing the information rates of optical communications via coded modulation: a study of transceiver performance". Scientific Reports. 6 (1). doi:10.1038/srep21278. PMC 4750034 . PMID 26864633. 
^ "A New Laser for a Faster Internet - Caltech". 




"What is WAN (wide area network)? - Definition from WhatIs.com". SearchEnterpriseWAN. Retrieved 2017-04-21. 

External links[edit]

Cisco - Introduction to WAN Technologies







v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal









Authority control



GND: 4294149-0











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wide_area_network&oldid=816622395"					Categories: Wide area networksTelecommunicationsComputingData transmissionHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2015All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers