For other uses, see Willow (disambiguation).
"Willow tree" redirects here. For Willow tree figurines, see Willow Tree (figurines).
"Salix" redirects here. For other uses, see Salix (disambiguation).


Willow





Salix alba 'Vitellina-Tristis'
Morton Arboretum acc. 58-95*1


Scientific classification


Kingdom:
Plantae


(unranked):
Angiosperms


(unranked):
Eudicots


(unranked):
Rosids


Order:
Malpighiales


Family:
Salicaceae


Tribe:
Saliceae[1]


Genus:
Salix
L.


Type species


Salix alba L.


Species



About 400.[2]
See List of Salix species



Willows, also called sallows, and osiers, form the genus Salix, around 400 species[2] of deciduous trees and shrubs, found primarily on moist soils in cold and temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere. Most species are known as willow, but some narrow-leaved shrub species are called osier, and some broader-leaved species are referred to as sallow (from Old English sealh, related to the Latin word salix, willow). Some willows (particularly arctic and alpine species) are low-growing or creeping shrubs; for example, the dwarf willow (Salix herbacea) rarely exceeds 6 cm (2.4 in) in height, though it spreads widely across the ground.



Contents


1 Description

1.1 Flowers


2 Cultivation
3 Hybrids
4 Ecological issues
5 Pests and diseases
6 Uses

6.1 Medicine
6.2 Manufacturing
6.3 Other


7 Culture
8 Selected species
9 See also
10 References
11 Bibliography
12 External links



Description[edit]




At the base of the petiole a pair of stipules form. These may fall in spring, or last for much of the summer or even for more than one year (marcescence).


Willows all have abundant watery bark sap, which is heavily charged with salicylic acid, soft, usually pliant, tough wood, slender branches, and large, fibrous, often stoloniferous roots. The roots are remarkable for their toughness, size, and tenacity to live, and roots readily sprout from aerial parts of the plant.
The leaves are typically elongated, but may also be round to oval, frequently with serrated edges. Most species are deciduous; semievergreen willows with coriaceous leaves are rare, e.g. Salix micans and S. australior in the eastern Mediterranean. All the buds are lateral; no absolutely terminal bud is ever formed. The buds are covered by a single scale. Usually, the bud scale is fused into a cap-like shape, but in some species it wraps around and the edges overlap.[3] The leaves are simple, feather-veined, and typically linear-lanceolate. Usually they are serrate, rounded at base, acute or acuminate. The leaf petioles are short, the stipules often very conspicuous, resembling tiny, round leaves, and sometimes remaining for half the summer. On some species, however, they are small, inconspicuous, and caducous (soon falling). In color, the leaves show a great variety of greens, ranging from yellowish to bluish color.
Flowers[edit]




Young male catkin


Willows are dioecious, with male and female flowers appearing as catkins on separate plants; the catkins are produced early in the spring, often before the leaves.
The staminate (male) flowers are without either calyx or corolla; they consist simply of stamens, varying in number from two to 10, accompanied by a nectariferous gland and inserted on the base of a scale which is itself borne on the rachis of a drooping raceme called a catkin, or ament. This scale is square, entire, and very hairy. The anthers are rose-colored in the bud, but orange or purple after the flower opens; they are two-celled and the cells open longitudinally. The filaments are threadlike, usually pale brown, and often bald.
The pistillate (female) flowers are also without calyx or corolla, and consist of a single ovary accompanied by a small, flat nectar gland and inserted on the base of a scale which is likewise borne on the rachis of a catkin. The ovary is one-celled, the style two-lobed, and the ovules numerous.
Cultivation[edit]
Almost all willows take root very readily from cuttings or where broken branches lie on the ground. The few exceptions include the goat willow (Salix caprea) and peachleaf willow (Salix amygdaloides). One famous example of such growth from cuttings involves the poet Alexander Pope, who begged a twig from a parcel tied with twigs sent from Spain to Lady Suffolk. This twig was planted and throve, and legend has it that all of England's weeping willows are descended from this first one.[4][5]
Willows are often planted on the borders of streams so their interlacing roots may protect the bank against the action of the water. Frequently, the roots are much larger than the stem which grows from them.
Hybrids[edit]
Willows are very cross-compatible, and numerous hybrids occur, both naturally and in cultivation. A well-known ornamental example is the weeping willow (Salix × sepulcralis), which is a hybrid of Peking willow (Salix babylonica) from China and white willow (Salix alba) from Europe.




A Weeping Willow, an example of a hybrid between two types of willow


The hybrid cultivar 'Boydii' has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit.[6]
Ecological issues[edit]




Knotted willow and woodpile in the Bourgoyen-Ossemeersen, Ghent, Belgium


Willows are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species, such as the mourning cloak butterfly.[7] Ants, such as wood ants, are common on willows inhabited by aphids, coming to collect aphid honeydew, as sometimes do wasps.
A small number of willow species were widely planted in Australia, notably as erosion-control measures along watercourses. They are now regarded as invasive weeds which occupy extensive areas across southern Australia and are considered 'Weeds of National Significance'. Many catchment management authorities are removing and replacing them with native trees.[8][9].
Substantial research undertaken from 2006 has identified that willows often inhabit an unoccupied niche when they spread across the bed of shallow creeks and streams and if removed, there is a potential water saving of up to 500 mm/per year per hectare of willow canopy area, depending on willow species and climate zone. This water could benefit the environment or provision of local water resources, especially during dry periods.[10].[11][12]. To aid management of willows, a remote sensing method has been developed to accurately map willow area along and in streams across southern Australia.[13]
Willow roots spread widely and are very aggressive in seeking out moisture; for this reason, they can become problematic when planted in residential areas, where the roots are notorious for clogging French drains, drainage systems, weeping tiles, septic systems, storm drains, and sewer systems, particularly older, tile, concrete, or ceramic pipes. Newer, PVC sewer pipes are much less leaky at the joints, and are therefore less susceptible to problems from willow roots; the same is true of water supply piping.[14][15]
Pests and diseases[edit]
Willow species are hosts to more than a hundred aphid species, belonging to Chaitophorus and other genera,[16] forming large colonies to feed on plant juices, on the underside of leaves in particular.[17] Corythucha elegans, the willow lace bug, is a bug species in the family Tingidae found on willows in North America.
Rust, caused by fungi of genus Melampsora, is known to damage leaves of willows, covering them with orange spots.[18]
Uses[edit]
Medicine[edit]
The leaves and bark of the willow tree have been mentioned in ancient texts from Assyria, Sumer and Egypt[19] as a remedy for aches and fever,[20] and in Ancient Greece the physician Hippocrates wrote about its medicinal properties in the fifth century BC. Native Americans across the Americas relied on it as a staple of their medical treatments. It provides temporary pain relief. Salicin is metabolized into salicylic acid in the human body, and is a precursor of aspirin.[21] In 1763, its medicinal properties were observed by the Reverend Edward Stone in England. He notified the Royal Society, which published his findings. The active extract of the bark, called salicin, was isolated to its crystalline form in 1828 by Henri Leroux, a French pharmacist, and Raffaele Piria, an Italian chemist, who then succeeded in separating out the compound in its pure state. In 1897, Felix Hoffmann created a synthetically altered version of salicin (in his case derived from the Spiraea plant), which caused less digestive upset than pure salicylic acid. The new drug, formally acetylsalicylic acid, was named Aspirin by Hoffmann's employer Bayer AG. This gave rise to the hugely important class of drugs known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Manufacturing[edit]
Some of humans' earliest manufactured items may have been made from willow. A fishing net made from willow dates back to 8300 BC.[22] Basic crafts, such as baskets, fish traps, wattle fences and wattle and daub house walls, were often woven from osiers or withies (rod-like willow shoots, often grown in coppices). One of the forms of Welsh coracle boat traditionally uses willow in the framework. Thin or split willow rods can be woven into wicker, which also has a long history. The relatively pliable willow is less likely to split while being woven than many other woods, and can be bent around sharp corners in basketry. Willow wood is also used in the manufacture of boxes, brooms, cricket bats, cradle boards, chairs and other furniture, dolls, flutes, poles, sweat lodges, toys, turnery, tool handles, veneer, wands and whistles. In addition, tannin, fibre, paper, rope and string can be produced from the wood. Willow is also used in the manufacture of double basses for backs, sides and linings, and in making splines and blocks for bass repair.
Other[edit]




Male catkin of Salix cinerea with bee






Willow tree in spring, England






Willow tree with woodbine honeysuckle






The willow tree as seen as the main part of an heraldic escutcheon over the main portal of a patrician house belonging to the Salis family in Chur, Switzerland, circa 1750






Environmental art installation "Sandworm" in the Wenduine Dunes, Belgium, made entirely out of willow



Agriculture: Willows produce a modest amount of nectar from which bees can make honey, and are especially valued as a source of early pollen for bees. Poor people at one time often ate willow catkins that had been cooked to form a mash.[23]
Art: Willow is used to make charcoal (for drawing) and in living sculptures. Living sculptures are created from live willow rods planted in the ground and woven into shapes such as domes and tunnels. Willow stems are used to weave baskets and three-dimensional sculptures, such as animals and figures. Willow stems are also used to create garden features, such as decorative panels and obelisks.
Energy: Willow is grown for biomass or biofuel, in energy forestry systems, as a consequence of its high energy in-energy out ratio, large carbon mitigation potential and fast growth.[24] Large-scale projects to support willow as an energy crop are already at commercial scale in Sweden.[25] Programs in other countries are being developed through initiatives such as the Willow Biomass Project in the US, and the Energy Coppice Project in the UK.[26] Willow may also be grown to produce charcoal.
Environment: As a plant, willow is used for biofiltration, constructed wetlands, ecological wastewater treatment systems, hedges, land reclamation, landscaping, phytoremediation, streambank stabilisation (bioengineering), slope stabilisation, soil erosion control, shelterbelt and windbreak, soil building, soil reclamation, tree bog compost toilet, and wildlife habitat.
Religion: Willow is one of the "Four Species" used ritually during the Jewish holiday of Sukkot. In Buddhism, a willow branch is one of the chief attributes of Kwan Yin, the bodhisattva of compassion. Christian churches in northwestern Europe and Ukraine and Bulgaria[27][better source needed] often used willow branches in place of palms in the ceremonies on Palm Sunday.[28]

Culture[edit]
The willow is one of the four species associated with the Jewish festival of Sukkot. Willow branches are also used during the synagogue service on Hoshana Rabbah, the seventh day of Sukkot.
In China, some people carry willow branches with them on the day of their Tomb Sweeping or Qingming Festival. Willow branches are also put up on gates and/or front doors, which they believe help ward off the evil spirits that wander on Qingming. Legend states that on Qingming Festival, the ruler of the underworld allows the spirits of the dead to return to earth. Since their presence may not always be welcome, willow branches keep them away.[29] In traditional pictures of the Goddess of Mercy Guanyin, she is often shown seated on a rock with a willow branch in a vase of water at her side. The Goddess employs this mysterious water and the branch for putting demons to flight. Taoist witches also use a small carving made from willow wood for communicating with the spirits of the dead. The image is sent to the nether world, where the disembodied spirit is deemed to enter it, and give the desired information to surviving relatives on its return.[30] The willow is a famous subject in many East Asian nations' cultures, particularly in pen and ink paintings from China and Japan.
A gisaeng (Korean geisha) named Hongrang, who lived in the middle of the Joseon Dynasty, wrote the poem "By the willow in the rain in the evening", which she gave to her parting lover (Choi Gyeong-chang).[31] Hongrang wrote:

"...I will be the willow on your bedside."

In Japanese tradition, the willow is associated with ghosts. It is popularly supposed that a ghost will appear where a willow grows. Willow trees are also quite prevalent in folklore and myths.[32][33]
In English folklore, a willow tree is believed to be quite sinister, capable of uprooting itself and stalking travellers. The Viminal Hill, one of the Seven Hills Of Rome, derives its name from the Latin word for osier, viminia (pl.).
Hans Christian Andersen wrote a story called "Under the Willow Tree" (1853) in which children ask questions of a tree they call "willow-father", paired with another entity called "elder-mother".[34]
"Green Willow" is a Japanese ghost story in which a young samurai falls in love with a woman called Green Willow who has a close spiritual connection with a willow tree.[35] "The Willow Wife" is another, not dissimilar tale.[36] "Wisdom of the Willow Tree" is an Osage Nation story in which a young man seeks answers from a willow tree, addressing the tree in conversation as 'Grandfather'.[37]
The Whomping Willow is featured throughout the Harry Potter series, most notably as a guardian for a backdoor entrance to the Shrieking Shack. This is especially important in the third and seventh installments of the series, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows respectively.
In Central Europe a "hollow willow" is a common figure of speech, alluding to a person one can confide secrets in. The metaphor was used e.g. in the poem Král Lávra (King Lear) by Czech poet Karel Havlíček Borovský (1854).
Willow is considere the national tree of Ukraine.
Selected species[edit]
Main article: List of Salix species
The genus Salix is made up of around 400 species[2] of deciduous trees and shrubs:


Salix acutifolia Willd. – long-leaved violet willow
Salix alaxensis (Andersson) Coville
Salix alba L. – white willow
Salix amygdaloides Andersson – peachleaf willow
Salix arbuscula L.
Salix arbusculoides – littletree willow
Salix arctica Pall. – Arctic willow
Salix arizonica Dorn
Salix atrocinerea Brot. – grey willow
Salix aurita L. – eared willow
Salix babylonica L. – Babylon willow, Peking willow or weeping willow
Salix bakko
Salix barclayi Andersson
Salix barrattiana – Barratt's willow
Salix bebbiana Sarg. – beaked willow, long-beaked willow, and Bebb's willow
Salix bicolor
Salix bonplandiana Kunth – Bonpland willow
Salix boothii Dorn – Booth's willow
Salix brachycarpa Nutt.
Salix breweri Bebb – Brewer's willow
Salix canariensis Chr. Sm.
Salix candida Flüggé ex Willd. – sageleaf willow
Salix caprea L. – goat willow, or pussy willow
Salix caroliniana Michx. – coastal plain willow
Salix chaenomeloides Kimura
Salix cinerea L. – grey willow
Salix cordata Michx. – sand dune willow, furry willow, or heartleaf willow
Salix delnortensis C.K.Schneid. – Del Norte willow
Salix discolor Muhl. – American willow
Salix drummondiana Barratt ex Hook. – Drummond's willow
Salix eastwoodiae Cockerell ex A.Heller – Eastwood's willow, mountain willow, or Sierra willow
Salix eleagnos Scop. - olive willow
Salix eriocarpa
Salix exigua Nutt. – sandbar willow, narrowleaf willow, or coyote willow
Salix floridana
Salix fragilis L. – crack willow
Salix fuscescens - Alaska bog willow
Salix futura
Salix geyeriana Andersson – Geyer's willow
Salix gilgiana Seemen
Salix glauca L.
Salix glaucosericea
Salix gooddingii C. R. Ball – Goodding's willow, or Goodding's black willow
Salix gracilistyla Miq.
Salix hastata L.
Salix herbacea L. – dwarf willow, least willow or snowbed willow
Salix hookeriana Barratt ex Hook. – dune willow, coastal willow, or Hooker's willow
Salix hultenii
Salix humboldtiana Willd.
Salix integra Thunb.
Salix interior
Salix japonica Thunb.
Salix jepsonii C.K.Schneid. – Jepson's willow
Salix jessoensis Seemen
Salix koriyanagi Kimura ex Goerz
Salix kusanoi
Salix laevigata Bebb – red willow or polished willow
Salix lanata L. – woolly willow
Salix lapponum L. - downy willow
Salix lasiolepis Benth. – arroyo willow
Salix lemmonii Bebb – Lemmon's willow
Salix libani – Lebanese willow
Salix ligulifolia C.R.Ball – strapleaf willow
Salix lucida Muhl. – shining willow, Pacific willow, or whiplash willow
Salix lutea Nutt. – yellow willow
Salix magnifica Hemsl.
Salix matsudana Koidz. – Chinese willow or twisted willow, variant Corkscrew
Salix melanopsis Nutt. – dusky willow
Salix miyabeana Seemen
Salix monticola
Salix mucronata - Cape silver willow
Salix microphylla Schltdl. & Cham.
Salix myrsinifolia Salisb.
Salix myrtillifolia
Salix myrtilloides L. – swamp willow
Salix nakamurana
Salix nigra Marshall – black willow
Salix orestera C.K.Schneid. – Sierra willow or gray-leafed Sierra willow
Salix paradoxa Kunth
Salix pentandra L. – bay willow
Salix phylicifolia L.
Salix pierotii – Korean willow[38]
Salix planifolia Pursh. – diamondleaf willow or tea-leafed willow
Salix polaris Wahlenb. – polar willow
Salix prolixa Andersson – MacKenzie's willow
Salix pulchra
Salix purpurea L. – purple willow or purple osier
Salix reinii
Salix reticulata L. – net-veined willow
Salix retusa
Salix richardsonii
Salix rorida Lacksch.
Salix rupifraga
Salix schwerinii E. L. Wolf
Salix scouleriana Barratt ex Hook. – Scouler's willow
Salix sepulcralis group – hybrid willows
Salix sericea Marshall – silky willow
Salix serissaefolia
Salix serissima (L. H. Bailey) Fernald — autumn willow or fall willow
Salix serpyllifolia
Salix sessilifolia Nutt. – northwest sandbar willow
Salix shiraii
Salix sieboldiana
Salix sitchensis C. A. Sanson ex Bong. – Sitka willow
Salix subfragilis
Salix subopposita Miq.
Salix taraikensis
Salix tarraconensis
Salix taxifolia Kunth – yew-leaf willow
Salix tetrasperma Roxb. – Indian willow
Salix triandra L. – almond willow or almond-leaved willow
Salix udensis Trautv. & C. A. Mey.
Salix viminalis L. – common osier
Salix vulpina Andersson
Salix yezoalpina Koidz.
Salix yoshinoi


See also[edit]


Trees portal





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Salix.





Wikispecies has information related to Salix



Aravah, the Hebrew name of the willow, for its ritual use during the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles;
List of Lepidoptera that feed on willows
Rhabdophaga rosaria, a willow gall;
Willow Biomass Project;
Willow water, using the biological rooting hormones indolebutyric acid and salicylic acid from willow branches to stimulate root growth in new cuttings;
Sail ogham letter meaning willow.

References[edit]


^ "Genus Salix (willows)". Taxonomy. UniProt. Archived from the original on 2013-09-05. Retrieved 2010-02-04. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ a b c Mabberley, D.J. 1997. The Plant Book, Cambridge University Press #2: Cambridge.
^ George W. Argus. The Genus Salix (Salicaceae) in the Southeastern United States. Systematic Botany Monographs. 9. JSTOR 25027618. 
^ Leland, John (2005) Aliens in the Backyard: Plant and Animal Imports into America, p. 70. Univ of South Carolina Press. At Google Books. Retrieved 11 August 2013.
^ Laird, Mark (1999) The Flowering of the Landscape Garden: English Pleasure Grounds, 1720-1800, p. 403. University of Pennsylvania Press At Google Books. Retrieved 11 August 2013.
^ "RHS Plant Selector - Salix 'Boydii'". Retrieved 2 June 2013. 
^ "Mourning Cloak". Study of Northern Virginia Ecology. Fairfax County Public Schools.
^ Albury/Wodonga Willow Management Working Group (December 1998). "Willows along watercourses: managing, removing and replacing". Department of Primary Industries, State Government of Victoria. 
^ Cremer, Kurt W. (2003). "Introduced willows can become invasive pests in Australia" (PDF). 
^ Doody, Tanya; Benyon, Richard (2011). "Quantifying water savings from willow removal in Australian streams". Journal of Environmental Management. 92: 926–935. doi:10.1016/j/jenvman.2010.10.061 (inactive 2017-11-27). 
^ Doody, Tanya; Nagler, Pamela; Glenn, Edward; Moore, Georgianne; Morino, Kiyomi; Hultine, Kevin; Benyon, Richard (2011). "Potential for water salvage by removal of non-native woody vegetation from dryland river systems". Hydrological Processes. 25 (26): 4117–4131. Bibcode:2011HyPr...25.4117D. doi:10.1002/hyp.8395. 
^ Doody, Tanya; Benyon, Richard; Theiveyanathan, S; Koul, Vijay; Stewart, Leroy (2013). "Development of pan coefficients for estimating evapotranspiration from woody vegetation". Hydrological Processes. 28 (4): 2129–2149. Bibcode:2014HyPr...28.2129D. doi:10.1002/hyp.9753. 
^ Doody, Tanya; Lewis, Megan; Benyon, Richard; Byrne, Guy (2013). "A method to map riparian exotic vegetation (Salix spp.) area to inform water resource management". Hydrological Processes. 28 (11): 3809–3823. Bibcode:2014HyPr...28.3809D. doi:10.1002/hyp.9916. 
^ Salix spp. UFL/edu, Weeping Willow Fact Sheet ST-576, Edward F. Gilman and Dennis G. Watson, United States Forest Service
^ "Rooting Around: Tree Roots", Dave Hanson, Yard & Garden Line News Volume 5 Number 15, University of Minnesota Extension, October 1, 2003
^ Blackman, R. L.; Eastop, V. F. (1994). Aphids on the World's Trees. CABI. ISBN 9780851988771. 
^ David V. Alford (2012). Pests of Ornamental Trees, Shrubs and Flowers. p. 78. ISBN 9781840761627. 
^ Kenaley, Shawn C.; et al. (2010). "Leaf Rust" (PDF). 
^ James Breasted (English translation). "The Edwin Smith Papyrus". Retrieved 2007-06-09. 
^ "An aspirin a day keeps the doctor at bay: The world's first blockbuster drug is a hundred years old this week". Retrieved 2007-06-09. 
^ W. Hale White. "Materia Medica Pharmacy, Pharmacology and Therapeutics". Retrieved 2011-04-02. 
^ The palaeoenvironment of the Antrea Net Find The Department of Geography, University of Helsinki
^ Hageneder, Fred (2001). The Heritage of Trees. Edinburgh : Floris. ISBN 0-86315-359-3. p.172
^ Aylott, Matthew J.; Casella, E; Tubby, I; Street, NR; Smith, P; Taylor, G (2008). "Yield and spatial supply of bioenergy poplar and willow short-rotation coppice in the UK" (PDF). New Phytologist. 178 (2): 358–370. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02396.x. PMID 18331429. Retrieved 2008-10-22. 
^ Mola-Yudego, Blas; Aronsson, Pär. (2008). "Yield models for commercial willow biomass plantations in Sweden" (PDF). Biomass and Bioenergy. 32 (9): 829–837. doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2008.01.002. Retrieved 2009-11-20. 
^ "Forestresearch.gov.uk". Forestresearch.gov.uk. Retrieved 2011-12-18. 
^ "Customs". 
^ "ChurchYear.net". ChurchYear.net. Retrieved 2011-12-18. 
^ Doolittle, Justus (2002) [1876]. Social Life of the Chinese. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7103-0753-8. 
^ Doré S.J., Henry; Kennelly, S.J. (Translator), M. (1914). Researches into Chinese Superstitions. Tusewei Press, Shanghai.  Vol I p. 2
^ "The Forest of Willows in Our Minds". Arirang TV. August 20, 2007. Retrieved September 10, 2007. 
^ "In Worship of Trees by George Knowles: Willow". 
^ "Mythology and Folklore of the Willow". 
^ "Under The Willow Tree". Hca.gilead.org.il. 2007-12-13. Retrieved 2011-12-18. 
^ "Green Willow". Spiritoftrees.org. Retrieved 2011-12-18. 
^ The Willow Wife Archived May 18, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Wisdom of the Willow Tree". Tweedsblues.net. Archived from the original on September 29, 2011. Retrieved 2011-12-18. 
^ English Names for Korean Native Plants (PDF). Pocheon: Korea National Arboretum. 2015. p. 617. ISBN 978-89-97450-98-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 22 December 2016 – via Korea Forest Service. 


Bibliography[edit]

Keeler, Harriet L. (1990). Our Native Trees and How to Identify Them. New York: Charles Scriber's Sons. Pages 393–395. ISBN 0-87338-838-0.
Newsholme, C. (1992). Willows: The Genus Salix. ISBN 0-88192-565-9
Warren-Wren, S.C. (1992). The Complete Book of Willows. ISBN 0-498-01262-X
Sviatlana Trybush, Šárka Jahodová, William Macalpine and Angela Karp. (2008). A genetic study of a Salix germplasm resource reveals new insights into relationships among subgenera, sections and species BioEnergy Research. 1(1):67 – 79.

External links[edit]



Look up withy or osier in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Look up willow, sallow, withy, or osier in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



1911 Encyclopædia Britannica
 "Willow". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914. 







v
t
e


Ancient anaesthesia



Plants / animals



Aconitum (aconite)
Atropa belladonna (belladonna)
Cannabis

medical use


Castoreum
Coca
Conium (hemlock)
Datura innoxia (thorn-apple)
Datura metel (devil's trumpet)
Hyoscyamus niger (henbane)
Lactucarium
Mandragora officinarum (mandrake)
Opium
Saussurea (saw-wort)
Willow





People



Abulcasis
Avenzoar
Avicenna
Celsus
Dioscorides
Galen
Hippocrates
Rhazes
Sabuncuoğlu
Sushrutha
Theophrastus
Zhang





Compounds



Aconitine
Atropine
Cocaine
Coniine
Hyoscine
Δ9-THC
Hyoscyamine
Morphine
Salicylate












v
t
e


Non-timber forest products



Animal products



Furs
Honey
Pine honey
Wild game











Berries
Tree fruit






Blackberry
Blueberry
Bilberry
Breadfruit
Cocoa bean
Coconut
Durian
Gambooge
Huckleberry
Jackfruit
Juniper berry
Lingonberry
Raspberry
Tamarind
Woodland strawberry





Edible plants / roots



Betel
Fiddlehead ferns
Mahuwa flowers
Sago palm

queen


Sassafras

filé powder
root beer


Saw palmetto
Wild ginseng





Mushrooms



Bare-toothed russula
Bay bolete
Birch bolete
Cep
Chanterelle
Honey mushroom
Lingzhi
Matsutake
Meadow mushroom
Morel
Oyster mushroom
Parasol mushroom
Red cap
Saffron milk cap
Slippery jack
Truffle
Yellow knight








Nuts
Spices






Allspice
Areca nut
Bay leaf
Black pepper
Brazil nut
Cinnamon
Clove
Hazelnut
Malva nut
Nutmeg
Pine nut
Vanilla








Oil
Waxes






Carnauba
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus wightiana)
Cocoa butter
Eucalyptol
Eucalyptus
Japan wax
Kokum
Kusum
Mahuwa
Nagkesar
Palm (kernel)
Pongamia
Phulwara
Pilu
Sal-seed (Shorea robusta)
Sandalwood
Shea butter
Tea-seed
Tea-tree
Vateria indica





Resins



Benzoin
Birch tar
Camphor
Creosote
Frankincense
Gamboge
Kauri
Lacquer
Mastic
Myrrh
Pine tar
Pitch
Rosin
Turpentine
Varnish





Sap / Gum / etc.



Birch syrup
Chicle

chewing gum


Coconut sugar
Date sugar
Fruit syrup
Gum arabic
Gutta-percha
Kino
Latex
Maple sugar
Maple syrup
Palm sugar
Palm wine

akpeteshie
ogogoro


Rubber
Spruce gum





Other



Bamboo

edible
musical instruments
textiles


Birch bark
Birch beer
Cork
Ferns
Forage
Gambier
Moss
Natural dyes

henna


Peat
Quinine
Rattan
Shellac
Tanbark

tannin


Thatching
Tendu leaves
Willow bark





Related



Dehesa (Iberian agroforestry)
Forest farming / gardening
Honey hunting
Indian forest produce
Mushroom hunting
Naval stores
Permaforestry
Resin extraction
Rubber tapping
Wildcrafting








 Forestry portal
 Trees portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject Forestry












v
t
e


Woodworking



Overviews



History
Glossary
Wood (lumber)





Forms



Boat building
Bow and arrow
Bush carpentry
Cabinetry
Caning
Carpentry
Certosina
Chainsaw carving
Chip carving
Clogs
Ébéniste
Fretwork
Intarsia
Japanese carpentry
Khatam
Log building
Marquetry
Millwork
Parquetry
Pyrography
Relief carving
Root carving
Sawdust
Segmented turning
Shingle weaving
Shipbuilding
Spindle turning
Timber framing
Whittling
Wood carving
Woodturning
Wood flour





Woods




Soft



Cedar (Calocedrus, Cedrus)
Cypress
Douglas fir
Fir
Juniper
Larch
Pine
Spruce
Yew





Hard



Ash
Alder
Aspen
Balsa
Beech
Birch
Cherry
Chestnut
Cocobolo
Ebony
Elm
Hazel
Lignum vitae
Linden (lime, basswood)
Mahogany
Maple
Oak
Padauk
Plum
Poplar
Teak
Totara
Walnut
Willow








Tools







Abrasives
Axe
Adze
Chisel
Clamp
Drawknife
Drill
Float
Mallet
Milling machine
Mitre box
Moulding plane
Plane
Rasp
Router
Sandpaper
Spokeshave
Timber-framing
Vise
Winding sticks
Wood scribe
Workbench





Saws



Backsaw
Bandsaw
Bow
Bucksaw
Chainsaw
Circular
Compass
Coping
Crosscut
Frame
Fretsaw
Jigsaw
Keyhole
Miter
Rip
Scroll
Table
Veneer
Whipsaw








Geometry




Joints



Birdsmouth
Bridle
Butt
Butterfly
Coping
Crown of thorns
Dado
Dovetail
Finger
Groove
Halved
Hammer-headed tenon
Knee
Lap
Mason's mitre
Miter
Mortise and tenon
Rabbet/Rebate
Scarf
Splice
Tongue and groove





Profiles



Bead
Bevel
Chamfer
Molding
Ogee
Ogive








Treatments



French polish
Heat bending
Paint
Paint stripper
Steam bending
Thermal
Varnish
Wood drying
Wood preservation
Wood stain
Wood finishing





Organizations



American Association of Woodturners
Architectural Woodwork Institute
British Woodworking Federation
Building and Wood Workers' International
Caricature Carvers of America
International Federation of Building and Wood Workers
National Wood Carvers Association
Society of Wood Engravers
Timber Framers Guild





Conversion



Chainsaw mill
Hewing
Sawmill
Whipsaw
Wood splitting





Techniques



Frame and panel
Frameless construction








 Category
 WikiProject
 Commons









Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q36050
APDB: 194572
EoL: 32667
FloraBase: 22673
FNA: 129059
FoC: 129059
Fossilworks: 54580
GBIF: 3039576
GRIN: 10657
iNaturalist: 53453
IPNI: 36055-1
ITIS: 22476
NCBI: 40685
PLANTS: SALIX
Tropicos: 40028804
VASCAN: 1639
WoRMS: 264935









Authority control



GND: 4130413-5
NDL: 00574233











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Willow&oldid=815088661"					Categories: Medicinal plantsSalixDioecious plantsNon-timber forest productsHidden categories: CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownPages with DOIs inactive since 2017Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with 'species' microformatsAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from May 2017Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRWWikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameterWikipedia articles with GND identifiers