Winger, in the game of ice hockey, is a forward position of a player whose primary zone of play on the ice is along the outer playing area. They typically work by flanking the centre forward. Originally the name was given to forward players who went up and down the sides of the rink. Nowadays, there are different types of wingers in the game — out-and-out goal scorers, checkers who disrupt the opponents, and forwards who work along the boards and in the corners. They tend to be bigger than centreman and smaller than defenceman.
This position is commonly referred to by the side of the rink that the winger normally takes, i.e. "left wing" or "right wing."



Contents


1 Defensive zone play
2 Offensive zone play
3 Backchecking
4 Face-offs
5 See also
6 References



Defensive zone play[edit]




Typical winger positioning in the defensive zone.


The wingers' responsibilities in the defensive zone include the following:

getting open for a pass from their teammates
intercepting a pass to the opposing defenceman
attacking the opposing defencemen when they have the puck

Wingers should typically not:

play deep in their defensive zone
help out their teammates along the boards


Offensive zone play[edit]
Wingers should be playing high in the zone, and always be vigilant for a breakout pass or a chance to chip the puck past the blue line. When wingers receive a pass along the boards, they can exercise a number of options:

Bank the puck off the boards or glass to get it out of the zone
Redirect or softly pass the puck to a rushing forward
Shoot the puck out to the centre line to another forward who can either set up an attack, or dump the puck into the offensive zone to summon a line change
Carry the puck themselves into the offensive zone to attempt a breakaway or an odd man rush

Backchecking[edit]
Wingers are usually the last players to backcheck out of the offensive zone. On the backcheck, it is essential that they cover the last free opposing player rushing in. Once the puck is controlled by the opposing team in the defensive zone, however, wingers are responsible for covering the defenceman on their side of the ice.
Face-offs[edit]
Prior to the puck being dropped for a face-off, players other than those taking the face-off must not make any physical contact with players on the opposite team, nor enter the face-off circle (where marked). After the puck is dropped, it is essential for wingers to engage the opposing players to prevent them from obtaining possession of the puck.
Once a team has established control of the puck, wingers can set themselves up into an appropriate position.
Some wingers are also employed to handle faceoffs.[1]
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ice hockey left wingers.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ice hockey right wingers.



Rover (ice hockey)
Centre
Defenceman
Forward
Goaltender
Power forward
List of NHL players



Positions on the hockey rink


Forwards:

Left wing | Centre | Right wing


Defencemen:
Left defenceman | Right defenceman


Goaltender:
Goaltender


Power forward | Enforcer | Grinder | Pest | Two-way forward | Stay-at-home defenceman | Captain | Head coach | Referees and linesmen


References[edit]



^ Heika: Faceoff skills learned playing center paying dividends for Stars' Jamie Benn in new position








						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Winger_(ice_hockey)&oldid=809887776"					Categories: Ice hockey positionsIce hockey terminologyIce hockey strategyHidden categories: Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata