For the TV series, see Working Class (TV series).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Sociology







History
Outline
Portal




Main theories




Structural functionalism
Conflict theory
Symbolic interactionism




Methods




Quantitative
Qualitative
Historical
Comparative
Mathematical
Computational
Ethnography
Ethnomethodology
Network analysis
Positivism
Critical theory




Subfields and other major theories




Conflict
Criminology
Social constructionism
Culture
Development
Deviance
Demography
Education
Economic
Environmental
Family
Feminist sociology
Gender
Health
Industrial
Inequality
Knowledge
Law
Literature
Medical
Military
Organizational
Political
Race and ethnicity
Religion
Rural
Science
Social change
Social movements
Social psychology in sociology
Stratification
Science and technology
Technology
Urban
Utilitarianism




Browse




Bibliography
By country
Index
Journals
Organizations
People
Timeline







v
t
e





The working class (also labouring class and proletariat) are the people employed for wages, especially in manual-labour occupations and industrial work.[1] Working-class occupations include blue-collar jobs, some white-collar jobs, and most pink-collar jobs. The working class only rely upon their earnings from wage labour, thereby, the category includes most of the working population of industrialized economies, of the urban areas (cities, towns, villages) of non-industrialized economies, and of the rural workforce.
In Marxist theory and socialist literature, the term working class is often used interchangeably with the term proletariat, and includes all workers who expend both physical and mental labour (salaried knowledge workers and white-collar workers) to produce economic value for the owners of the means of production (the bourgeoisie in Marxist literature).[2]



Contents


1 Definitions
2 History and growth
3 Marxist definition
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Definitions[edit]
As with many terms describing social class, working class is defined and used in many different ways. The most general definition, used by Marxists and socialists, is that the working class includes all those who have nothing to sell but their labor-power and skills. In that sense it includes both white and blue-collar workers, manual and mental workers of all types, excluding only individuals who derive their income from business ownership and the labor of others.
When used non-academically in the United States, however, it often refers to a section of society dependent on physical labor, especially when compensated with an hourly wage. For certain types of science, as well as less scientific or journalistic political analysis, for example, the working class is loosely defined as those without college degrees.[3] Working-class occupations are then categorized into four groups: Unskilled laborers, artisans, outworkers, and factory workers.[4]
A common alternative, sometimes used in sociology, is to define class by income levels. When this approach is used, the working class can be contrasted with a so-called middle class on the basis of differential terms of access to economic resources, education, cultural interests, and other goods and services. The cut-off between working class and middle class here might mean the line where a population has discretionary income, rather than simply sustenance (for example, on fashion versus merely nutrition and shelter).
Some researchers have suggested that working-class status should be defined subjectively as self-identification with the working-class group.[5] This subjective approach allows people, rather than researchers, to define their own social class.
History and growth[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Working class life in Victorian Wetherby, West Riding of Yorkshire, England, the UK.


In feudal Europe, the working class as such did not exist in large numbers. Instead, most people were part of the laboring class, a group made up of different professions, trades and occupations. A lawyer, craftsman and peasant were all considered to be part of the same social unit, a third estate of people who were neither aristocrats nor church officials. Similar hierarchies existed outside Europe in other pre-industrial societies. The social position of these laboring classes was viewed as ordained by natural law and common religious belief. This social position was contested, particularly by peasants, for example during the German Peasants' War.
In the late 18th century, under the influence of the Enlightenment, European society was in a state of change, and this change could not be reconciled with the idea of a changeless god-created social order. Wealthy members of these societies created ideologies which blamed many of the problems of working-class people on their morals and ethics (i.e. excessive consumption of alcohol, perceived laziness and inability to save money). In The Making of the English Working Class, E.P. Thompson argues that the English working class was present at its own creation, and seeks to describe the transformation of pre-modern laboring classes into a modern, politically self-conscious, working class.
Starting around 1917, a number of countries became ruled ostensibly in the interests of the working class. (see Soviet working class). Some historians have noted that a key change in these Soviet-style societies has been a massive a new type of proletarianisation, often effected by the administratively achieved forced displacement of peasants and rural workers. Since then, four major industrial states have turned towards semi-market-based governance (China, Laos, Vietnam, Cuba), and one state has turned inwards into an increasing cycle of poverty and brutalisation (North Korea). Other states of this sort have either collapsed (such as the Soviet Union), or never achieved significant levels of industrialization or large working classes.
Since 1960, large-scale proletarianisation and enclosure of commons has occurred in the third world, generating new working classes. Additionally, countries such as India have been slowly undergoing social change, expanding the size of the urban working class.
Marxist definition[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Proletariat




Striking teamsters battling police on the streets of Minneapolis, Minnesota, the US, June 1934.


Karl Marx defined the working class or proletariat as individuals who sell their labour power for wages and who do not own the means of production. He argued that they were responsible for creating the wealth of a society. He asserted that the working class physically build bridges, craft furniture, grow food, and nurse children, but do not own land, or factories. A sub-section of the proletariat, the lumpenproletariat (rag-proletariat), are the extremely poor and unemployed, such as day laborers and homeless people.
In The Communist Manifesto, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels argued that it was the destiny of the working class to displace the capitalist system, with the dictatorship of the proletariat, abolishing the social relationships underpinning the class system and then developing into a future communist society in which "the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all." Some issues in Marxist arguments about working-class membership have included:

The class status of people in a temporary or permanent position of unemployment.
The class status of domestic labor, particularly the children (see child labour), and also traditionally the wives of male workers, as some spouses do not themselves work in paying jobs outside the home.
Whether workers can be considered working class if they own personal property or small amounts of stock ownership.
The relationships among peasants, rural smallholders, and the working class.
The extent to which non-class group identities and politics (race, gender, et al.) can obviate or substitute for working-class membership in Enlightenment projects, where working-class membership is prohibitively contradictory or obfuscated.

Possible responses to some of these issues are:

Unemployed workers are proletariat.
Class for dependents is determined by the primary income earner.
Personal property is argued to be different from private property. For example, the proletariat can own houses; this is personal property.
The self-employed worker may be a member of the petite bourgeoisie (for example a highly paid professional, athlete, etc.), or a member of the proletariat (for example, a contract worker whose income may be relatively high but is precarious).

In general, in Marxist terms, wage laborers and those dependent on the welfare state are working class, and those who live on accumulated capital are not. This broad dichotomy defines the class struggle. Different groups and individuals may at any given time be on one side or the other. For example, retired factory workers are working-class in the popular sense; but to the extent that they live off fixed incomes, financed by stock in corporations whose earnings are profit, retired factory workers' interests, and possibly their identities and politics, are not working class. Such contradictions of interests and identity within individuals' lives and within communities can effectively undermine the ability of the working class to act in solidarity to reduce exploitation, inequality, and the role of ownership in determining people's life chances, work conditions, and political power.
See also[edit]

Apprentice
Embourgeoisement
Globalization
Household income in the United States
Industrial novel
Knowledge worker
Labour movement
Living wage and Minimum wage
Proletarian literature
Proletarian novel
Social class

Blue-collar worker and White-collar worker
Bourgeoisie
False consciousness
Lower middle class
Middle class
Proletarianization
Proletariat
Ruling class
Reserve army of labor
Underclass or Lumpenproletariat
Upper middle class
Upper class
Working poor


Social mobility
Trade union
Unfree labor
US working class
Vocational education
Wage slavery
Westminster City Council v Duke of Westminster
Working class culture

References[edit]



^ working class. Oxford Dictionaries. Retrieved 8 May 2014.
^ Martin Glaberman (17 September 1974). "Marxist Views of the Working Class". Marxists.org. Retrieved 18 January 2013. 
^ Thomas B. Edsall (June 17, 2012). "Canaries in the CoaMine" (Blog by expert). The New York Times. Retrieved June 18, 2012. 
^ Doob, B. Christopher (2013). Social Inequality and Social Stratification in US Society. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Education. ISBN 0-205-79241-3.
^ Rubin, M., Denson, N., Kilpatrick, S., Matthews, K. E., Stehlik, T., & Zyngier, D. (2014). "'I am working-class': Subjective self-definition as a missing measure of social class and socioeconomic status in higher education research". Educational Researcher. doi: 10.3102/0013189X14528373



Further reading[edit]

Benson, John. The Working Class in Britain 1850-1939 (IB Tauris, 2003)
Blackledge, Paul (2011). "Why workers can change the world". Socialist Review 364. London. 
Engels, Friedrich, Condition of the Working Class in England [in 1844], Stanford University Press (1968), trade paperback, ISBN 0-8047-0634-4 Numerous other editions exist; first published in German in 1845. Better editions include a preface written by Engels in 1892.
Miles, Andrew, and Mike Savage. (2013) The remaking of the British working class, 1840-1940 (Routledge, 2013).
Moran, W. (2002). Belles of New England: The women of the textile mills and the families whose wealth they wove. New York: St Martin's Press, ISBN 0-312-30183-9.
Raine, April Janise. "Lifestyles of the Not So Rich and Famous: Ideological Shifts in Popular Culture, Reagan-Era Sitcoms and Portrayals of the Working Class." McNair Scholars Research Journal 7#1 (2011): 63-78 online, With bibliographical citations
Rose, Jonathan, The Intellectual Life of the British Working Classes. (Yale University Press, 2001)
Rubin, Lillian Breslow, Worlds of Pain: Life in the Working Class Family, Basic Books (1976), 268 pages, ISBN 0-465-09724-3
Sheehan, Steven T. "'Pow! Right in the Kisser': Ralph Kramden, Jackie Gleason, and the Emergence of the Frustrated Working‐Class Man". Journal of Popular Culture 43#3 (2010): 564-582.
Shipler, David K., The Working Poor: Invisible in America, Knopf (2004), hardcover, 322 pages, ISBN 0-375-40890-8
Skeggs, Beverley. Class, Self, Culture, Routledge, (2004),
Thompson, E.P, The Making of the English Working Class - paperback Penguin.
Turner, Katherine Leonard. How the Other Half Ate: A History of Working-Class Meals at the Turn of the Century. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2014.
Zweig, Michael, Working Class Majority: America's Best Kept Secret, Cornell University Press (2001), trade paperback, 198 pages, ISBN 0-8014-8727-7

External links[edit]



Look up working class in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



The Center for Working-Class Studies at Youngstown State University
International Labor and Working-Class History Journal
Images of the working class between 1840 and 1945 from the McCord Museum's online collection
The Working-Class poetry of Gerald Massey
Definition of "Working Class", Dictionary.com
An introduction to the working class, Prole.info
Bibliography - Work, Workers and their Workplaces
Working Moms
List of Working Class Literature
List of Working Class Videos — Movies, and Documentaries
Paulo Freire Research Center–Finland
BBC Archive collection of TV & Radio programmes about Working Class Britain
Caring too much. That's the curse of the working classes. David Graeber for The Guardian. March 2014.
US millennials feel more working class than any other generation. The Guardian. March 2016.







v
t
e


Syndicalism



Precursors



Guild socialism
Utopian socialism
Revolutions of 1848
Orthodox Marxism








Variants



Anarcho-syndicalism
Syndical Communism
National syndicalism
Revolutionary syndicalism
Yellow syndicalism





Economics



Co-operative economics
Labour economics

Labour rights
General strike
Workers' self-management
Labour unionisation


Mutual aid





Organisations



Industrial Workers of the World (IWW)
International Workers' Association (IWA-AIT) and affiliates:

Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT-AIT, Spain)
Brazilian Workers Confederation (COB)
Argentine Regional Workers' Federation (FORA)
Free Workers' Union (FAU, Germany)
Confederation of Revolutionary Anarcho-Syndicalists (CRAS, Russia)
Norsk Syndikalistisk Forbund (NSF-IAA, Norway)
Solidarity Federation (SF-IWA, Britain)







Leaders



Daniel De Leon
Victor Griffuelhes
Hubert Lagardelle
Juan García Oliver
Rudolf Rocker
Georges Sorel
Fernand Pelloutier





Related subjects



Criticism of capitalism
Post-capitalism
Libertarian socialism
Criticism of wage labour
Labour power
Revisionism








 Category












v
t
e





Social class
Status










Theories



Gilbert model
Marxian
Mudsill theory
New class
Spoon class theory
Weberian (three-component)





Related
topics



Caste
Chattering classes
Class conflict
Class discrimination
Classicide
Classless society
Euthenics
Nouveau riche / Parvenu
Poverty
Ranked society
Snobbery
Social exclusion
Social mobility
Social position
Social stigma
Subaltern














By demographic








By status



Administrative detainee
Alien

illegal immigrant
refugee


Citizen

dual or multiple
native-born
naturalized
second-class


Convicted
Migrant worker
Political prisoner
Stateless





By "collar"



Blue
Gold
Green
Grey
Pink
White





By type




Creative



Bohemians
Robber baron
Russian oligarch
Business magnate
Overclass
Superclass





Middle



Lower middle class
Upper middle class
Bourgeoisie
Petite bourgeoisie





Working



Working poor
Proletariat
Lumpenproletariat





Warrior



Harii
Kshatriya
Yadav
Nair
Cossacks
Hashashin
Knight
Vanniyar
Samurai
Cuāuh
Ocēlōtl
Spartiate





Under



Commoner
Outcast
Outlaw
Peasant / Serf
Slave
Untouchable





Upper



Bourgeoisie
Elite
Gentry
Global elite
Nobility
Old money





Ruling



Aristocracy
Hanseaten
Patrician
Royal family





Intellectual



Clergy
Knowledge worker




















By country or region








United States







Affluence
American Dream
Conflict
Social class in American history





Classes



Lower
Middle (Mexican-American, Black)
Upper
Under





Income



Household
Inequality
Personal
Poverty





Standard of living



Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home ownership
Wealth








Other countries
or regions



Africa
Cambodia
China
Colombia
Ecuador
France
Haiti
India
Iran
Italy
New Zealand
Romania
Sri Lanka
Tibet
United Kingdom





Historic



Ancient Greece
Ancient Rome
Aztec
Ottoman Empire
Soviet Union
Pre-industrial East Asia
Pre-industrial Europe














 Category












v
t
e


Socialism



Variants



Agrarian socialism
Communism
Democratic socialism
Eco-socialism
Ethical socialism
Guild socialism
Liberal socialism
Libertarian socialism
Market socialism
Mutualism
Marxist socialism
Revolutionary socialism
Scientific socialism
Social democracy
Socialist feminism
Socialism of the 21st century
Social anarchism
State socialism
Syndicalism
Utopian socialism








Key topics and issues



Types of socialism
History of socialism
Economics
State
Criticism





Concepts



Economic planning
Free association
Equal opportunity
Direct democracy
Adhocracy
Technocracy
Self-management
Industrial democracy
Economic democracy
Public ownership
Common ownership
Cooperative ownership
Social dividend
Basic income
Production for use
Calculation in kind
Labour voucher
Workplace democracy





People



Charles Hall
Henri de Saint-Simon
François-Noël Babeuf
Robert Owen
Charles Fourier
William Thompson
Thomas Hodgskin
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Louis Blanc
Mikhail Bakunin
Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels
Ferdinand Lassalle
William Morris
Mary Harris Jones
Peter Kropotkin
Eduard Bernstein
Errico Malatesta
Fred M. Taylor
Eugene Debs
Georgi Plekhanov
John Dewey
Enrico Barone
W. E. B. Du Bois
Emma Goldman
Rosa Luxemburg
Léon Blum
Antonie Pannekoek
Bertrand Russell
Luis Emilio Recabarren
Albert Einstein
Clement Attlee
Karl Polanyi
Nestor Makhno
G. D. H. Cole
Imre Nagy
Einar Gerhardsen
George Orwell
Léopold Sédar Senghor
Salvador Allende
François Mitterrand
Nelson Mandela
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Murray Bookchin
Alexander Dubček
Howard Zinn
Noam Chomsky
Martin Luther King Jr.
Mikhail Gorbachev
Bernie Sanders
Tariq Ali
Abdullah Öcalan
Slavoj Žižek
Jeremy Corbyn
Cornel West
Jack Layton
Hugo Chávez
Chris Hedges
Yanis Varoufakis
Pablo Iglesias





Organizations



First International (International Workingmen's Association)
Second International
Third International (Comintern)
Fourth International
Fifth International
Socialist International
Foro de São Paulo
World Federation of Democratic Youth (WFDY)
International Union of Socialist Youth (IUSY)
World Socialist Movement
International League of Religious Socialists
International Marxist Tendency





Religious socialism



Buddhist socialism
Christian socialism
Islamic socialism
Jewish left





Regional socialism



African socialism
Arab socialism
Bolivarianism
Gandhian socialism
Indian socialism
Labor Zionism
Marhaenism
Naxalism
Socialism in One Country
Socialist nationalism
Third World Socialism





Related topics



Criticism of capitalism
Class struggle
Democracy
Dictatorship of the proletariat
Egalitarianism
Equality of outcome
Impossibilism
Internationalism
State-owned enterprise
Left-wing politics
Marxism
Mixed economy
Nanosocialism
Nationalization
Socialisation of production
Planned economy
Proletarian revolution
Reformism
Socialism in One Country
Socialist market economy
Post-capitalism
Trade union
Mode of production





Anthem



"The Internationale"








Politics portal
Socialism portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Working_class&oldid=817450783"					Categories: SocialismSocial classesWorking classMarxismMarxist theoryHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from May 2014Articles needing additional references from February 2013