"WMO" redirects here. For other uses, see WMO (disambiguation).

World Meteorological Organization





WMO flag



Abbreviation
WMO
OMM


Formation
23 March 1950; 67 years ago (1950-03-23)


Type
UN agency


Legal status
Active


Headquarters
Geneva, Switzerland



Head

Petteri Taalas (Secretary-General)
David Grimes (President)


Website
public.wmo.int


The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is an intergovernmental organization with a membership of 191 Member States and Territories. It originated from the International Meteorological Organization (IMO), which was founded in 1873. Established by the ratification of the WMO Convention on 23 March 1950, WMO became the specialised agency of the United Nations for meteorology (weather and climate), operational hydrology and related geophysical sciences a year later. Its current Secretary-General is Petteri Taalas[1] and the President of the World Meteorological Congress, its supreme body, is David Grimes.[2] The Organization is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland.



Contents


1 The organization
2 Functions

2.1 Weather
2.2 Climate
2.3 Water


3 WMO Strategic Plan
4 Contributions to Sustainable Development Goals
5 Meteorological codes
6 Recognitions received
7 World Meteorological Day
8 Main public outreach materials
9 WMO awards and prizes
10 Milestones
11 Membership

11.1 Membership by regional associations

11.1.1 Region I (Africa)
11.1.2 Region II (Asia)
11.1.3 Region III (South America)
11.1.4 Region IV (North America, Central America and the Caribbean)
11.1.5 Region V (South-West Pacific)
11.1.6 Region VI (Europe)
11.1.7 States with membership in more than one region




12 See also
13 Notes and references
14 External links



The organization[edit]
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations. It is the UN system's authoritative voice on the state and behavior of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans, the climate it produces and the resulting distribution of water resources.[3]
WMO has a membership of 191 Member States and Territories as of February 2014. The Convention of the World Meteorological Organization was signed 11 October 1947 and established upon ratification on 23 March 1950. WMO became the specialized agency of the United Nations in 1951 for meteorology (weather and climate), operational hydrology and related geophysical sciences. It originated from the International Meteorological Organization (IMO), which was founded in 1873.[3]
The WMO hierarchy:

The World Meteorological Congress, the supreme body of the Organization, determines policy. Each member state and territory is represented by a Permanent Representative with WMO when Congress meets every four years. Congress elects the President and Vice-Presidents of the Organization and members of the Executive Council; and appoints the Secretary-General.
The Executive Council (EC) implements Congress decisions. It coordinates programmes, manages the budget, considers and acts on resolutions and recommendations from the regional associations and technical commissions, and studies and makes recommendations on matters affecting international meteorology and related activities. The Executive Council normally hold a session at least once a year.
Six Regional Associations (RA) are responsible for the coordination of meteorological, hydrological and related activities within their respective Regions. They meet once every four years, and elect a president and vice-president. The president of each regional association is an ex officio member of the Executive Council.
Eight Technical Commissions are responsible for studying meteorological and hydrological operational systems, applications and research. They establish methodology and procedures and make recommendations to Executive Council and the World Meteorological Congress.
The Secretariat is headed by the Secretary-General, who is appointed by the World Meteorological Congress for a four-year term with a maximum tenure of 8 years. The Secretary-General appoints all staff, including the Deputy Secretary-General and the Assistant Secretary-General. The Secretariat currently has around 300 staff.[4]

Functions[edit]
Weather, climate and the water cycle shape almost every aspect of our lives. They can be benevolent and bring abundance and well-being, but they can also be dangerous and cause great damage: weather-, climate and water-related hazards account for nearly 90% of "natural" disasters. These powerful natural forces do not recognize national borders, thus global and regional cooperation is essential. Global data are needed to understand the behaviour of the Earth’s atmosphere and its interaction with the land and oceans - whether it be to predict next week’s weather or next year’s climate, forecasters must have timely, quality-assured, standardized information coming from all corners of the world. Even the accuracy of a two-day weather forecast relies on observations from far beyond national borders. The World Meteorological Organization provides the framework for this essential international cooperation among the National Meteorological and Hydrological Services of its 191 Member States and Territories.[5]
Weather[edit]
Thanks to the international coordination efforts of WMO, National Meteorological and Hydrological Services provide daily weather forecasts and early and reliable warnings of high-impact weather and climate events. These warnings help to save countless lives and to protect property and the environment from damage. They contribute to economic planning and decision-making, and help minimize the harm that weather, climate and water hazards can cause to socioeconomic development. The Organization also fosters collaboration between the National Meteorological and Hydrological Services to furthers the application of meteorology to public weather services, agriculture, aviation, shipping, energy, water resource management and many other economic sectors.[5]
The first step in producing weather forecasts is to gather non-stop observations of the environment from around the world. Millions of observations are gathered worldwide every day by over 50 satellites, 400 moored buoys, 1 250 drifting buoys, 4 000 aircraft from around 40 commercial aircraft companies, 7 300 ships and 10 000 land-based observing stations. WMO develops the technical standards for designing these and other observing instruments and for ensuring that the collected data are quality controlled and comparable. Data that pass the test are fed into the complex numerical weather prediction models that National Meteorological Services use to produce weather forecasts, early warnings of storms and other natural hazards, air-quality forecasts, climate predictions and risk assessments. These forecasts and related products are broadcast in real time to the public and myriads of users worldwide. This enables governments to provide reliable and effective weather services to protect lives and property and ensure sustainable economic development and the general welfare of their citizens. To achieve these objectives, WMO advocates for broad, open data policies and maintains standardized data and exchange mechanisms. It also collaborates on the development of innovative data collection and delivery systems.[5]
Climate[edit]
The stations of the WMO Global Atmosphere Watch play a vital role in detecting climate variability and change by monitoring long-term changes in levels of greenhouse gases, solar radiation and other atmospheric components to assess their effects on people, climate, regional and urban air quality, and marine and terrestrial ecosystems. They project the magnitude and rate of climate change and related impacts such as sea-level rise. WMO publishes an annual Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, with details on atmospheric concentrations of long-lived greenhouse gases including carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide.[6]
The WMO-led Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS) guides the development of science-based climate information and services to support decision-making in climate-sensitive sectors. GFCS coordinates actions at the national, regional and global levels to enhance the quality, quantity and use of climate services. Climate information empowers countries to implement the Paris Agreement on climate change and promotes sustainable development. The GFCS enables public- and private-sector decision-makers to plan and adapt their activities and projects in anticipation of changing conditions. Seasonal climate forecasts, in particular, are increasingly used for agriculture and food security, disaster risk reduction, energy, public health, water resources and other sectors.
The annually published WMO Statements on the status of the World Climate provides details of global, regional and national temperatures and extreme weather events. It also provides information on long-term climate change indicators include atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, sea level rise, and sea ice extent. The year 2016 was the hottest year on record, with many weather and climate extremes, according to the most recent WMO report.[7]
The World Meteorological Organization further supports climate change assessments by providing data and models and by hosting and co-sponsoring the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) and the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP).
Water[edit]
Water is essential for the production of virtually all of our goods and services. It is the most important and widely used source of renewable energy - hydropower represents approximately 16% of total electricity production worldwide. The World Meteorological Organization promotes water-resource assessments by National Hydrological Services, which, in turn, provide the forecasts needed to plan water storage for domestic requirements, agricultural activities, hydroelectric power gener- ation and urban development.
The Organization also assists National Hydrological Services to establish and maintain systems for acquiring and disseminating accurate and timely information on the water cycle for formulating integrated water-resource management strategies. Equipped with better hydrological information, assessments and forecasts, countries are able to independently assess their water resources and respond to threats of floods and drought.
WMO Strategic Plan[edit]
The WMO Strategic Plan sets the directions and priorities to guide the activities of Members and constituent bodies to enable the improvement of their core information, products and services, to maintain necessary infrastructures and to directly benefit from advancements in science and technology. This Plan emphasizes the following key priorities:

disaster risk reduction
the Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS)
the WMO Integrated Global Observing System (WIGOS)
aviation meteorological services
polar and high mountain regions
capacity development
governance

Contributions to Sustainable Development Goals[edit]
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development serves as the centerpiece for national and international policymaking over the next 15 years. It sets out 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that the WMO community can contribute to at the national and international levels. National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHSs) can benefit from the status of WMO as a Specialized Agency of the UN to engage with the 2030 Agenda. They can also draw on the partnerships that the WMO community continues to build with other communities, sectors and disciplines, for example, through national climate services and the Global Framework for Climate Services. As policymakers and the general public gain a better understand of the WMO contribution to sustainable development, National Meteorological and Hydrological Services can look forward to establishing an even stronger role in protecting life and property, and in building weather and climate resilience.
Meteorological codes[edit]
In keeping with its mandate to promote the standardization of meteorological observations, the WMO maintains numerous code forms for the representation and exchange of meteorological, oceanographical, and hydrological data. The traditional code forms, such as SYNOP, CLIMAT and TEMP, are character-based and their coding is position-based. Newer WMO code forms are designed for portability, extensibility and universality. These are BUFR, CREX, and, for gridded geo-positioned data, GRIB.[citation needed]
Recognitions received[edit]

The WMO and United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) jointly created Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2007 "for their efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about anthropogenic (man-made) climate change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such change."[8]

World Meteorological Day[edit]




WMO headquarters in Geneva shared with the IPCC and the Group on Earth Observations



World Meteorological Day is held annually on 23 March.[9]

Main public outreach materials[edit]

The International Cloud Atlas - On 23 March 2017, WMO released a completely revised and updated electronic version combining 19th century traditions with 21st century technology. The International Cloud Atlas was first published by WMO predecessor, IMO, in 1896. The new version contains hundreds of images submitted by meteorologists, photographers and cloud lovers from around the globe. It includes new classifications, including volutus, a roll cloud; clouds from human activities such as the contrail, a vapour trail sometimes produced by airplanes; and asperitas, a dramatic undulated cloud which captured the public imagination. It also features meteorological phenomena like rainbows, halos, snow devils and hailstones.[10]
The World Meteorological Organization at a Glance
WMO Public website
WMO for Youth
WMO Bulletin (twice annually)
WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletin (annually)
WMO Statements on the Status of the World Climate (annually)

WMO awards and prizes[edit]

International Meteorological Organization Prize[11]
Professor Dr Vilho Väisälä Awards[12]
Norbert Gerbier-Mumm International Award (suspended in 2014)[13]
WMO Research Award for Young Scientists[14]
Professor Mariolopoulus Award[15]

Milestones[edit]
1853 First International Meteorological Conference (Brussels)
1873 International Meteorological Organization established (predecessor of WMO)
1947 WMO Convention agreed unanimously by Conference of Directors (Washington, DC)
1950 WMO Convention enters into force on 23 March
1951 WMO becomes a specialized agency of the United Nations
1957 Global Ozone Observing System set up
1957/1958 International Geophysical Year
1963 World Weather Watch (WWW) launched
1971 Tropical Cyclone project established (upgraded to Tropical Cyclone Programme in 1980)
1972 Operational Hydrology Programme established
1976 WMO issues first international assessment of the state of global ozone
1977 Integrated Global Ocean Services System (IGOSS) established jointly by WMO and UNESCO Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC)
1978/1979 Global Weather Experiment and Monsoon Experiments under the Global Atmospheric Research Programme
1979 First World Climate Conference (leads to the establishment of the WMO World Climate Programme)
1985 Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer
1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer
1988 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) established, co-sponsored by WMO and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
1989 Global Atmosphere Watch established
1990 Second World Climate Conference; International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction
1991 WMO/UNEP convene first meeting of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
1992 The Global Climate Observing System established
1993 World Hydrological Cycle Observing System (WHYCOS) launched
1995 Climate Information and Prediction Services (CLIPS) established
1998 Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion
1999 Inauguration of new WMO headquarters in Geneva
2005 Group on Earth Observations (GEO) Secretariat established
2007/2008 International Polar Year
2009 Third World Climate Conference establishes Global Framework for Climate Services
2014 Conference on the Gender Dimensions of Weather and Climate Services
2015 Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030; 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; Paris Agreement reached at the Conference of the Parties (COP21) of the UNFCCC
Membership[edit]
As of February 2014, WMO Members include a total of 185 Member States and 6 Member Territories.[16]
Ten United Nations member states are not members of WMO: Andorra, Equatorial Guinea, Grenada, Liechtenstein, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and San Marino. Cook Islands and Niue are WMO Members but non-members of the United Nations. Vatican City and the states with limited recognition are not members of either organization.
The six WMO Member Territories are the British Caribbean Territories (joint meteorological organisation and membership),[16] French Polynesia, Hong Kong, Macau, Curaçao and Sint Maarten (joint meteorological service and membership)[16] and New Caledonia. (List of all members with admission dates.)
Membership by regional associations[edit]





The member states of the World Meteorological Organization divided into the six regional associations, shown on a world map



Region I (Africa)[edit]
Region I consists of the states of Africa and a few former colonial powers. Region I has 57 member states and no member territories:[17]


 Algeria
 Angola
 Benin
 Botswana
 Burkina Faso
 Burundi
 Cameroon
 Cape Verde
 Central African Republic
 Chad
 Comoros
 Republic of the Congo
 Côte d'Ivoire
 Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Djibouti
 Egypt
 Eritrea
 Ethiopia
 France
 Gabon
 The Gambia
 Ghana
 Guinea
 Guinea-Bissau
 Kenya
 Lesotho
 Liberia
 Libya
 Madagascar
 Malawi
 Mali
 Mauritania
 Mauritius
 Morocco
 Mozambique
 Namibia
 Niger
 Nigeria
 Portugal
 Rwanda
 São Tomé and Príncipe
 Senegal
 Seychelles
 Sierra Leone
 Somalia
 South Africa
 South Sudan
 Spain
 Sudan
 Swaziland
 Tanzania, United Republic of
 Togo
 Tunisia
 Uganda
 Zambia
 Zimbabwe


Non-member

 Equatorial Guinea

Region II (Asia)[edit]
Region II has 33 member states and 2 member territories. The member states are:[18]


 Afghanistan
 Bahrain
 Bangladesh
 Bhutan
 Cambodia
 People's Republic of China
 North Korea
 India
 Iran, Islamic Republic of
 Iraq
 Japan
 Kazakhstan
 Kuwait
 Kyrgyzstan
 Lao People's Democratic Republic
 Maldives
 Mongolia
 Myanmar
   Nepal
 Oman
 Pakistan
 Qatar
 South Korea
 Russian Federation
 Saudi Arabia
 Sri Lanka
 Tajikistan
 Thailand
 Turkmenistan
 United Arab Emirates
 Uzbekistan
 Viet Nam
 Yemen


The member territories are:

 Hong Kong - China
 Macau - China

Region III (South America)[edit]
Region III consists of the states of South America, including France as French Guiana is an overseas region of France. It has a total of 13 member states and no member territories:[19]


 Argentina
 Bolivia, Plurinational State of
 Brazil
 Chile
 Colombia
 Ecuador
 French Guiana
 Guyana
 Paraguay
 Peru
 Suriname
 Uruguay
 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of


Region IV (North America, Central America and the Caribbean)[edit]
Region IV consists of the states of North America, Central America, and the Caribbean, including three European states with dependencies within the region. It has a total of 25 member states and 2 member territories. The member states are:[20]


 Antigua and Barbuda
 Bahamas
 Barbados
 Belize
 Canada
 Colombia
 Costa Rica
 Cuba
 Dominica
 Dominican Republic
 El Salvador
 France
 Guatemala
 Haiti
 Honduras
 Jamaica
 Mexico
 Netherlands
 Nicaragua
 Panama
 Saint Lucia
 Trinidad and Tobago
 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
 United States of America
 Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of

The two member territories are:

British Caribbean Territories
 Curaçao and  Sint Maarten

Non-members

 Grenada
 Saint Kitts and Nevis
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines


Region V (South-West Pacific)[edit]
Region V consists of 21 member states and 2 member territories. The member states are:[21]


 Australia
 Brunei Darussalam
 Cook Islands
 Fiji
 Indonesia
 Kiribati
 Malaysia
 Federated States of Micronesia
 New Zealand
 Niue
 Papua New Guinea
 Philippines
 Samoa
 Singapore
 Solomon Islands
 Timor-Leste
 Tonga
 Tuvalu
 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
 United States of America
 Vanuatu

The  Cook Islands and  Niue (both are in free association with New Zealand)
The member territories are:

 French Polynesia
 New Caledonia

Non-members

 Marshall Islands
 Nauru
 Palau


Region VI (Europe)[edit]
Region VI consists consist of all the states in Europe as well as some Western Asia. It has 50 member states:[22]


 Albania
 Armenia
 Austria
 Azerbaijan
 Belarus
 Belgium
 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Bulgaria
 Croatia
 Cyprus
 Czech Republic
 Denmark
 Estonia
 Finland
 France
 Georgia
 Germany
 Greece
 Hungary
 Iceland
 Ireland
 Israel
 Italy
 Jordan
 Kazakhstan
 Latvia
 Lebanon
 Lithuania
 Luxembourg
 Malta
 Monaco
 Montenegro
 Netherlands
 Norway
 Poland
 Portugal
 Romania
 Republic of Moldova
 Russian Federation
 Serbia
 Slovakia
 Slovenia
 Spain
 Sweden
  Switzerland
 Syrian Arab Republic
 Republic of Macedonia[23]
 Turkey
 Ukraine
 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

Non-members

 Andorra
 Liechtenstein


States with membership in more than one region[edit]
A total of ten member states have membership in more than one region. Two nations are members to four different regions, while eight are members of two regions. These nations, with their regions, are as follows:


 France (Regions I, III, IV, and VI)
 United Kingdom (Regions I, IV, V, and VI)
 Colombia (Regions III and IV)
 Kazakhstan (Regions II and VI)
 Netherlands (Regions IV and VI)
 Portugal (Regions I and VI)
 Russian Federation (Regions II and VI)
 Spain (Regions I and VI)
 United States of America (Regions IV and V)
 Venezuela (Regions III and IV)


See also[edit]

Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR)
Cloud atlas
Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP)
International Cloud Atlas
Regional Specialized Meteorological Center

Notes and references[edit]



^ Taalas, Petteri (1916). "Secretary-General". WMO. World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 23 March 2016. 
^ Grimes, David. "President". WMO. World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 23 March 2016. 
^ a b "Who we are". World Meteorological Organization. 2015-12-02. Retrieved 2017-04-05. 
^ http://library.wmo.int/pmb_ged/wmo_1161_en.pdf WMO Strategic Plan
^ a b c WMO Editor (2016). "World Meteorological Organization (WMO) at a glance". WMO Library. wmo.int. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ "WMO Greenhouse Gas Bulletins (GHG Bulletins)". library.wmo.int. 
^ https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release/climate-breaks-multiple-records-2016-global-impacts
^ "IPCC Nobel Peace Prize". Nobel Prize Committee. 12 October 2007. Archived from the original on 5 February 2010. Retrieved 20 February 2010. 
^ "World Meteorological Day". World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 15 July 2013. 
^ https://www.wmocloudatlas.org/home.html
^ "International Meteorological Organization (IMO) Prize". World Meteorological Organization. 2015-12-09. Retrieved 2017-04-04. 
^ "Professor Dr Vilho Väisälä Awards". World Meteorological Organization. 2015-12-09. Retrieved 2017-04-04. 
^ "Norbert Gerbier-Mumm International Award". World Meteorological Organization. 2015-12-09. Retrieved 2017-04-04. 
^ "WMO Research Award for Young Scientists". World Meteorological Organization. 2015-12-09. Retrieved 2017-04-04. 
^ "Professor Mariolopoulos Award". World Meteorological Organization. 2015-12-09. Retrieved 2017-04-04. 
^ a b c "WMO - Members". World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 6 March 2017. 
^ "Members of Regional Association I (Africa)". World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 6 March 2017. 
^ "Members of Regional Association II (Asia)". World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 6 March 2017. 
^ "Members of Regional Association III (South America)". World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 6 March 2017. 
^ "Members of Regional Association IV (North America, Central America and the Caribbean)". World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 6 March 2017. 
^ "Members of Regional Association V (South-West Pacific)". World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 6 March 2017. 
^ "Members of Regional Association IV (Europe)". World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 6 March 2017. 
^ Referred to by the United Nations as "The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" due to the Macedonia naming dispute.



External links[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Convention of the World Meteorological Organization




World Meteorological Organization
WMO country codes from the International Comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set
World Climate Conference-3 (WCC-3)




Wikimedia Commons has media related to World Meteorological Organization.








v
t
e


 United Nations






António Guterres, Secretary-General
Amina J. Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General
Peter Thomson, General Assembly President





United Nations System




United Nations Charter



Preamble





Principal organs



General Assembly

President


Security Council

Members


Economic and Social Council
Secretariat

Secretary-General
Deputy Secretary-General
Under-Secretary-General


International Court of Justice

statute


Trusteeship Council





Secretariat Offices
and Departments



Headquarters
Envoy on Youth
Spokesperson for the Secretary-General
Geneva
Palace of Nations
Nairobi
Vienna
Economic and Social Affairs
Political Affairs
Public Information

Dag Hammarskjöld Library


Safety and Security
Palestinian Rights
Peacekeeping Operations
Internal Oversight
Legal Affairs
Developing Countries
Sport for Development and Peace
Disarmament Affairs
Outer Space Affairs
Partnerships
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UN organizations by location
United Nations Office for Developing Countries






Programmes and
specialized agencies




FAO
ICAO
IFAD
ILO
IMO
ITC
IPCC
IAEA
MINURSO
UNIDO
ITU
UNAIDS
SCSL
UNCTAD
UNCITRAL
UNCDF
UNDG
UNDP
UNDPI
UNDPKO

peacekeeping


UNEP

OzonAction
UNEP/GRID-Arendal
UNEP-WCMC


UNESCO
UNFIP
UNFPA
UN-HABITAT
OHCHR
UNHCR
UNHRC
UNICEF
UNICRI
UNIDIR
UNITAR
UN-Oceans
UNODC
UNOPS
UNOSAT
UNRISD
UNRWA
UNSSC
UNU

UNU-OP
UNU-CRIS


UNV
UN Women
UNWTO
UPU
WFP
WHO
WIPO
WMO








Members / observers



Full members
Founding members

UNSC Permanent members


Observers

European Union







History



League of Nations
Four Policemen
Declaration by United Nations
Peacekeeping missions

history
timeline


Enlargement





Resolutions



Security Council vetoes
General Assembly

66th
67th


Security Council

Cyprus
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Lebanon
Nagorno-Karabakh
North Korea
Palestine
Syria
Western Sahara







Elections



Secretary-General (2006
2016)
International Court of Justice 2011
General Assembly President (2012
2016)
Security Council (2015
2016)





Related



Bretton Woods system
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Criticism
Delivering as One
Flag

Honour Flag


Four Nations Initiative
Genocide Convention
UN Global Compact
ICC
International Years
UN laissez-passer
Military Staff Committee
Official languages
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Peacekeeping
Treaty Series
UN Day
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Millennium Declaration

Summit
Development Goals


Security Council veto power
UN reform

Security Council reform


UN Art Collection
UN Memorial Cemetery Korea





Other



Outline
UN television film series (1964–1966)
In popular culture












v
t
e


National meteorological organizations



Africa



Mozambique National Institute of Meteorology
South African Weather Service





Asia



Afghanistan Meteorological Authority
Bangladesh Meteorological Department
China Meteorological Administration
Central Weather Bureau (Taiwan)
Hong Kong Observatory
India Meteorological Department
Indonesian Agency for Meteorology, Climatology and Geophysics
Israel Meteorological Service
Japan Meteorological Agency
Macao Meteorological and Geophysical Bureau
Malaysian Meteorological Department
Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration
Hydrometeorological Centre of Russia
Pakistan Meteorological Department
Korea Meteorological Administration
Meteorological Service Singapore
Thai Meteorological Department
Turkish State Meteorological Service
Institute of Seismology and Atmospheric Physics (zh) (Turkmenistan)





Europe



Central Institution for Meteorology and Geodynamics (Austria)
Royal Meteorological Institute (Belgium)
Czech Hydrometeorological Institute
Croatian Meteorological and Hydrological Service
Danish Meteorological Institute
Estonian Weather Service
Finnish Meteorological Institute
Météo-France
Deutscher Wetterdienst (Germany)
Hellenic National Meteorological Service (Greece)
Icelandic Meteorological Office
Met Éireann (Ireland)
Servizio Meteorologico (Italy)
Latvian Environment, Geology and Meteorology Centre
Lithuanian Hydrometeorological Service
Hydrometeorological Institute of Montenegro
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute
Norwegian Meteorological Institute
Instituto Português do Mar e da Atmosfera (Portugal)
Administrația Națională de Meteorologie (Romania)
Hydrometeorological Centre of Russia
Republic Hydrometeorological Institute of Serbia
Slovenian Environment Agency
Agencia Estatal de Meteorología (Spain)
Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute
MeteoSwiss
Met Office (United Kingdom)





North America



Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology (regional)
Meteorological Service of Canada
Instituto Meteorológico Nacional (Costa Rica)
Instituto Nacional de Sismología, Vulcanología, Meteorología e Hidrología (Guatemala)
Servicio Meteorológico Nacional (Mexico)
National Weather Service (United States)





Oceania



Bureau of Meteorology (Australia)
Fiji Meteorological Service
Meteorological Service of New Zealand
Tonga Meteorological Service
Tuvalu Meteorological Service





South America



Centro de Previsão do Tempo e Estudos Climáticos (Brazil)
Institute of Hydrology, Meteorology and Environmental Studies (Colombia)
Instituto Nacional de Meteorología e Hidrología (Ecuador)








Intercontinental: European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts
Global: World Meteorological Organization









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 141399695
LCCN: n79032054
ISNI: 0000 0001 2171 1432
GND: 2034291-3
SELIBR: 135880
SUDOC: 026551519
BNF: cb11877797z (data)
ULAN: 500305882
NLA: 35620393
NDL: 00537970
NKC: ko2003163637
BNE: XX97180








Weather portal
Atmospheric sciences portal
United Nations portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_Meteorological_Organization&oldid=811287719"					Categories: World Meteorological OrganizationMeteorological organizationsUnited Nations specialized agenciesClimate change organizationsHydrology organizationsMeteorological institutions and stationsInternational scientific organizationsStandards organizationsUnited Nations Development GroupOrganisations based in GenevaNon-profit organisations based in SwitzerlandScientific organisations based in SwitzerlandEnvironmental organizations established in 1950Scientific organizations established in 19501950 establishments in SwitzerlandHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listUse dmy dates from October 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2013Interlanguage link template link numberWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers