"WTO" redirects here. For other uses, see WTO (disambiguation).

World Trade Organization (in English)
Organisation mondiale du commerce (in French)
Organización Mundial del Comercio (in Spanish)







  Members
  Members, dually represented by the EU
  Observers
  Non-participant states





Formation
1 January 1995; 23 years ago (1995-01-01)


Type
International trade organization


Purpose
Regulate international trade


Headquarters
Centre William Rappard, Geneva, Switzerland


Coordinates
46°07′N 6°05′E﻿ / ﻿46.12°N 6.09°E﻿ / 46.12; 6.09Coordinates: 46°07′N 6°05′E﻿ / ﻿46.12°N 6.09°E﻿ / 46.12; 6.09



Region served

Worldwide



Membership

164 member states[1]



Official language

English, French, Spanish[2]



Director-General

Roberto Azevêdo



Budget

196 million Swiss francs (approx. 209 million US$) in 2011.[3]



Staff

640[4]


Website
www.wto.org


The World Trade Organization (WTO) is an intergovernmental organization that regulates international trade. The WTO officially commenced on 1 January 1995 under the Marrakesh Agreement, signed by 123 nations on 15 April 1994, replacing the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which commenced in 1948. It is the largest international economic organization in the world.[5][6] The WTO deals with regulation of trade in goods, services and intellectual property between participating countries by providing a framework for negotiating trade agreements and a dispute resolution process aimed at enforcing participants' adherence to WTO agreements, which are signed by representatives of member governments[7]:fol.9–10 and ratified by their parliaments.[8] Most of the issues that the WTO focuses on derive from previous trade negotiations, especially from the Uruguay Round (1986–1994).
The WTO is attempting to complete negotiations on the Doha Development Round, which was launched in 2001 with an explicit focus on developing countries. As of June 2012[update], the future of the Doha Round remained uncertain: the work programme lists 21 subjects in which the original deadline of 1 January 2005 was missed, and the round is still incomplete.[9] The conflict between free trade on industrial goods and services but retention of protectionism on farm subsidies to domestic agricultural sector (requested by developed countries) and the substantiation of fair trade on agricultural products (requested by developing countries) remain the major obstacles. This impasse has made it impossible to launch new WTO negotiations beyond the Doha Development Round. As a result, there have been an increasing number of bilateral free trade agreements between governments.[10] As of July 2012, there were various negotiation groups in the WTO system for the current agricultural trade negotiation which is in the condition of stalemate.[11]
The WTO's current Director-General is Roberto Azevêdo,[12][13] who leads a staff of over 600 people in Geneva, Switzerland.[14] A trade facilitation agreement, part of the Bali Package of decisions, was agreed by all members on 7 December 2013, the first comprehensive agreement in the organization's history.[15][16]. On 23 January 2017, the amendment to the WTO Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) Agreement marks the first time since the organization opened its doors in 1995 that WTO accords have been amended, and this change should secure for developing countries a legal pathway to access affordable remedies under WTO rules.[17]



Contents


1 History

1.1 GATT negotiations before Uruguay
1.2 Uruguay Round
1.3 Ministerial conferences
1.4 Doha Round (Doha Agenda)


2 Functions
3 Principles of the trading system
4 Organizational structure
5 Decision-making
6 Dispute settlement
7 Accession and membership

7.1 Accession process
7.2 Members and observers


8 Agreements
9 Office of director-general

9.1 List of directors-general


10 Criticism of the organization
11 See also
12 Notes and references
13 External links



History[edit]








The image caption in this section requires cleanup to comply with Wikipedia guidelines for succinctness. 
See Wikipedia's picture tutorial and image help pages – review policy on image use and check the talk page – visit the Graphics Lab and improve this if you can. (June 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: History of the World Trade Organization




The economists Harry White (left) and John Maynard Keynes at the Bretton Woods Conference. Both had been strong advocates of a central-controlled international trade environment and recommended the establishment of three institutions: the IMF (for fiscal and monetary issues); the World Bank (for financial and structural issues); and the ITO (for international economic cooperation).[18]


The WTO's predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), was established after World War II in the wake of other new multilateral institutions dedicated to international economic cooperation – such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. A comparable international institution for trade, named the International Trade Organization never started as the treaty was not approved by the U.S. and other signatories,[19][20][21] and so GATT slowly became a de facto international organization.[22]
GATT negotiations before Uruguay[edit]
See also: General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
Seven rounds of negotiations occurred under GATT. The first real GATT trade rounds concentrated on further reducing tariffs. Then, the Kennedy Round in the mid-sixties brought about a GATT anti-dumping Agreement and a section on development. The Tokyo Round during the seventies was the first major attempt to tackle trade barriers that do not take the form of tariffs, and to improve the system, adopting a series of agreements on non-tariff barriers, which in some cases interpreted existing GATT rules, and in others broke entirely new ground. Because these plurilateral agreements were not accepted by the full GATT membership, they were often informally called "codes". Several of these codes were amended in the Uruguay Round, and turned into multilateral commitments accepted by all WTO members. Only four remained plurilateral (those on government procurement, bovine meat, civil aircraft and dairy products), but in 1997 WTO members agreed to terminate the bovine meat and dairy agreements, leaving only two.[23] Despite attempts in the mid-1950s and 1960s to create some form of institutional mechanism for international trade, the GATT continued to operate for almost half a century as a semi-institutionalized multilateral treaty regime on a provisional basis.[24]
Uruguay Round[edit]








The image caption in this section requires cleanup to comply with Wikipedia guidelines for succinctness. 
See Wikipedia's picture tutorial and image help pages – review policy on image use and check the talk page – visit the Graphics Lab and improve this if you can. (June 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Uruguay Round




During the Doha Round, the US government blamed Brazil and India for being inflexible and the EU for impeding agricultural imports.[25] The then-President of Brazil, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (above right), responded to the criticisms by arguing that progress would only be achieved if the richest countries (especially the US and countries in the EU) made deeper cuts in agricultural subsidies and further opened their markets for agricultural goods.[26]


Well before GATT's 40th anniversary, its members concluded that the GATT system was straining to adapt to a new globalizing world economy.[27][28] In response to the problems identified in the 1982 Ministerial Declaration (structural deficiencies, spill-over impacts of certain countries' policies on world trade GATT could not manage etc.), the eighth GATT round – known as the Uruguay Round – was launched in September 1986, in Punta del Este, Uruguay.[27]
It was the biggest negotiating mandate on trade ever agreed: the talks were going to extend the trading system into several new areas, notably trade in services and intellectual property, and to reform trade in the sensitive sectors of agriculture and textiles; all the original GATT articles were up for review.[28] The Final Act concluding the Uruguay Round and officially establishing the WTO regime was signed 15 April 1994, during the ministerial meeting at Marrakesh, Morocco, and hence is known as the Marrakesh Agreement.[29]
The GATT still exists as the WTO's umbrella treaty for trade in goods, updated as a result of the Uruguay Round negotiations (a distinction is made between GATT 1994, the updated parts of GATT, and GATT 1947, the original agreement which is still the heart of GATT 1994).[27] GATT 1994 is not however the only legally binding agreement included via the Final Act at Marrakesh; a long list of about 60 agreements, annexes, decisions and understandings was adopted. The agreements fall are in six main parts, the Agreement Establishing the WTO, the Multilateral Agreements on Trade in Goods,[30] the General Agreement on Trade in Services, the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, Dispute settlement[31] and reviews of governments' trade policies[32]
In terms of the WTO's principle relating to tariff "ceiling-binding" (No. 3), the Uruguay Round has been successful in increasing binding commitments by both developed and developing countries, as may be seen in the percentages of tariffs bound before and after the 1986–1994 talks.[33]
Ministerial conferences[edit]




The World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 1998, in the Palace of Nations (Geneva, Switzerland).


The highest decision-making body of the WTO is the Ministerial Conference, which usually meets every two years.[34] It brings together all members of the WTO, all of which are countries or customs unions. The Ministerial Conference can take decisions on all matters under any of the multilateral trade agreements. Some of these such as the inaugural ministerial conference in Singapore and the Cancun conference in 2003[35] involved arguments between developed and developing economies referred to as the "Singapore issues" such as agricultural subsidies while others such as the Seattle conference in 1999 created large demonstrations. The fourth ministerial conference in Doha in 2001 approved China's entry to the WTO and launched the Doha Development Round which was supplemented by the sixth WTO ministerial conference (in Hong Kong) when agricultural export subsidies were agreed to be phased out and adoption of the European Union's Everything but Arms initiative to phase out tariffs for goods from the Least Developed Countries.
Doha Round (Doha Agenda)[edit]
Main article: Doha Development Round
The WTO launched the current round of negotiations, the Doha Development Round, at the fourth ministerial conference in Doha, Qatar in November 2001. This was to be an ambitious effort to make globalization more inclusive and help the world's poor, particularly by slashing barriers and subsidies in farming.[36] The initial agenda comprised both further trade liberalization and new rule-making, underpinned by commitments to strengthen substantial assistance to developing countries.[37]
Progress stalled after over differences between developed nations and the major developing countries on issues such as industrial tariffs and non tariff barriers to trade[38] particularly against and between the EU and the US over their maintenance of agricultural subsidies—seen to operate effectively as trade barriers. Repeated attempts to revive the talks were without success[39] although adoption of the Bali Ministerial Declaration in 2013[40] addressed bureaucratic barriers to commerce[41] although the future of the Doha Round remains uncertain.
Functions[edit]
Among the various functions of the WTO, these are regarded by analysts as the most important:

It oversees the implementation, administration and operation of the covered agreements.[42][43]
It provides a forum for negotiations and for settling disputes.[44][45]

Additionally, it is WTO's duty to review and propagate the national trade policies, and to ensure the coherence and transparency of trade policies through surveillance in global economic policy-making.[43][45] Another priority of the WTO is the assistance of developing, least-developed and low-income countries in transition to adjust to WTO rules and disciplines through technical cooperation and training.[46]

The WTO shall facilitate the implementation, administration and operation and further the objectives of this Agreement and of the Multilateral Trade Agreements, and shall also provide the frame work for the implementation, administration and operation of the multilateral Trade Agreements.
The WTO shall provide the forum for negotiations among its members concerning their multilateral trade relations in matters dealt with under the Agreement in the Annexes to this Agreement.
The WTO shall administer the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes.
The WTO shall administer Trade Policy Review Mechanism.
With a view to achieving greater coherence in global economic policy making, the WTO shall cooperate, as appropriate, with the international Monetary Fund (IMF) and with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and its affiliated agencies.[47]

The above five listings are the additional functions of the World Trade Organization. As globalization proceeds in today's society, the necessity of an International Organization to manage the trading systems has been of vital importance. As the trade volume increases, issues such as protectionism, trade barriers, subsidies, violation of intellectual property arise due to the differences in the trading rules of every nation. The World Trade Organization serves as the mediator between the nations when such problems arise. WTO could be referred to as the product of globalization and also as one of the most important organizations in today's globalized society.
The WTO is also a centre of economic research and analysis: regular assessments of the global trade picture in its annual publications and research reports on specific topics are produced by the organization.[48] Finally, the WTO cooperates closely with the two other components of the Bretton Woods system, the IMF and the World Bank.[44]
Principles of the trading system[edit]
The WTO establishes a framework for trade policies; it does not define or specify outcomes. That is, it is concerned with setting the rules of the trade policy games.[49] Five principles are of particular importance in understanding both the pre-1994 GATT and the WTO:

Non-discrimination. It has two major components: the most favoured nation (MFN) rule, and the national treatment policy. Both are embedded in the main WTO rules on goods, services, and intellectual property, but their precise scope and nature differ across these areas. The MFN rule requires that a WTO member must apply the same conditions on all trade with other WTO members, i.e. a WTO member has to grant the most favourable conditions under which it allows trade in a certain product type to all other WTO members.[49] "Grant someone a special favour and you have to do the same for all other WTO members."[33] National treatment means that imported goods should be treated no less favourably than domestically produced goods (at least after the foreign goods have entered the market) and was introduced to tackle non-tariff barriers to trade (e.g. technical standards, security standards et al. discriminating against imported goods).[49]
Reciprocity. It reflects both a desire to limit the scope of free-riding that may arise because of the MFN rule, and a desire to obtain better access to foreign markets. A related point is that for a nation to negotiate, it is necessary that the gain from doing so be greater than the gain available from unilateral liberalization; reciprocal concessions intend to ensure that such gains will materialise.[50]
Binding and enforceable commitments. The tariff commitments made by WTO members in a multilateral trade negotiation and on accession are enumerated in a schedule (list) of concessions. These schedules establish "ceiling bindings": a country can change its bindings, but only after negotiating with its trading partners, which could mean compensating them for loss of trade. If satisfaction is not obtained, the complaining country may invoke the WTO dispute settlement procedures.[33][50]
Transparency. The WTO members are required to publish their trade regulations, to maintain institutions allowing for the review of administrative decisions affecting trade, to respond to requests for information by other members, and to notify changes in trade policies to the WTO. These internal transparency requirements are supplemented and facilitated by periodic country-specific reports (trade policy reviews) through the Trade Policy Review Mechanism (TPRM).[51] The WTO system tries also to improve predictability and stability, discouraging the use of quotas and other measures used to set limits on quantities of imports.[33]
Safety values. In specific circumstances, governments are able to restrict trade. The WTO's agreements permit members to take measures to protect not only the environment but also public health, animal health and plant health.[52]

There are three types of provision in this direction:

articles allowing for the use of trade measures to attain non-economic objectives;
articles aimed at ensuring "fair competition"; members must not use environmental protection measures as a means of disguising protectionist policies.[52][53]
provisions permitting intervention in trade for economic reasons.[51]

Exceptions to the MFN principle also allow for preferential treatment of developing countries, regional free trade areas and customs unions.[7]:fol.93
Organizational structure[edit]
The General Council has the following subsidiary bodies which oversee committees in different areas:

Council for Trade in Goods
There are 11 committees under the jurisdiction of the Goods Council each with a specific task. All members of the WTO participate in the committees. The Textiles Monitoring Body is separate from the other committees but still under the jurisdiction of Goods Council. The body has its own chairman and only 10 members. The body also has several groups relating to textiles.[54]


Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Information on intellectual property in the WTO, news and official records of the activities of the TRIPS Council, and details of the WTO's work with other international organizations in the field.[55]


Council for Trade in Services
The Council for Trade in Services operates under the guidance of the General Council and is responsible for overseeing the functioning of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). It is open to all WTO members, and can create subsidiary bodies as required.[56]


Trade Negotiations Committee
The Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) is the committee that deals with the current trade talks round. The chair is WTO's director-general. As of June 2012[update] the committee was tasked with the Doha Development Round.[57]

The Service Council has three subsidiary bodies: financial services, domestic regulations, GATS rules and specific commitments.[54] The council has several different committees, working groups, and working parties.[58] There are committees on the following: Trade and Environment; Trade and Development (Subcommittee on Least-Developed Countries); Regional Trade Agreements; Balance of Payments Restrictions; and Budget, Finance and Administration. There are working parties on the following: Accession. There are working groups on the following: Trade, debt and finance; and Trade and technology transfer.
Decision-making[edit]
The WTO describes itself as "a rules-based, member-driven organization—all decisions are made by the member governments, and the rules are the outcome of negotiations among members".[59] The WTO Agreement foresees votes where consensus cannot be reached, but the practice of consensus dominates the process of decision-making.[60]
Richard Harold Steinberg (2002) argues that although the WTO's consensus governance model provides law-based initial bargaining, trading rounds close through power-based bargaining favouring Europe and the U.S., and may not lead to Pareto improvement.[61]
Dispute settlement[edit]
Main article: Dispute settlement in the WTO
The WTO's dispute-settlement system "is the result of the evolution of rules, procedures and practices developed over almost half a century under the GATT 1947".[62] In 1994, the WTO members agreed on the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes (DSU) annexed to the "Final Act" signed in Marrakesh in 1994.[63] Dispute settlement is regarded by the WTO as the central pillar of the multilateral trading system, and as a "unique contribution to the stability of the global economy".[64] WTO members have agreed that, if they believe fellow-members are violating trade rules, they will use the multilateral system of settling disputes instead of taking action unilaterally.[65]
The operation of the WTO dispute settlement process involves case-specific panels[66] appointed by the Dispute Settlement Body (DSB),[67] the Appellate Body,[68] The Director-General and the WTO Secretariat,[69] arbitrators,[70] and advisory experts.[71]
The priority is to settle disputes, preferably through a mutually agreed solution, and provision has been made for the process to be conducted in an efficient and timely manner so that "If a case is adjudicated, it should normally take no more than one year for a panel ruling and no more than 16 months if the case is appealed... If the complainant deems the case urgent, consideration of the case should take even less time.[72] WTO member nations are obliged to accept the process as exclusive and compulsory.[73]
Accession and membership[edit]
Main article: World Trade Organization accession and membership
The process of becoming a WTO member is unique to each applicant country, and the terms of accession are dependent upon the country's stage of economic development and current trade regime.[74] The process takes about five years, on average, but it can last longer if the country is less than fully committed to the process or if political issues interfere. The shortest accession negotiation was that of the Kyrgyz Republic, while the longest was that of Russia, which, having first applied to join GATT in 1993, was approved for membership in December 2011 and became a WTO member on 22 August 2012.[75] Kazakhstan also had a long accession negotiation process. The Working Party on the Accession of Kazakhstan was established in 1996 and was approved for membership in 2015.[76] The second longest was that of Vanuatu, whose Working Party on the Accession of Vanuatu was established on 11 July 1995. After a final meeting of the Working Party in October 2001, Vanuatu requested more time to consider its accession terms. In 2008, it indicated its interest to resume and conclude its WTO accession. The Working Party on the Accession of Vanuatu was reconvened informally on 4 April 2011 to discuss Vanuatu's future WTO membership. The re-convened Working Party completed its mandate on 2 May 2011. The General Council formally approved the Accession Package of Vanuatu on 26 October 2011. On 24 August 2012, the WTO welcomed Vanuatu as its 157th member.[77] An offer of accession is only given once consensus is reached among interested parties.[78]
A 2017 study argues that "political ties rather than issue-area functional gains determine who joins" and shows "how geopolitical alignment shapes the demand and supply sides of membership".[79] The "findings challenge the view that states first liberalize trade to join the GATT/WTO. Instead, democracy and foreign policy similarity encourage states to join."[79]
Accession process[edit]




WTO accession progress:[80]
  Draft Working Party Report or Factual Summary adopted
  Goods or Services offers submitted
  Working party meetings
  Memorandum on Foreign Trade Regime submitted
  Working party established



A country wishing to accede to the WTO submits an application to the General Council, and has to describe all aspects of its trade and economic policies that have a bearing on WTO agreements.[81] The application is submitted to the WTO in a memorandum which is examined by a working party open to all interested WTO Members.[82]
After all necessary background information has been acquired, the working party focuses on issues of discrepancy between the WTO rules and the applicant's international and domestic trade policies and laws. The working party determines the terms and conditions of entry into the WTO for the applicant nation, and may consider transitional periods to allow countries some leeway in complying with the WTO rules.[74]
The final phase of accession involves bilateral negotiations between the applicant nation and other working party members regarding the concessions and commitments on tariff levels and market access for goods and services. The new member's commitments are to apply equally to all WTO members under normal non-discrimination rules, even though they are negotiated bilaterally.[81]
When the bilateral talks conclude, the working party sends to the general council or ministerial conference an accession package, which includes a summary of all the working party meetings, the Protocol of Accession (a draft membership treaty), and lists ("schedules") of the member-to-be's commitments. Once the general council or ministerial conference approves of the terms of accession, the applicant's parliament must ratify the Protocol of Accession before it can become a member.[83] Some countries may have faced tougher and a much longer accession process due to challenges during negotiations with other WTO members, such as Vietnam, whose negotiations took more than 11 years before it became official member in January 2007.[84]
Members and observers[edit]
The WTO has 164 members and 23 observer governments.[85] Liberia became the 163rd member on 14 July 2016, and Afghanistan became the 164th member on 29 July 2016.[86][87] In addition to states, the European Union, and each EU Country in its own right,[88] is a member. WTO members do not have to be fully independent states; they need only be a customs territory with full autonomy in the conduct of their external commercial relations. Thus Hong Kong has been a member since 1995 (as "Hong Kong, China" since 1997) predating the People's Republic of China, which joined in 2001 after 15 years of negotiations. The Republic of China (Taiwan) acceded to the WTO in 2002 as "Separate Customs Territory of China: Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu" (Chinese Taipei) despite its disputed status.[89] The WTO Secretariat omits the official titles (such as Counsellor, First Secretary, Second Secretary and Third Secretary) of the members of Chinese Taipei's Permanent Mission to the WTO, except for the titles of the Permanent Representative and the Deputy Permanent Representative.[90]
As of 2007, WTO member states represented 96.4% of global trade and 96.7% of global GDP.[91] Iran, followed by Algeria, are the economies with the largest GDP and trade outside the WTO, using 2005 data.[92][93] With the exception of the Holy See, observers must start accession negotiations within five years of becoming observers. A number of international intergovernmental organizations have also been granted observer status to WTO bodies.[94] 12 UN member states have no official affiliation with the WTO.
Agreements[edit]
Further information: Uruguay Round
The WTO oversees about 60 different agreements which have the status of international legal texts. Member countries must sign and ratify all WTO agreements on accession.[95] A discussion of some of the most important agreements follows. The Agreement on Agriculture came into effect with the establishment of the WTO at the beginning of 1995. The AoA has three central concepts, or "pillars": domestic support, market access and export subsidies. The General Agreement on Trade in Services was created to extend the multilateral trading system to service sector, in the same way as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) provided such a system for merchandise trade. The agreement entered into force in January 1995. The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights sets down minimum standards for many forms of intellectual property (IP) regulation. It was negotiated at the end of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1994.[96]
The Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures—also known as the SPS Agreement—was negotiated during the Uruguay Round of GATT, and entered into force with the establishment of the WTO at the beginning of 1995. Under the SPS agreement, the WTO sets constraints on members' policies relating to food safety (bacterial contaminants, pesticides, inspection and labelling) as well as animal and plant health (imported pests and diseases). The Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade is an international treaty of the World Trade Organization. It was negotiated during the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and entered into force with the establishment of the WTO at the end of 1994. The object ensures that technical negotiations and standards, as well as testing and certification procedures, do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade".[97] The Agreement on Customs Valuation, formally known as the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of GATT, prescribes methods of customs valuation that Members are to follow. Chiefly, it adopts the "transaction value" approach.
In December 2013, the biggest agreement within the WTO was signed and known as the Bali Package.[98]
Office of director-general[edit]




The headquarters of the World Trade Organization in Geneva, Switzerland.


The procedures for the appointment of the WTO director-general were published in January 2003.[99] Additionally, there are four deputy directors-general. As of 1 October 2013[update], under director-general Roberto Azevêdo, the four deputy directors-general are Yi Xiaozhun of China, Karl-Ernst Brauner of Germany, Yonov Frederick Agah of Nigeria and David Shark of the United States.[100]
List of directors-general[edit]
Source: Official website[101]

 Roberto Azevêdo, 2013–
 Pascal Lamy, 2005–13
 Supachai Panitchpakdi, 2002–05
 Mike Moore, 1999–2002
 Renato Ruggiero, 1995–99
 Peter Sutherland, 1995

(Heads of the precursor organization, GATT):

 Peter Sutherland, 1993–95
 Arthur Dunkel, 1980–93
 Olivier Long, 1968–80
 Eric Wyndham White, 1948–68

Criticism of the organization[edit]
Main article: Criticism of the World Trade Organization
See also[edit]


Agreement on Trade Related Investment Measures
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Aide-mémoire
Anti-globalization movement
Foreign Affiliate Trade Statistics
Global administrative law
Globality
Information Technology Agreement
International Trade Centre
Labour Standards in the World Trade Organisation
List of member states of the World Trade Organization
North American Free Trade Agreement
Subsidy
Swiss Formula
Trade bloc
Washington Consensus
World Trade Report
World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 1999 protest activity
China and the World Trade Organization
Geographical indication
Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999
List of Geographical Indications in India


Notes and references[edit]



^ Members and Observers at WTO official website
^ Languages, Documentation and Information Management Division at WTO official site
^ "WTO Secretariat budget for 2011". WTO official site. Retrieved 25 August 2008. 
^ Understanding the WTO: What We Stand For_ Fact File
^ http://www.nber.org/reporter/winter00/krueger.html
^ World Trade Organization – UNDERSTANDING THE WTO: BASICS
^ a b Understanding the WTO Handbook at WTO official website. (Note that the document's printed folio numbers do not match the pdf page numbers.)
^ Malanczuk, P. (1999). "International Organisations and Space Law: World Trade Organization". Encyclopædia Britannica. 442. p. 305. Bibcode:1999ESASP.442..305M. 
^ Understanding the WTO: The Doha Agenda
^ The Challenges to the World Trade Organization: It’s All About Legitimacy THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION, Policy Paper 2011-04
^ GROUPS IN THE WTO Updated 1 July 2013
^ Bourcier, Nicolas (21 May 2013). "Roberto Azevedo's WTO appointment gives Brazil a seat at the top table". Guardian Weekly. Retrieved 2 September 2013. 
^ "Roberto Azevêdo takes over". WTO official website. 1 September 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2013. 
^ "Overview of the WTO Secretariat". WTO official website. Retrieved 2 September 2013. 
^ Ninth WTO Ministerial Conference | WTO – MC9 Archived 1 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ BBC News – WTO agrees global trade deal worth $1tn
^ https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news17_e/trip_23jan17_e.htm
^ A.E. Eckes Jr., US Trade History, 73
* A. Smithies, Reflections on the Work of Keynes, 578–601
* N. Warren, Internet and Globalization, 193
^ P. van den Bossche, The Law and Policy of the World Trade Organization, 80
^ Palmeter-Mavroidis, Dispute Settlement, 2
^ Fergusson, Ian F. (9 May 2007). "The World Trade Organization: Background and Issues" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. p. 4. Retrieved 15 August 2008. 
^ It was contemplated that the GATT would be applied for several years until the ITO came into force. However, since the ITO was never brought into being, the GATT gradually became the focus for international governmental cooperation on trade matters with economist Nicholas Halford overseeing the implementation of GATT in members policies. (P. van den Bossche, The Law and Policy of the World Trade Organization, 81; J.H. Jackson, Managing the Trading System, 134).
^ The GATT Years: from Havana to Marrakesh, WTO official site
^ Footer, M. E. Analysis of the World Trade Organization, 17
^ B.S. Klapper, With a "Short Window"
^ Lula, Time to Get Serious about Agricultural Subsidies
^ a b c P. Gallagher, The First Ten Years of the WTO, 4
^ a b The Uruguay Round, WTO official site
^ "Legal texts – Marrakesh agreement". WTO. Retrieved 30 May 2010. 
^ including the GATT 1994 and the Trade Related Investment Measures (TRIMS)
^ ""Resolving Trade Disputes, the Mechanisms of GATT/WTO Dispute Resolution" by Daniel H. Erskine". digitalcommons.law.scu.edu. Retrieved 2016-04-03. 
^ Overview: a Navigational Guide, WTO official site. For the complete list of "The Uruguay Round Agreements", see WTO legal texts, WTO official site, and Uruguay Round Agreements, Understandings, Decisions and Declarations Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine., WorldTradeLaw.net
^ a b c d Principles of the Trading System, WTO official site
^ https://www.wto.org/english/theWTO_e/minist_e/min11_e/min11_e.htm
^ "Five Years of China WTO Membership. EU and US Perspectives about China's Compliance with Transparency Commitments and the Transitional Review Mechanism". Papers.ssrn.com. SSRN 916768 .  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "In the twilight of Doha". The Economist. The Economist: 65. 27 July 2006. 
^ European Commission The Doha Round
^ Fergusson ps, Ian F. (18 January 2008). "World Trade Organization Negotiations: The Doha Development Agenda" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. Retrieved 26 July 2008. 
^ Documents from the negotiating chairs, 21 April 2011 at WTO official website
^ Bali Ministerial Declaration and decisions Archived 18 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine. at WTO official website. Accessed 31 December 2013
^ Walker, Andrew (7 December 2013). "WTO agrees global trade deal worth $1tn". BBC News. Retrieved 7 December 2013. 
^ Functions of the WTO Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine., IISD
^ a b Main Functions Archived 30 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine., WTO official site
^ a b A Bredimas, International Economic Law, II, 17
^ a b C. Deere, Decision-making in the WTO: Medieval or Up-to-Date?
^ WTO Assistance for Developing Countries, WTO official site Archived 12 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Sinha, Aparijita. [1]. "What are the functions and objectives of the WTO?". Retrieved on 13 April 2014.
^ Economic research and analysis, WTO official site
^ a b c B. Hoekman, The WTO: Functions and Basic Principles, 42
^ a b B. Hoekman, The WTO: Functions and Basic Principles, 43
^ a b B. Hoekman, The WTO: Functions and Basic Principles, 44
^ a b Understanding the WTO: What we stand for
^ Farah, Paolo Davide and Cima, Elena, World Trade Organization, Renewable Energy Subsidies and the Case of Feed-In Tariffs: Time for Reform Toward Sustainable Development? (December 1, 2015). Georgetown International Environmental Law Review (GIELR), Vol. 27, No. 1, 2015. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2704398
^ a b "Fourth level: down to the nitty-gritty". WTO official site. Retrieved 18 August 2008. 
^ "Intellectual property – overview of TRIPS Agreement". Wto.org. 15 April 1994. Retrieved 30 May 2010. 
^ "The Services Council, its Committees and other subsidiary bodies". WTO official site. Retrieved 14 August 2008. 
^ "The Trade Negotiations Committee". WTO official site. Retrieved 14 August 2008. 
^ "WTO organization chart". WTO official site. Retrieved 14 August 2008. 
^ Decision-making at WTO official site
^ Decision-Making in the World Trade Organization Abstract from Journal of International Economic Law at Oxford Journals
^ Steinberg, Richard H. "In the Shadow of Law or Power? Consensus-based Bargaining and Outcomes in the GATT/WTO." International Organization. Spring 2002. pp. 339–74.
^ "1.2 The Dispute Settlement Understanding". WTO official website. 2005. Retrieved 7 March 2005. 
^ Stewart-Dawyer, The WTO Dispute Settlement System, 7
^ S. Panitchpakdi, The WTO at ten, 8.
^ Settling Disputes:a Unique Contribution, WTO official site
^ "3.3 Panels". WTO official website. 2005. Retrieved 7 March 2005. 
^ "3.1 The Dispute Settlement Body (DSB)". WTO official website. 2005. Retrieved 7 March 2015. 
^ "3.4 Appellate Body". WTO official website. 2005. Retrieved 7 March 2005. 
^ "3.2 The Director-General and the WTO Secretariat". WTO official website. 2005. Retrieved 7 March 2005. 
^ "3.5 arbitrators". WTO official website. 2005. Retrieved 7 March 2005. 
^ "3.6 Experts". WTO official website. 2005. Retrieved 7 March 2005. 
^ ""Mutually Agreed Solutions" as "Preferred Solution"". WTO official website. 2005. Retrieved 7 March 2005. 
^ "1.3 Functions, objectives and key features of the dispute settlement system". WTO official website. 2005. Retrieved 7 March 2005. 
^ a b Accessions Summary, Center for International Development
^ Ministerial Conference approves Russia's WTO membership WTO News Item, 16 December 2011
^ "Kazakhstan". www.wto.org. Retrieved 23 February 2016. 
^ Accession status: Vanuatu. WTO. Retrieved on 12 July 2013.
^ C. Michalopoulos, WTO Accession, 64
^ a b Davis, Christina L.; Wilf, Meredith (2017-05-10). "Joining the Club: Accession to the GATT/WTO". The Journal of Politics: 000–000. doi:10.1086/691058. ISSN 0022-3816. 
^ "Summary Table of Ongoing Accessions". World Trade Organization. April 2014. Retrieved 2014-10-25. 
^ a b Membership, Alliances and Bureaucracy, WTO official site
^ C. Michalopoulos, WTO Accession, 62–63
^ How to Become a Member of the WTO, WTO official site
^ Napier, Nancy K.; Vuong, Quan Hoang (2013). What we see, why we worry, why we hope: Vietnam going forward. Boise, ID: Boise State University CCI Press. p. 140. ISBN 978-0985530587. 
^ "Members and Observers". World Trade Organization. 24 August 2012. 
^ "Liberia clears last hurdle to WTO accession | International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development". www.ictsd.org. Retrieved 2016-06-25. 
^ "Afghanistan to become 164th WTO member on 29 July 2016". Retrieved 2016-07-01. 
^ "The European Union and the WTO". World Trade Organization. Retrieved 2 August 2016. 
^ Jackson, J. H. Sovereignty, 109
^ ROC Government Publication
^ "Accession in perspective". World Trade Organization. Retrieved 22 December 2013. 
^ "ANNEX 1. STATISTICAL SURVEY". World Trade Organization. 2005. Retrieved 22 December 2013. 
^ Arjomandy, Danial (21 November 2013). "Iranian Membership in the World Trade Organization: An Unclear Future". Iranian Studies. 47: 933–50. doi:10.1080/00210862.2013.859810. Retrieved 22 December 2013. 
^ International intergovernmental organizations granted observer status to WTO bodies at WTO official website
^ "Legal texts – the WTO agreements". WTO. Retrieved 30 May 2010. 
^ Understanding the WTO - Intellectual property: protection and enforcement. WTO. Retrieved on 29 July 2013.
^ "A Summary of the Final Act of the Uruguay Round". Wto.org. Retrieved 30 May 2010. 
^ Zarocostas, John (7 December 2013). "Global Trade Deal Reached". WWD. Retrieved 8 December 2013. 
^ "WT/L/509". WTO. Retrieved 18 February 2013. 
^ "Director-General Elect Azevêdo announces his four Deputy Directors-General". 17 August 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2013. 
^ "Previous GATT and WTO Directors-General". WTO. Retrieved 21 May 2011. 



External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: World Trade Organization





Wikimedia Commons has media related to World Trade Organization.



Official pages


Official WTO homepage

"WTO 10th Anniversary" (PDF).  (1.40 MB) – Highlights of the first decade, Annual Report 2005 pp. 116–66
Glossary of terms – a guide to 'WTO-speak'


International Trade Centre – joint UN/WTO agency







v
t
e


World Trade Organization



System



Accession and membership
Appellate Body
Dispute Settlement Body
International Trade Centre
Chronology of key events





Issues



Criticism
Doha Development Round
Singapore issues
Quota Elimination
Peace Clause





Agreements



General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
Agriculture
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Technical Barriers to Trade
Trade Related Investment Measures
Trade in Services
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Government Procurement
Information Technology
Marrakech Agreement
Doha Declaration
Bali Package





Ministerial
Conferences



1st (1996)
2nd (1998)
3rd (1999)
4th (2001)
5th (2003)
6th (2005)
7th (2009)
8th (2011)
9th (2013)
10th (2015)





People



Roberto Azevêdo (Director-General)
Pascal Lamy
Supachai Panitchpakdi
Alejandro Jara
Rufus Yerxa





Members



Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Benin
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Cuba
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Fiji
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Ghana
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong1
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Israel
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lesotho
Liberia
Liechtenstein
Macau1
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Rwanda
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Suriname
Swaziland
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Taiwan2
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe




European Union



Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom











Special administrative regions of the People's Republic of China, participates as "Hong Kong, China" and "Macao China".
Officially the Republic of China, participates as "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu", and "Chinese Taipei" in short.












v
t
e


International trade



Terminology



Absolute advantage
Balance of payments
Balance of trade
Capital account
Comparative advantage
Current account
Export-oriented industrialization
Fair trade
Foreign exchange reserves
Globalization
Import substitution industrialization
Net capital outflow
Outsourcing
Tariff
Trade justice
Trade war
Trading nation









Organizations
and policies




International Monetary Fund (IMF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization (WTO)

International Trade Centre


Bilateral investment treaty
Economic integration
Free-trade zone
Special economic zone
Trade agreement
Trade barrier
Trade bloc





Political economy



Free trade (Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Repeal of the Corn Laws)
Mercantilism
Protectionism (Economic nationalism, Autarky)





Regional organizations



ACU
ASEAN
CACM
CAN
CARICOM
CEMAC
CUBKR
EAC
EAU
EU
GCC
Mercosur
RCEP
SAARC
SACU
WAEMU





Exports by product



Aircraft & Spacecraft
Aircraft parts
Aluminium
Cars
Car parts
Coal
Coffee
Computers
Copper
Corn
Cotton
Diamonds
Electricity
Engines
Gas turbines
Gold
Integrated circuits
Iron ore
Natural gas
Oil
Petrol
Pharmaceuticals
Ships
Steel
Telecommunications equipment
Telephones
Trucks
Wheat
Wine








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


International organizations



Intergovernmental
organizations




Non-cultural IGOs



International Criminal Court
International Monetary Fund
International Seabed Authority
Inter-Parliamentary Union
Interpol
New Development Bank
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
United Nations
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization





Cultural IGOs



Commonwealth of Nations
Community of Portuguese Language Countries
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie















v
t
e


Economics






Economic theory
Econometrics
Applied economics





Macroeconomics



Adaptive expectations
Aggregate demand
Balance of payments
Business cycle
Capacity utilization
Capital flight
Central bank
Consumer confidence
Currency
Demand shock
Depression (Great Depression)
DSGE
Economic growth
Economic indicator
Economic rent
Effective demand
General Theory of Keynes
Hyperinflation
Inflation
Interest
Interest rate
Investment
IS–LM model
Microfoundations
Monetary policy
Money
NAIRU
National accounts
PPP
Rate of profit
Rational expectations
Recession
Saving
Shrinkflation
Stagflation
Supply shock
Unemployment
Macroeconomics publications





Microeconomics



Aggregation problem
Budget set
Consumer choice
Convexity
Cost–benefit analysis
Deadweight loss
Distribution
Duopoly
Economic equilibrium
Economic shortage
Economic surplus
Economies of scale
Economies of scope
Elasticity
Expected utility hypothesis
Externality
General equilibrium theory
Indifference curve
Intertemporal choice
Marginal cost
Market failure
Market structure
Monopoly
Monopsony
Non-convexity
Oligopoly
Opportunity cost
Preference
Production set
Profit
Public good
Returns to scale
Risk aversion
Scarcity
Social choice theory
Sunk costs
Supply and demand
Theory of the firm
Trade
Transaction cost
Value
Uncertainty
Utility
Microeconomics publications





Applied fields



Agricultural
Business
Demographic
Development
Economic history
Education
Engineering
Environmental
Financial
Health
Industrial organization
International
Knowledge
Labour
Law and economics
Monetary
Natural resource
Public
Service
Transportation
Urban
Welfare





Methodology



Behavioral economics
Computational economics
Econometrics
Economic systems
Experimental economics
Mathematical economics
Methodological publications





Economic thought



Ancient economic thought
Austrian school of economics
Chicago school of economics
Classical economics
Feminist economics
Heterodox economics
Institutional economics
Keynesian economics
Mainstream economics
Marxian economics
Neoclassical economics
Post-Keynesian economics
Schools overview






Notable economists and
thinkers within economics




Kenneth Arrow
Gary Becker
Francis Ysidro Edgeworth
Milton Friedman
Ragnar Frisch
Friedrich Hayek
Harold Hotelling
John Maynard Keynes
Tjalling Koopmans
Paul Krugman
Robert Lucas Jr.
Jacob Marschak
Alfred Marshall
Karl Marx
John von Neumann
Vilfredo Pareto
David Ricardo
Paul Samuelson
Joseph Schumpeter
Amartya Sen
Herbert A. Simon
Adam Smith
Robert Solow
Léon Walras
more





International organizations



Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Economic Cooperation Organization
European Free Trade Association
International Monetary Fund
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
World Bank
World Trade Organization








Category
Index
Lists
Outline
Publications
Business and economics portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 153400694
LCCN: no94018277
ISNI: 0000 0001 2296 2735
GND: 2145784-0
SELIBR: 135910
SUDOC: 032375824
BNF: cb12341756k (data)
ULAN: 500292980
HDS: 13811
NLA: 35451455
NDL: 00577475
NKC: kn20010711437
BNE: XX4574846








Business and economics portal
United Nations portal
International relations portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_Trade_Organization&oldid=818192994"					Categories: World Trade OrganizationInternational tradeInternational trade organizationsOrganisations based in GenevaOrganizations established in 1995World governmentHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksPages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLUse dmy dates from February 2014Use British English Oxford spelling from August 2016Articles with French-language external linksArticles with Spanish-language external linksCoordinates not on WikidataArticles containing potentially dated statements from June 2012All articles containing potentially dated statementsImage captions for cleanup/With examplesImage captions for cleanup/With examples/Not succinctImage captions for cleanup from June 2017All image captions for cleanupArticles containing potentially dated statements from October 2013Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers