For other uses of "World music", see World Music (disambiguation).


World music


Cultural origins
Folk music of indigenous cultures worldwide


Typical instruments



Folk music and contemporary classical music string instrument (Electric guitar and acoustic guitar)
wind instrument
percussion instrument
Mbira
piano
synthesizer





Fusion genres





Worldbeat
ethno jazz





World music (also called global music or international music[1]) is a musical category encompassing many different styles of music from around the globe, which includes many genres including some forms of Western music represented by folk music, as well as selected forms of ethnic music, indigenous music, neotraditional music, and music where more than one cultural tradition, such as ethnic music and Western popular music, intermingle.
World music's inclusive nature and elasticity as a musical category may pose for some obstacles to a universal definition, but its ethic of interest in the culturally exotic is encapsulated in fRoots magazine's description of the genre as "local music from out there".[2]
The term was popularized in the 1980s as a marketing category for non-Western traditional music.[3][4] Globalization has facilitated the expansion of world music's audiences and scope.[citation needed] It has grown to include hybrid subgenres such as world fusion, global fusion, ethnic fusion,[5] and worldbeat.[6][7]



Contents


1 Terminology

1.1 Evolving terminology


2 Forms
3 Hybrid examples

3.1 World fusion


4 Popular non-Western genres
5 After 1987: Women and beyond

5.1 1987 meeting


6 Marketing
7 Relationship to immigration and multiculturalism
8 World Music Month
9 2010s radio programs
10 Criticisms
11 Awards
12 Festivals
13 See also
14 References

14.1 Notes
14.2 Citations


15 External links



Terminology[edit]




Delhi 2 Dublin in 2012


The term has been credited to ethnomusicologist Robert E. Brown, who coined it in the early 1960s at Wesleyan University in Connecticut, where he developed undergraduate through the doctoral programs in the discipline. To enhance the process of learning, he invited more than a dozen visiting performers from Africa and Asia and began a world music concert series.[8][9] The term became current in the 1980s as a marketing/classificatory device in the media and the music industry.[10] There are several conflicting definitions for world music. One is that it consists of "all the music in the world", though such a broad definition renders the term virtually meaningless.[11][12]
The term also is taken as a classification of music that combines Western popular music styles with one of many genres of non-Western music that are also described as folk music or ethnic music. However, world music is not exclusively traditional folk music. It may include cutting edge pop music styles as well. Succinctly, it can be described as "local music from out there",[13] or "someone else's local music".[14] It is a very nebulous term with an increasing number of genres that fall under the umbrella of world music to capture musical trends of combined ethnic style and texture, including Western elements (examples noted in this section).
World music may incorporate distinctive non-Western scales, modes and/or musical inflections, and often features distinctive traditional ethnic instruments, such as the kora (West African harp), the steel drum, the sitar or the didgeridoo.[15]
Music from around the world exerts wide cross-cultural influence as styles naturally influence one another, and in recent years world music has also been marketed as a successful genre in itself. Academic study of world music, as well as the musical genres and individual artists associated with it appear in such disciplines as anthropology, folkloristics, performance studies and ethnomusicology.
Evolving terminology[edit]




Anda Union at a music festival


In the age of digital music production the increased availability of high-quality, ethnic music samples, sound bites and loops from every known region are commonly used in commercial music production, which has exposed a vast spectrum of indigenous music texture to developing, independent artists. These influences proliferate quickly in a web-based music industry that is now percolating as a much larger, predominantly self-promoted menu, via an increasing number of indie-artist-friendly, streaming Internet options, such as Last.fm, Rhapsody, Live365, Jango Artist Airplay and ReverbNation.
An amalgamation of roots music in the global, contemporary listening palette has become apparent, which weakens the role major entertainment labels can play in the cultural perception of genre boundaries. As a result, definitions of the genre have become particularly varied, and determined by particularly wide-ranging and varied opinions.[citation needed]
Similar terminology between distinctly different sub-categories under primary music genres, such as world, rock and pop can be as ambiguous and confusing to industry moguls as it is to consumers. This is especially true in the context of world music, where branches of ethnically influenced pop trends are as genre-defined by consumer perception as they are by the music industry forums that govern the basis for categorical distinction. Academic scholars tend to agree that, in today's world of consumer music reviews and blogging, global music culture's public perception is what ultimately distils a prevailing basis for definition from genre ambiguity, regardless of how clearly a category has been outlined by corporate marketing forums and music journalism. The world music genre's gradual migration from a clear spectrum of roots music traditions to an extended list of hybrid subgenres is a good example of the motion genre boundaries can exhibit in a globalizing pop culture.
The classic, original definition of world music was in part created to instill a perceived authenticity and distinction between indigenous music traditions and those that eventually become diluted by pop culture, and the modern debate over how possible it is to maintain that perception in the richly diverse genre of world music is ongoing.[16][17]
In a report on the 2014 globalFEST National Public Radio's Anastasia Tsioulcas said "Even within the "world music" community, nobody likes the term "world music." It smacks of all kinds of loaded issues, from cultural colonialism to questions about what's "authentic" and what isn't (and who might get to police such inquiries), and forces an incredible array of styles that don't have anything in common under the label of "exotic Other." What's more: I believe that in many people's imaginations, "world music" means a kind of fairly awful, gloppy, hippy-ish, worldbeat fusion. It's a problematic, horrible term that satisfies absolutely no one."[18]
Forms[edit]




Alan Stivell in concert at Brest (Brittany), 2013


Examples of popular forms of world music include the various forms of non-European classical music (e.g. Japanese koto and Chinese guzheng music, Indian raga music, Tibetan chants), Eastern European folk music (e.g. the village music of the Balkans, The Mystery Of The Bulgarian Voices), Nordic folk music and the many forms of folk and tribal music of the Middle East, Africa, Asia, Oceania, Central and South America, and Indonesian music.
The Breton musician Alan Stivell pioneered the connection between traditional folk music, modern rock music and world music with his 1972 album Renaissance of the Celtic Harp.[19] At this time, Stivell's contemporary, Welsh singer-songwriter Meic Stevens popularised Welsh folk music.[20] Neo-traditional Welsh language music featuring a fusion of modern instruments and traditional instruments such as the Pibgorn and the Welsh harp has been further developed by artists such as Bob Delyn a'r Ebillion. Lebanese musical pioneer Lydia Canaan fused Middle-Eastern quarter notes and microtones with anglophone folk, and is listed in the catalog of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum's Library and Archives[21][22] as the first rock star of the Middle East.[22][23][24][25][26]
More recently, other Welsh-language bands such as Calan and 9 Bach have achieved international acclaim.[27][28] Experimental psychedelic rock group Super Furry Animals's Welsh-language album Mwng was released in May 2000 and re-released in May 2015, captures the spirit of World music as 'trying to hang on to something that's under serious threat from advanced capitalism'.[29]
The broad category of world music includes isolated forms of ethnic music from diverse geographical regions. These dissimilar strains of ethnic music are commonly categorized together by virtue of their indigenous roots. Over the 20th century, the invention of sound recording, low-cost international air travel and common access to global communication among artists and the general public has given rise to a related phenomenon called "crossover" music. Musicians from diverse cultures and locations could readily access recorded music from around the world, see and hear visiting musicians from other cultures and visit other countries to play their own music, creating a melting pot of stylistic influences. While communication technology allows greater access to obscure forms of music, the pressures of commercialization also present the risk of increasing musical homogeneity, the blurring of regional identities, and the gradual extinction of traditional local music-making practices.[citation needed]
Hybrid examples[edit]




Vampire Weekend performing at Red Rocks Amphitheatre in 2013


Since the music industry established this term, the fuller scope of what an average music consumer defines as "world" music in today's market has grown to include various blends of ethnic music tradition, style and interpretation,[7] and derivative world music genres have been coined to represent these hybrids, such as World fusion, Global fusion, Ethnic fusion or Worldbeat. Good examples of hybrid, world fusion are the Irish / West African meld of Afro Celt Sound System,[30] the pan-cultural sound of Aomusic[31] and the jazz / Finnish folk music of Värttinä,[32] each of which bear tinges of contemporary, Western influence—an increasingly noticeable element in the expansion genres of world music. World fusion / Worldbeat / Ethnic fusion / Global fusion can also blend specific indigenous sounds with more blatant elements of Western pop. Good examples are Paul Simon's album Graceland, on which South African Mbaqanga music is heard, Peter Gabriel's work with Pakistani Sufi singer, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, the Deep Forest project, in which vocal loops from West Africa are blended with Western, contemporary rhythmic textures and harmony structure, and the work of Mango, who combined pop and rock music with world elements.
More recent bands who exhibit experimentation with World music Hybrid Forms include Vampire Weekend, The Very Best, Island Cassettes & Yeasayer, many of which cite inspiration from the work of Paul Simon.
Depending on style and context, world music can sometimes share the new-age music genre, which is a category that often includes Ambient music and textural expressions from indigenous roots sources. Good examples are Tibetan bowls, Tuvan throat singing, Gregorian chant or Native American flute music. World music blended with new-age music is a sound, loosely classified as the hybrid genre, ethnic fusion. Examples of ethnic fusion are Nicholas Gunn's "Face-to-Face" from Beyond Grand Canyon, featuring authentic Native American flute combined with synthesizers, and "Four Worlds" from The Music of the Grand Canyon, featuring spoken word from Razor Saltboy of the Navajo Indian Nation.
World fusion[edit]
The subgenre world fusion is often mistakenly assumed to refer exclusively to a blending of Western jazz fusion elements with world music. Although such a hybrid expression falls easily into the world fusion category, the suffix "fusion" in the term world fusion should not be assumed to mean only jazz fusion. Western jazz combined with strong elements of world music is more accurately termed world fusion jazz, ethnic jazz or non-Western jazz.[33] World fusion and global fusion are nearly synonymous with the genre term worldbeat, and though these are considered subgenres of popular music, they may also imply universal expressions of the more general term, world music.[7] Throughout the 1970s and 80s, fusion in the jazz music genre implied a blending of jazz and rock music, which is where the misleading assumption is rooted.[34]
Popular non-Western genres[edit]
Although it primarily describes traditional music, the world music category also includes popular music from non-Western urban communities (e.g. South African "township" music) and non-European music forms that have been influenced by other so-called third-world musics (e.g. Afro-Cuban music), although Western-style popular song sourced from non-English-speaking countries in Europe (e.g. French pop music) would not generally be considered world music.[citation needed]
Paris is one of the great European capitals for world music.[citation needed] For many years, the city has attracted numerous musicians from former colonies in West and North Africa. This scene is aided by the fact that there are many concerts and institutions that help promote the music.
Algerian and Moroccan music have an important presence in the French capital. Hundreds of thousands of Algerian and Moroccan immigrants have settled in Paris, bringing the sounds of Amazigh (Berber), raï, and Gnawa music. Algerian raï also found a large French audience.[citation needed]
The West African community is also very large, integrated by people from Senegal, Mali, Ivory Coast, and Guinea. They have introduced manding jeli music, mbalax and other styles.[citation needed]
After 1987: Women and beyond[edit]
One origin of the term was the initiation of World Music Day (Fête de la Musique) in 1982 in France. World Music Day has been celebrated on 21 June every year since then. On 29 June 1987 a meeting of interested parties gathered to capitalize on the marketing of this genre. Arguably popular interest was sparked with the release in 1986 of Paul Simon's Graceland album.[citation needed] The concept behind the album was to express his own sensibilities using the sounds he had fallen in love with while listening to artists from Southern Africa, including Ladysmith Black Mambazo and Savuka. This project and the work of Peter Gabriel and Johnny Clegg among others had, to some degree, introduced non-Western music to a wider audience. They saw this as an opportunity. Zila Khan is one of today's leading singers in World Music.[citation needed]
Before 1987, world music had a following but it was still difficult for interested parties to sell their music to the larger music stores.[citation needed] Although specialist music stores had been important in developing the genre over many years, the record companies, broadcasters and journalists had been finding it difficult to build a following because the music, itself, seemed too scarce. However, they were aware that the jazz and classical markets had developed a crossover audience. They decided the best way forward would be a collective strategy to bring the music to a wider audience.[citation needed]
At around this time, Cultural Co-operation started the Music Village Festival. This regular series of free world music festivals continues to run. They also started a network of world music artists to help promote their work.[citation needed]
1987 meeting[edit]
At the outset of the 1987 meeting, the musician Roger Armstrong advised the reason why something had to be done:

[He] felt that the main problem in selling our kind of material lay with the UK retail outlets and, specifically, the fact that they did not know how to rack it coherently. This discouraged [the retail stores] from stocking the material in any depth and made it more difficult for the record buyers to become acquainted with our catalogs.[35]

The first concern of the meetings was to select the umbrella name that this music would be listed under. Suggestions included "world beat" and prefixing words such as "hot" or "tropical" to existing genre titles. "World music" won after a show of hands, but initially it was not meant to be the title for a whole new genre—but just something the record labels could place on record sleeves to distinguish them during the forthcoming campaign. Afterward, they agreed that despite the publicity campaign, this wasn't an exclusive club—and that for the good of all, any label that sold this type of music could use the name.
Another issue was the distribution methods at the time. Most main labels were unhappy with the lack of specialist knowledge in their sales force, which led to poor service. Many larger outlets were reluctant to carry the music, because they favored larger releases they could promote within the store. It was difficult to justify a large presentation expense with limited stock going into stores.
Marketing[edit]
One of the marketing strategies used in the vinyl market at the time was the use of browser cards, which would appear in the record racks. As part of the "world music" campaign, it was decided that these would be a two color affair designed to carry a special offer package; to aid the retailer a selection of labels would also be included, presumably for shelf or rack edging.
In an unprecedented move, all of the world music labels coordinated together and developed a compilation cassette for the cover of the music magazine NME. The overall running time was 90 minutes, each package containing a mini-catalog showing the other releases on offer.
By the time of a second meeting it became clear that a successful campaign required its own dedicated press officer. The press officer would be able to juggle various deadlines and sell the music as a concept—not just to national stations, but also regional DJs keen to expand their musical variety. DJs were a key resource as it was important to make "world music" important to people outside London—most regions after all had a similarly heritage to tap into. A cost-effective way of achieving all this would be a leafleting campaign.
The next step was to develop a world music chart, gathering together selling information from around fifty shops, so that it would finally be possible to see which were big sellers in the genre—so new listeners could see what was particularly popular. It was agreed that the NME could again be involved in printing the chart and also Music Week and the London listings magazine City Limits. It was also suggested that Andy Kershaw might be persuaded to do a run down of this chart on his show regularly.
Relationship to immigration and multiculturalism[edit]
Further information: Music of Canadian cultures
In most wealthy industrialized countries, large amounts of immigration from other regions has been ongoing for many decades. This has introduced non-Western music to Western audiences not only as "exotic" imports, but also as local music played by fellow citizens. Caribbean music in the United Kingdom or Chicano rock in the United States would be two obvious examples.[citation needed] But the process is ongoing and continues to produce new forms. In the 2010s several musicians from immigrant communities in the West rose to global popularity, such as Haitian-American Wyclef Jean, Somali-Canadian K'naan, Tamil-Briton M.I.A., or Lebanese-Colombian Shakira, often blending the music of their heritage with hip-hop or pop. Cuban-born singer-songwriter Addys Mercedes started of her international career from Germany mixing traditional elements of Son with pop.[36]
The diverse nature of major Western cities has changed the pace of musical intermixing.[citation needed] Once, an established Western artist might collaborate with an established African artist to produce an album or two. Now, new bands and new genres are built from the ground up by young performers. For example, the Punjabi-Irish fusion band Delhi 2 Dublin is from neither India nor Ireland, but Vancouver, Canada. Country for Syria, an Istanbul based music collective, blends American Country music with the music of Syrian refugees and local Turkish music.[37]
In Vancouver,[clarification needed] musicians and composers also work collectively to create original compositions for various combinations of ethnic and western instruments. The JUNO nominated Orchid Ensemble is a trio of two Chinese instruments and the marimba (plus other percussion instruments). It has been touring across North American since 1997. The Vancouver Inter-Cultural Orchestra stages musicians and instruments from China, Taiwan, India, Iran, Africa, Vietnam,.... with Canadian western orchestral players.
There is also Canada's most famous Traditional Indian Classical Musician, Cassius Khan who is an award-winning internationally renowned as the world's only Ghazal singer who accompanies himself on the Tabla a two piece hand drum indigenous to India. Khan himself has not made his views unknown on his dislike to Robert E Brown's term "World Music" by publicly stating he found the term "Colonial and Oppressing" and he has been a hot issue in most underground meetings of the musical elites in Canada.[original research?]
World Music Month[edit]
The World Music Month was designated on October 1987.[citation needed] It is a music festival held at the Town & Country Club in London, and it was the start of the winter season for both WOMAD and Arts Worldwide. The main press release stressed the issues inherent in the campaign.[vague][citation needed]
Since the early 1980s the enthusiasm for music from 'outside' Western pop culture has been steadily mounting.[citation needed] More and more international artists, many of whom are big stars in their own countries, are coming to England and North America on tour. They started off, like the Bhundu Boys, playing small clubs and pubs, but now many acts are so popular that they are filling larger venues.
Examples of radio shows that feature world music include World of Music on Voice of America, Transpacific Sound Paradise on WFMU, The Planet on Australia's ABC Radio National, DJ Edu presenting D.N.A: DestiNation Africa on BBC Radio 1Xtra, Adil Ray on the BBC Asian Network, Andy Kershaw's show on BBC Radio 3 and Charlie Gillett's show[38] on the BBC World Service.
2010s radio programs[edit]
World music radio programs today often play African hip hop or reggae artists, crossover Bhangra and Latin American jazz groups, etc. Common media for world music include public radio, webcasting, the BBC, NPR, and ABC (Australian Broadcasting Corporation). The scope of what is considered world music has increased.[citation needed] By default, non-region-specific or multi-cultural world music projects are often listed under the generic category of world music.
Criticisms[edit]
The generally accepted geographic standard for what designates world music is withstanding criticism for its universal asymmetry, where nearly every classifiable region under the term is defined, relative to Western music culture; this is primarily due to the fact that dominant corporate structures for music distribution and promotion originate in Europe and North America, as do the forums for establishing industry genre categories. Therefore, in market context, "ethnic" music is synthetically defined by a radius that extends from a Western center.
Some musicians and curators of music have come to dislike the term "world music". To these critics, "world music" is a parochial, catch-all marketing term for non-Western music of all genres. In October 1999, Luaka Bop label founder and ex-Talking Heads frontman David Byrne wrote an "I Hate World Music" editorial in The New York Times explaining his objections to the term. Byrne argued that the labelling and categorization of other cultures as "exotic" serves to attract an insincere consumption and deter other potential consumers.[39]
Awards[edit]




WOMEX 15 - Budapest


Main article: Awards for world music
The BBC Radio 3 Awards for World Music was an award given to world music artists between 2002 and 2008, sponsored by BBC Radio 3. The award was thought up by fRoots magazine's editor Ian Anderson, inspired by the BBC Radio 2 Folk Awards. Award categories included: Africa, Asia/Pacific, Americas, Europe, Mid East and North Africa, Newcomer, Culture Crossing, Club Global, Album of the Year, and Audience Award. Initial lists of nominees in each category were selected annually by a panel of several thousand industry experts. Shortlisted nominees were voted on by a twelve-member jury, which selected the winners in every category except for the Audience Award category. These jury members were appointed and presided over by the BBC.[40] The annual awards ceremony was held at the BBC Proms and winners were given an award called a "Planet". In March 2009, the BBC made a decision to axe the BBC Radio 3 Awards for World Music.[41][42]
In response to the BBC's decision to end its awards program, the British world music magazine Songlines launched the Songlines Music Awards in 2009 "to recognise outstanding talent in world music".[43]
The WOMEX Awards were introduced in 1999 to honor the high points of world music on an international level and to acknowledge musical excellence, social importance, commercial success, political impact and lifetime achievement.[44] Every October at the WOMEX event, the award figurine—an ancient mother goddess statue dating back about 6000 years to the Neolithic age—is presented in an award ceremony to a worthy member of the world music community.
Festivals[edit]
See also: Category:World music festivals



Wikimedia Commons has media related to World music festivals.


Many festivals are identified as being "world music"; here is a small representative selection:

The WOMAD Foundation organizes festivals in countries around the world. These festivals have featured artists including Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Youssou N'Dour, Peter Gabriel and Jaojoby.[45]

Australia

The Globe to Globe World Music Festival takes place in the City of Kingston, Melbourne, for 2 days each year in January.[46]

Bangladesh

The Dhaka World Music Festival takes place in Dhaka.

Belgium

Sfinks Festival in Boechout, Belgium is a 4-day world music festival.

Canada

Sunfest is an annual 4-day world music festival that happens in London, Ontario, primarily in Victoria Park that typically runs the weekend after Canada Day in early July. Sunfest is billed as Canada’s Premier Celebration of World Cultures.

Croatia

Ethnoambient is a two- or three-day world music festival held every summer (started 1998) in Solin, a town in center part of Dalmatia, south part of Croatia.

France

The Festival de l'Inde takes place in Evian, Haute-Savoie.

Germany

The TFF Rudolstadt takes place annually on the first full July weekend in Rudolstadt, Thuringia, Germany.
The German World Music Festival der Klangfreunde takes place every first weekend of August, at Schlosspark Loshausen. Klangfreunde e. V. is a non-profit organization.
Wilde Töne, Festival für Folk- und Weltmusik in Braunschweig Germany[47]

Hungary




Budapest Ritmo Tent and MÜPA Center



Budapest Ritmo Festival takes place in Budapest, Hungary.
The WOMEX when in Budapest (2015)

Iceland

Fest Afrika Reykjavík takes place every September

India

The Lakshminarayana Global Music Festival (LGMF) takes place annually during December–January, often across several major cities in India. The LGMF has also traveled to 22 countries.[48]

Indonesia

Matasora World Music Festival held in Bandung, Java.

Iran

The Fajr International Music Festival is Iran's most prestigious Music Festival founded in 1986. The festival is affiliated with UNESCO and includes national and international competition sections. Since its establishment, many musicians from several countries like Austria, Germany, France participated in the event. The festival have enjoyed a strong presence of Asian countries as well.[49]

Ireland

A directory of Music Festivals in Ireland—Music Festivals Ireland—www.musicfestivalsireland.ie

Italy

The Ariano Folkfestival is a five-day world music festival held every summer in Ariano Irpino, a small town in southern Italy.
The World Music Festival Lo Sguardo di Ulisse was first held in 1997 in Campania, Italy.

Macedonia

OFFest is a five-day world music festival held every summer (started 2002) in Skopje.

Malaysia

Rainforest World Music Festival is another world music festival held in Malaysia.

Mali

The Festival in the Desert takes place every year at Essakane, near Timbuktu, in Mali, West Africa and has achieved international status in spite of the difficulties of reaching its location.[50]

Morocco

Mawazine is a festival of world music that takes place annually in Rabat, Morocco, featuring Arab and international music icons.[51]

New Zealand

Festival in New Plymouth, New Zealand. Early March each year.[52]

Poland

The Cross-Culture Warsaw Festival, Poland. September each year.[53]
Brave Festival, Wrocław, Poland. July each year. [2]
Ethno Port, Poznań, Poland. June each year. [3]
Ethno Jazz Festival in Wrocław, Poland. Several events throughout the whole year. [4]
Different Sounds (Inne brzmienia), Lublin, Poland. July each year.[54]
Francophonic Festival in Warsaw, Poland. March each year. [5]
Nowa Tradycja (New Tradition), Warsaw, Poland. May each year.[55]
Siesta Festival, Gdańsk, Poland. First edition in April/May 2011. [6]

Portugal

Festival Músicas do Mundo, Sines, Setúbal District is a world music festival first held in 1998.

Romania

Plai Festival in Timisoara

Serbia

The Serbia World Music Festival is a three-day world music festival held every summer in Takovo, a small village in central Serbia.

Spain Spain's most important world music festivals are:

Etnosur, in Alcalá la Real, Jaén (Andalucía region)
Pirineos Sur, in Aragón region
Festival Internacional de Música Popular Tradicional in Vilanova i la Geltrú / Vilanova International World Music Festival (Catalonia)
La Mar de Músicas, in Cartagena (Murcia region)
Fira Mediterrània, in Manresa (Catalonia)
The WOMEX when in Seville (2003, 2006, 2007, 2008)
Territorios, in Seville

Sweden

Urkult Näsåker, Ångermanland August each year. [7]
Green World Yoga & Sacred Music Festival, July this year at Skåne.

Turkey

Konya Mystic Music Festival, held annually in Konya since 2004, in recent years in commemoration of Rumi's birthday. The festival features traditional music from around the world with a mystical theme, religious function and/or sacred content.[56]
Fethiye World Music Festival. The Fethiye World Music Festival presents musicians from different countries of the world for concerts that will contribute to the city’s arts and culture.[57]

Uganda

Milege World Music Festival has become a big festival in Uganda inviting musicians and fans from all over Africa and the rest of the world to enjoy live music, games, sports and so on. The festival runs for three consecutive days every November at the Botanical Gardens, Entebbe, Uganda

Ukraine

Svirzh World Music Festival (Lviv region)

United Kingdom

Glastonbury Festival held at Worthy Farm near Glastonbury each year
Musicport World Music Festival held annually at The Spa Pavilion, Whitby, North Yorkshire.
Music Village Festival is Europe's longest running festival of world cultures. It is held every two years in London and has been running since 1983. It is organised by the Cultural Co-operation
Drum Camp established in 1996 is a unique world music festival. Each event takes you on a musical journey around the world, combining ancient rhythmic traditions with the most modern and cutting edge grooves and beats.

United States

The California World Music Festival is held each July at the Nevada County Fairgrounds.
The World Sacred Music Festival is held annually in Olympia, Washington State, sponsored by Interfaith Works.
FloydFest in Floyd, Virginia, United States, has featured artists from a wide diversity of styles including Ani DiFranco, Geno Delafose & French Rockin' Boogie, Trumystic, Nickel Creek and Akoya Afrobeat Enemble.
The Finger Lakes GrassRoots Festival of Music and Dance in Trumansburg, New York, United States, has featured artists from a variety of world and ethnic music genres including Tinariwen, Thomas Mapfumo, Michael Franti, D'Gary, Boubacar Traore, Mamadou Diabate, and many more from around the world.
Stern Grove Festival is a San Francisco celebration of musical and cultural diversity. Examples: Lucinda Williams, John Doe, Ojos de Brujo, O-Maya, Ladysmith Black Mambazo, the Funk Brothers and also symphony orchestras and operatic stars.
The Starwood Festival is a seven-day Neopagan, New Age, multi-cultural and world music festival that has been held in July every year since 1981 at various locations in the United States. It has featured such world music acts as Amampondo, Babatunde Olatunji, Badal Roy, Sikiru Adepoju, the Prodigals, Yaya Diallo, Merl Saunders and the Rainforest Band, Baka Beyond, Stephen Kent, Cyro Baptista, Airto Moreira, Muruga Booker, Gaelic Storm, and Halim El-Dabh.[58]

See also[edit]


Music portal
Geography portal



Musicology
World cinema
Folk music
List of cultural and regional genres of music

References[edit]
Notes[edit]


Nidel, Richard (2004). World Music: The Basics. ISBN 0-415-96801-1. [8] accessdate 2010-04-24
Bernard, Yvan, and Nathalie Fredette (2003). Guide des musiques du monde: une selection de 100 CD. Rév., Sophie Sainte-Marie. Montréal: Éditions de la Courte échelle. N.B.: Annotated discography. ISBN 2-89021-662-4
Manuel, Peter (1988). Popular Musics of the Non-Western World: An Introductory Survey. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-505342-7.
N'Dour, Youssou. "Foreword" to Nickson, Chris (2004). The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to World Music. ISBN 0-399-53032-0.
Sorce Keller, Marcello (1996). "Of Minority Musics, Preservation, and Multiculturalism: Some Considerations". In Echo der Vielfalt: traditionelle Musik von Minderheiten/ethnischen Gruppen = Echoes of Diversity: Traditional Music of Ethnic Groups/Minorities, Schriften zur Volksmusik 16, edited by Ursula Hemetek and Emil H. Lubej, 41–47. Vienna, Cologne, and Weimar: Böhlau Verlag. ISBN 3-205-98594-X. Reprinted in Sonus 18, no. 2 (Spring 1998): 33–41.
Wergin, Carsten (2007). World Music: A Medium for Unity and Difference? EASA Media Anthropology Network: http://www.media-anthropology.net/wergin_worldmusic.pdf.
World Music Network—Guides to World Music: http://www.worldmusic.net/guide/
Putumayo World Music—http://www.putumayo.com/
An Introduction to Music Studies, Chapter 6: Henry Stobart, ‘World Musics’.


Citations[edit]


^ Tsioulcas, Anastasia (December 13, 2014). "Best Global Music Of 2014". NPR. Retrieved July 21, 2017. 
^ Chris Nickson. The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to World Music. Grand Central Press, 2004. pp 1-2.
^ Erlmann, Veit (1996). "Aesthetics of the Global Imagination: Reflections on World Music in the 1990s". Public Culture. 8 (3). pp. 467–488. 
^ Frith, Simon (2000). Born and Hesmondhalgh, ed. "The Discourse of World Music". University of California Press. 
^ "Ethnic fusion Music". Allmusic. 
^ "Worldbeat". Allmusic. 
^ a b c "World Fusion Music". worldmusic.nationalgeographic.com. Archived from the original on 2012-03-14. 
^ Williams, Jack. "Robert E. Brown brought world music to San Diego schools | The San Diego Union-Tribune". Signonsandiego.com. Retrieved 2010-04-24. 
^ "World Music and Ethnomusicology". Ethnomusic.ucla.edu. 1991-09-23. Retrieved 2013-04-22. 
^ "What Is World Music?". people.iup.edu. December 1994. Retrieved 2014-10-27. 
^ Bohlman, Philip (2002). World Music: A Very Short Introduction, "Preface". ISBN 0-19-285429-1.
^ Nidel 2004, p.3
^ fRoots magazine, quoted in N'Dour 2004, p. 1
^ Songlines magazine
^ Skyphos Songs by Elena Frolova on poetry by Marina Tsvetaeva using reconstructed ancient angular harp found in Altai mountains in Siberia
^ "New Perspectives in Ethnomusicology: A Critical Survey". Society of Ethnomusicology. 
^ "Origins of World Music". BBC. 
^ Tsioulcas, Anastasia (January 16, 2014). "What Makes globalFEST So Interesting?". NPR. Retrieved January 16, 2014. 
^ Bruce Elder. All Music Guide, Renaissance of the Celtic harp. Retrieved 15 July 2009.
^ "3am Interview: FOLK MINORITY - AN INTERVIEW WITH MEIC STEVENS". www.3ammagazine.com. 
^ "Library and Archives Subject File (Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum Records--Curatorial Affairs Division Records) - Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum - Library and Archives - Catalog". catalog.rockhall.com. 
^ a b O'Connor, Tom. "Lydia Canaan One Step Closer to Rock n' Roll Hall of Fame", The Daily Star, Beirut, April 27, 2016.
^ Salhani, Justin. "Lydia Canaan: The Mideast’s First Rock Star", The Daily Star, Beirut, November 17, 2014.
^ Livingstone, David. "A Beautiful Life; Or, How a Local Girl Ended Up With a Recording Contract in the UK and Who Has Ambitions in the U.S.", Campus, No. 8, p. 2, Beirut, February 1997.
^ Ajouz, Wafik. "From Broumana to the Top Ten: Lydia Canaan, Lebanon's 'Angel' on the Road to Stardom", Cedar Wings, No. 28, p. 2, Beirut, July–August 1995.
^ Aschkar, Youmna. "New Hit For Lydia Canaan", Eco News, No. 77, p. 2, Beirut, January 20, 1997.
^ "folkwales.org". 
^ Denselow, Robin (8 May 2014). "9Bach: Tincian review – quietly intriguing Welsh outfit" – via The Guardian. 
^ "BBC Wales - Music - Super Furry Animals - Mwng track by track". www.bbc.co.uk. 
^ "Afro Celt Sound System". Allmusic. 
^ "Aomusic". Allmusic. 
^ "Värttinä". Allmusic. 
^ "World Fusion". allmusic.com. 
^ "Fusion". allmusic.com. 
^ "Minutes of Meeting Between the Various 'World Music' Record Companies and Interested Parties, Monday 29 June 1987". fRoots magazine. Retrieved 2010-09-15. 
^ "Addys Mercedes - Addys Mercedes". www.addysmercedes.com. 
^ "American country music with an Arabic twist". DailySabah. Retrieved 2017-02-09. 
^ "bbc.co.uk/worldservice/programmes/wmusic". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2010-04-24. 
^ Byrne, David (3 October 1999). "Crossing Music's Borders In Search Of Identity; 'I Hate World Music'". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. Archived from the original on 15 April 2011. Retrieved 15 December 2016. 
^ "Radio 3—Awards for World Music 2008". BBC. Retrieved 2013-04-22. 
^ Donovan, Paul (2009-03-22). "Mystery of missing BBC music awards". London: The Sunday Times. Retrieved 2009-03-21. 
^ Dowell, Ben (2009-03-20). "BBC axes Radio 3 Awards for World Music". The Guardian. Retrieved 2009-03-21. 
^ Magazine, Songlines. "Songlines - Music Awards - 2017 - winners". www.songlines.co.uk. 
^ "WOMEX Awards". 
^ "Radio 3—WOMAD 2005". BBC. Retrieved 2010-04-24. 
^ "Kingston City Council, Melbourne, Australia—Globe to Globe World Music Festival". Kingston.vic.gov.au. 2013-01-31. Retrieved 2013-04-22. 
^ "Initiative Folk e.V". Folk-music.de. Retrieved 2010-04-24. 
^ "LGMF". L Subramaniam Foundation. Retrieved 2014-03-28. 
^ "Fajr International Music Festival". Retrieved 2015-09-09. 
^ Festival in the Desert—Artist Detail Information; BBC Four, "Festival in the Desert 2004", 5 November 2004.
^ "Festival Mawazine". Festival Mawazine. 
^ [1] Archived September 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Stołeczna Estrada—O projekcie". Estrada.com.pl. Retrieved 2013-04-22. 
^ "Strona główna". Innebrzmienia.pl. Retrieved 2013-04-22. 
^ "Nowa Tradycja 2013—XVI Festiwal Folkowy Polskiego Radia". .polskieradio.pl. Retrieved 2013-04-22. 
^ "Konya International Mystic Music Festival". www.mysticmusicfest.com. 
^ "FETHIYE WORLD MUSIC FESTIVAL TURKEY WEB". 
^ Krassner, Paul (2005). Life Among the Neopagans in The Nation, August 24, 2005. Retrieved November 28, 2012.


External links[edit]


Library resources about
World music





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries






Music Listings Top-ranking free world music podcasts
List of World Music Festivals
Regional and Ethnic Music at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Sounds and Colours—magazine about South American music and culture
World Music at SKY.FM—A free World Music radio channel
World Music Central—World Music news, reviews, articles and resources
Rhythm Passport world music / global beats event listings website for the UK
Wilde Töne – Festival for Folk- and Weltmusic Braunschweig | Germany








v
t
e


Ethnomusicology






Ethnochoreology
Fumio Koizumi Prize
Universities with ethnomusicology programmes
Prehistoric music
Society for Ethnomusicology
World music












v
t
e


Music industry



Companies and
organizations




Representatives



ARIA
BPI
Music Canada
FIMI
IFPI (worldwide)
PROMUSICAE
RIAA
SNEP





Music publishers



BMG Rights Management
EMI Music Publishing
Fox Music
Imagem
MGM Music
Music catalog
Sony/ATV Music Publishing
Universal Music Publishing Group
Warner/Chappell Music





Record labels



Major: Sony Music
Universal Music Group
Warner Music Group
Independent: Independent UK record labels





Live music



CTS Eventim
Live Nation
LiveStyle
Ticketmaster








Genres



Avant-garde
Blues
Contemporary R&B
Country
Crossover
Dance
Disco
Drum and bass
Easy listening
Electronica
Experimental
Folk
Funk
Gospel
Hip hop
Instrumental
Jazz
Latin
Metal
Motown
New Age
Operatic pop
Pop
Punk
Reggae
Rock
Soul
Soundtrack
World





Sectors and
roles



Album cover design
Artists and repertoire (A&R)
Disc jockey
Distribution
Entertainment law
Music education
Music executive
Music journalism
Music publisher
Music store
Music venue
Musical instruments
Professional audio store
Promotion
Radio promotion
Record label
Record shop
Road crew
Talent manager
Tour promoter




Production



Arrangement
Composer
Conductor
Disc jockey
Hip hop producer
Horn section
Record producer
Recording artist
Rhythm section
Orchestrator
Session musician
Singer

Backup singer
Ghost singer
Vocal coach


Songwriter

Ghostwriter


Sound engineer








Release
formats



Album
Extended play (EP)/Mini album
Single
Music video
Promotional recording
Phonograph record
Eight-track
Compact cassette
CD
DVD
Airplay
Music download
Streaming media





Live shows



Concert
Concert tour
Concert residency
Music festival
Music competition





Charts



ARIA Charts
Billboard Hot 100
Brasil Hot 100 Airplay
Canadian Hot 100
Gaon Music Chart
Irish Singles Chart
Italian Singles Chart
GfK Entertainment Charts
Entertainment Monitoring Africa
Oricon Charts
New Zealand Singles Chart
SNEP Singles Chart
Sverigetopplistan
UK Singles Chart





Publications



Billboard
HitQuarters
Hot Press
Kerrang!
Mojo
Musica e dischi
NME
Q
Rolling Stone
Smash Hits
Top of the Pops





Television




Channels



CMT
TheCoolTV
Fuse
Heartland
Juice
MTV
MTV2
Tr3s
MuchMusic
The Music Factory
Viva
VH1
The Country Network





Series



Idols
Popstars
Star Academy
The Voice
The X Factor
Rising Star








Achievements



Music award
Best-selling music artists
Best-selling albums
Best-selling albums by country
Best-selling singles
Highest-grossing concert tours
Highest-attended concerts
Global Recording Artist of the Year





Other



Album sales
Album-equivalent unit
A-side and B-side
Backmasking
Christian music industry
Hidden track
Grammy Museum
White label








 Category









Authority control



GND: 4267804-3











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_music&oldid=813241049"					Categories: World musicRadio formatsMusic genresFusion music genresHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles using Template:Infobox music genre with invalid colour combinationAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2014All articles that may contain original researchArticles that may contain original research from July 2014All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationCommons category with local link different than on WikidataArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers