





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Predominant national and selected regional or minority scripts





Alphabetical



  Latin
  Cyrillic
  Greek
  Armenian
  Hangul
  Georgian




Logographic
and Syllabic




  Hanzi [L]
  Kana [S] / Kanji [L]  
  Hanja [L]



Abjad



  Arabic
  Hebrew



Abugida



  North Indic
  South Indic
  Ethiopic
  Thaana
  Canadian syllabic






v
t
e







Writing systems







History
Grapheme
List of writing systems




Types




Alphabet
Abjad
Impure Abjad
Abugida
Syllabary
Semi-syllabary
Logography
Logophonetic (Logosyllabary, Logoconsonantal)
Shorthand
Featural




Related topics




Pictogram
Ideogram







v
t
e





A writing system is any conventional method of visually representing verbal communication. While both writing and speech are useful in conveying messages, writing differs in also being a reliable form of information storage and transfer.[1] The processes of encoding and decoding writing systems involve shared understanding between writers and readers of the meaning behind the sets of characters that make up a script. Writing is usually recorded onto a durable medium, such as paper or electronic storage, although non-durable methods may also be used, such as writing on a computer display, on a blackboard, in sand, or by skywriting.
The general attributes of writing systems can be placed into broad categories such as alphabets, syllabaries, or logographies. Any particular system can have attributes of more than one category. In the alphabetic category, there is a standard set of letters (basic written symbols or graphemes) of consonants and vowels that encode based on the general principle that the letters (or letter pair/groups) represent speech sounds. In a syllabary, each symbol correlates to a syllable or mora. In a logography, each character represents a word, morpheme, or other semantic units. Other categories include abjads, which differ from alphabets in that vowels are not indicated, and abugidas or alphasyllabaries, with each character representing a consonant–vowel pairing. Alphabets typically use a set of 20-to-35 symbols to fully express a language, whereas syllabaries can have 80-to-100, and logographies can have several hundreds of symbols.
Most systems will typically have an ordering of its symbol elements so that groups of them can be coded into larger clusters like words or acronyms (generally lexemes), giving rise to many more possibilities (permutations) in meanings than the symbols can convey by themselves. Systems will also enable the stringing together of these smaller groupings (sometimes referred to by the generic term 'character strings') in order to enable a full expression of the language. The reading step can be accomplished purely in the mind as an internal process, or expressed orally. A special set of symbols known as punctuation is used to aid in structure and organization of many writing systems and can be used to help capture nuances and variations in the message's meaning that are communicated verbally by cues in timing, tone, accent, inflection or intonation. A writing system will also typically have a method for formatting recorded messages that follows the spoken version's rules like its grammar and syntax so that the reader will have the meaning of the intended message accurately preserved.
Writing systems were preceded by proto-writing, which used pictograms, ideograms and other mnemonic symbols. Proto-writing lacked the ability to capture and express a full range of thoughts and ideas. The invention of writing systems, which dates back to the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late Neolithic Era of the late 4th millennium BC, enabled the accurate durable recording of human history in a manner that was not prone to the same types of error to which oral history is vulnerable. Soon after, writing provided a reliable form of long distance communication. With the advent of publishing, it provided the medium for an early form of mass communication.
The creation of a new alphabetic writing system for a language with an existing logographic writing system is called alphabetization, as when the People's Republic of China studied the prospect of alphabetizing the Chinese languages with Latin script, Cyrillic script, Arabic script, and even numbers,[2] although the most common instance of it, converting to Latin script, is usually called romanization.



Contents


1 General properties
2 Basic terminology

2.1 Text, writing, reading and orthography
2.2 Grapheme and phoneme
2.3 Glyph, sign and character
2.4 Complete and partial writing systems
2.5 Writing systems, languages and conceptual systems


3 History
4 Functional classification

4.1 Logographic systems
4.2 Syllabic systems: syllabary
4.3 Segmental systems: Alphabets
4.4 Featural systems
4.5 Ambiguous systems


5 Graphic classification
6 Directionality
7 On computers
8 See also
9 References

9.1 Citations
9.2 Sources


10 External links



General properties[edit]




Chinese characters (漢字) are morpho-syllabic. Each one represents a syllable with a distinct meaning, but some characters may have multiple meanings or pronunciations


Writing systems are distinguished from other possible symbolic communication systems in that a writing system is always associated with at least one spoken language. In contrast, visual representations such as drawings, paintings, and non-verbal items on maps, such as contour lines, are not language-related. Some symbols on information signs, such as the symbols for male and female, are also not language related, but can grow to become part of language if they are often used in conjunction with other language elements. Some other symbols, such as numerals and the ampersand, are not directly linked to any specific language, but are often used in writing and thus must be considered part of writing systems.
Every human community possesses language, which many regard as an innate and defining condition of humanity. However, the development of writing systems, and the process by which they have supplanted traditional oral systems of communication, have been sporadic, uneven and slow. Once established, writing systems generally change more slowly than their spoken counterparts. Thus they often preserve features and expressions which are no longer current in the spoken language. One of the great benefits of writing systems is that they can preserve a permanent record of information expressed in a language.
All writing systems require:

at least one set of defined base elements or symbols, individually termed signs and collectively called a script;[3]
at least one set of rules and conventions (orthography) understood and shared by a community, which assigns meaning to the base elements (graphemes), their ordering and relations to one another;
at least one language (generally spoken) whose constructions are represented and can be recalled by the interpretation of these elements and rules;
some physical means of distinctly representing the symbols by application to a permanent or semi-permanent medium, so they may be interpreted (usually visually, but tactile systems have also been devised).

Basic terminology[edit]




A Specimen of typefaces and styles, by William Caslon, letter founder; from the 1728 Cyclopaedia


In the examination of individual scripts, the study of writing systems has developed along partially independent lines. Thus, the terminology employed differs somewhat from field to field.
Text, writing, reading and orthography[edit]
The generic term text[4] refers to an instance of written or spoken material with the latter having been transcribed in some way. The act of composing and recording a text may be referred to as writing,[5] and the act of viewing and interpreting the text as reading.[6] Orthography refers to the method and rules of observed writing structure (literal meaning, "correct writing"), and particularly for alphabetic systems, includes the concept of spelling.
Grapheme and phoneme[edit]
Main articles: grapheme and phoneme
A grapheme is a specific base unit of a writing system. Graphemes are the minimally significant elements which taken together comprise the set of "building blocks" out of which texts made up of one or more writing systems may be constructed, along with rules of correspondence and use. The concept is similar to that of the phoneme used in the study of spoken languages. For example, in the Latin-based writing system of standard contemporary English, examples of graphemes include the majuscule and minuscule forms of the twenty-six letters of the alphabet (corresponding to various phonemes), marks of punctuation (mostly non-phonemic), and a few other symbols such as those for numerals (logograms for numbers).
An individual grapheme may be represented in a wide variety of ways, where each variation is visually distinct in some regard, but all are interpreted as representing the "same" grapheme. These individual variations are known as allographs of a grapheme (compare with the term allophone used in linguistic study). For example, the minuscule letter a has different allographs when written as a cursive, block, or typed letter. The choice of a particular allograph may be influenced by the medium used, the writing instrument, the stylistic choice of the writer, the preceding and following graphemes in the text, the time available for writing, the intended audience, and the largely unconscious features of an individual's handwriting.
Glyph, sign and character[edit]
The terms glyph, sign and character are sometimes used to refer to a grapheme. Common usage varies from discipline to discipline; compare cuneiform sign, Maya glyph, Chinese character. The glyphs of most writing systems are made up of lines (or strokes) and are therefore called linear, but there are glyphs in non-linear writing systems made up of other types of marks, such as Cuneiform and Braille.
Complete and partial writing systems[edit]
Writing systems may be regarded as complete according to the extent to which they are able to represent all that may be expressed in the spoken language, while a partial writing system is limited in what it can convey.[7]
Writing systems, languages and conceptual systems[edit]
Writing systems can be independent from languages, we can have multiple writing systems for a language, e.g., Hindi and Urdu;[8] and we can have one writing system for multiple languages, e.g., the Arabic script. Chinese characters were also borrowed by variant countries as their early writing systems, e.g., the early writing systems of Vietnamese language until the beginning of the 20th century.
To represent a conceptual system, we use one or more languages, e.g., mathematics is a conceptual system[9] and we may use first-order logic and a natural language together in representation.
History[edit]
Main article: History of writing




Table of scripts in the introduction to Sanskrit-English Dictionary by Monier Monier-Williams


Writing systems were preceded by proto-writing, systems of ideographic and/or early mnemonic symbols. The best known examples are:

Jiahu symbols, carved on tortoise shells in Jiahu, c. 6600 BC
Vinča symbols (Tărtăria tablets), c.5300 BC
Early Indus script, c. 3500 BC.
Nsibidi script, c. before 500 AD

The invention of the first writing systems is roughly contemporary with the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late Neolithic[dubious – discuss] of the late 4th millennium BC. The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered the earliest writing systems, both emerging out of their ancestral proto-literate symbol systems from 3400 to 3200 BC with earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC. It is generally agreed that Sumerian writing was an independent invention; however, it is debated whether Egyptian writing was developed completely independently of Sumerian, or was a case of cultural diffusion.
A similar debate exists for the Chinese script, which developed around 1200 BC. Chinese script are probably an independent invention, because there is no evidence of contact between China and the literate civilizations of the Near East,[10] and because of the distinct differences between the Mesopotamian and Chinese approaches to logography and phonetic representation.[11]
The pre-Columbian Mesoamerican writing systems (including among others Olmec and Maya scripts) are generally believed to have had independent origins.
A hieroglyphic writing system used by pre-colonial Mi'kmaq, that was observed by missionaries from the 17th to 19th centuries, is thought to have developed independently. Although, there is some debate over whether or not this was a fully formed system or just a series of mnemonic pictographs.
It is thought that the first consonantal alphabetic writing appeared before 2000 BC, as a representation of language developed by Semitic tribes in the Sinai-peninsula (see History of the alphabet). Most other alphabets in the world today either descended from this one innovation, many via the Phoenician alphabet, or were directly inspired by its design.
The first true alphabet is the Greek script which consistently represents vowels since 800 BC.[12][13] The Latin alphabet, a direct descendant, is by far the most common writing system in use.[14]
Functional classification[edit]
For lists of writing systems by type, see List of writing systems.




This textbook for Puyi shows the English alphabet. Although the English letters run from left to right, the Chinese explanations run from top to bottom then right to left, as traditionally written


Several approaches have been taken to classify writing systems, the most common and basic one is a broad division into three categories: logographic, syllabic, and alphabetic (or segmental); however, all three may be found in any given writing system in varying proportions, often making it difficult to categorise a system uniquely. The term complex system is sometimes used to describe those where the admixture makes classification problematic. Modern linguists regard such approaches, including Diringer's[15]

pictographic script
ideographic script
analytic transitional script
phonetic script
alphabetic script

as too simplistic, often considering the categories to be incomparable. Hill[16] split writing into three major categories of linguistic analysis, one of which covers discourses and is not usually considered writing proper:

discourse system

iconic discourse system, e.g. Amerindian
conventional discourse system, e.g. Quipu


morphemic writing system, e.g. Egyptian, Sumerian, Maya, Chinese
phonemic writing system

partial phonemic writing system, e.g. Egyptian, Hebrew, Arabic
poly-phonemic writing system, e.g. Linear B, Kana, Cherokee
mono-phonemic writing system

phonemic writing system, e.g. Ancient Greek, Old English
morpho-phonemic writing system, e.g. German, Modern English





Sampson draws a distinction between semasiography and glottography

semasiography, relating visible marks to meaning directly without reference to any specific spoken language
glottography, using visible marks to represent forms of a spoken language

logography, representing a spoken language by assigning distinctive visible marks to linguistic elements of André Martinet's "first articulation" (Martinet 1949), i.e. morphemes or words
phonography, achieving the same goal by assigning marks to elements of the "second articulation", e.g. phonemes, syllables



DeFrancis,[17] criticizing Sampson's[18] introduction of semasiographic writing and featural alphabets stresses the phonographic quality of writing proper

pictures

nonwriting
writing

rebus

syllabic systems

pure syllabic, e.g. Linear B, Yi, Kana, Cherokee
morpho-syllabic, e.g. Sumerian, Chinese, Mayan
consonantal

morpho-consonantal, e.g. Egyptian
pure consonantal, e.g. Phoenician
alphabetic

pure phonemic, e.g. Greek
morpho-phonemic, e.g. English













Faber[19] categorizes phonographic writing by two levels, linearity and coding:

logographic, e.g. Chinese, Ancient Egyptian
phonographic

syllabically linear

syllabically coded, e.g. Kana, Akkadian
segmentally coded, e.g. Hebrew, Syriac, Arabic, Ethiopian, Amharic, Devanagari


segmentally linear

complete (alphabet), e.g. Greco-Latin, Cyrillic
defective, e.g. Ugaritic, Phoenician, Aramaic, Old South Arabian, Paleo-Hebrew






Classification by Daniels

Type
Each symbol represents
Example


Logographic
morpheme
Chinese characters


Syllabic
syllable or mora
Japanese kana


Alphabetic
phoneme (consonant or vowel)
Latin alphabet


Abugida
phoneme (consonant+vowel)
Indian Devanāgarī


Abjad
phoneme (consonant)
Arabic alphabet


Featural
phonetic feature
Korean hangul


Logographic systems[edit]
Main article: Logogram




Early Chinese character for sun (ri), 1200 B.C






Modern Chinese character (ri) meaning sun or day


A logogram is a single written character which represents a complete grammatical word. Most traditional Chinese characters are classified as logograms.
As each character represents a single word (or, more precisely, a morpheme), many logograms are required to write all the words of language. The vast array of logograms and the memorization of what they mean are major disadvantages of logographic systems over alphabetic systems. However, since the meaning is inherent to the symbol, the same logographic system can theoretically be used to represent different languages. In practice, the ability to communicate across languages only works for the closely related varieties of Chinese, as differences in syntax reduce the crosslinguistic portability of a given logographic system. Japanese uses Chinese logograms extensively in its writing systems, with most of the symbols carrying the same or similar meanings. However, the grammatical differences between Japanese and Chinese are significant enough that a long Chinese text is not readily understandable to a Japanese reader without any knowledge of basic Chinese grammar, though short and concise phrases such as those on signs and newspaper headlines are much easier to comprehend.
While most languages do not use wholly logographic writing systems, many languages use some logograms. A good example of modern western logograms are the Hindu-Arabic numerals: everyone who uses those symbols understands what 1 means whether he or she calls it one, eins, uno, yi, ichi, ehad, ena, or jedan. Other western logograms include the ampersand &, used for and, the at sign @, used in many contexts for at, the percent sign % and the many signs representing units of currency ($, ¢, €, £, ¥ and so on.)
Logograms are sometimes called ideograms, a word that refers to symbols which graphically represent abstract ideas, but linguists avoid this use, as Chinese characters are often semantic–phonetic compounds, symbols which include an element that represents the meaning and a phonetic complement element that represents the pronunciation. Some nonlinguists distinguish between lexigraphy and ideography, where symbols in lexigraphies represent words and symbols in ideographies represent words or morphemes.
The most important (and, to a degree, the only surviving) modern logographic writing system is the Chinese one, whose characters have been used with varying degrees of modification in varieties of Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, and other east Asian languages. Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs and the Mayan writing system are also systems with certain logographic features, although they have marked phonetic features as well and are no longer in current use. Vietnamese speakers switched to the Latin alphabet in the 20th century and the use of Chinese characters in Korean is increasingly rare. The Japanese writing system includes several distinct forms of writing including logography.
Syllabic systems: syllabary[edit]
Main article: Syllabary




Bilingual stop sign in English and the Cherokee syllabary, Tahlequah, Oklahoma


Another type of writing system with systematic syllabic linear symbols, the abugidas, is discussed below as well.
As logographic writing systems use a single symbol for an entire word, a syllabary is a set of written symbols that represent (or approximate) syllables, which make up words. A symbol in a syllabary typically represents a consonant sound followed by a vowel sound, or just a vowel alone.
In a "true syllabary", there is no systematic graphic similarity between phonetically related characters (though some do have graphic similarity for the vowels). That is, the characters for /ke/, /ka/ and /ko/ have no similarity to indicate their common "k" sound (voiceless velar plosive). More recent creations such as the Cree syllabary embody a system of varying signs, which can best be seen when arranging the syllabogram set in an onset–coda or onset–rime table.
Syllabaries are best suited to languages with relatively simple syllable structure, such as Japanese. The English language, on the other hand, allows complex syllable structures, with a relatively large inventory of vowels and complex consonant clusters, making it cumbersome to write English words with a syllabary. To write English using a syllabary, every possible syllable in English would have to have a separate symbol, and whereas the number of possible syllables in Japanese is around 100, in English there are approximately 15,000 to 16,000.
However, syllabaries with much larger inventories do exist. The Yi script, for example, contains 756 different symbols (or 1,164, if symbols with a particular tone diacritic are counted as separate syllables, as in Unicode). The Chinese script, when used to write Middle Chinese and the modern varieties of Chinese, also represents syllables, and includes separate glyphs for nearly all of the many thousands of syllables in Middle Chinese; however, because it primarily represents morphemes and includes different characters to represent homophonous morphemes with different meanings, it is normally considered a logographic script rather than a syllabary.
Other languages that use true syllabaries include Mycenaean Greek (Linear B) and Indigenous languages of the Americas such as Cherokee. Several languages of the Ancient Near East used forms of cuneiform, which is a syllabary with some non-syllabic elements.
Segmental systems: Alphabets[edit]
Main article: Alphabet
An alphabet is a small set of letters (basic written symbols), each of which roughly represents or represented historically a phoneme of a spoken language. The word alphabet is derived from alpha and beta, the first two symbols of the Greek alphabet.
The first type of alphabet that was developed was the abjad. An abjad is an alphabetic writing system where there is one symbol per consonant. Abjads differ from other alphabets in that they have characters only for consonantal sounds. Vowels are not usually marked in abjads.
All known abjads (except maybe Tifinagh) belong to the Semitic family of scripts, and derive from the original Northern Linear Abjad. The reason for this is that Semitic languages and the related Berber languages have a morphemic structure which makes the denotation of vowels redundant in most cases.
Some abjads, like Arabic and Hebrew, have markings for vowels as well. However, they use them only in special contexts, such as for teaching. Many scripts derived from abjads have been extended with vowel symbols to become full alphabets. Of these, the most famous example is the derivation of the Greek alphabet from the Phoenician abjad. This has mostly happened when the script was adapted to a non-Semitic language.
The term abjad takes its name from the old order of the Arabic alphabet's consonants 'alif, bā', jīm, dāl, though the word may have earlier roots in Phoenician or Ugaritic. "Abjad" is still the word for alphabet in Arabic, Malay and Indonesian.




A Bible printed with Balinese script


An abugida is an alphabetic writing system whose basic signs denote consonants with an inherent vowel and where consistent modifications of the basic sign indicate other following vowels than the inherent one.
Thus, in an abugida there may or may not be a sign for "k" with no vowel, but also one for "ka" (if "a" is the inherent vowel), and "ke" is written by modifying the "ka" sign in a way that is consistent with how one would modify "la" to get "le". In many abugidas the modification is the addition of a vowel sign, but other possibilities are imaginable (and used), such as rotation of the basic sign, addition of diacritical marks and so on.
The contrast with "true syllabaries" is that the latter have one distinct symbol per possible syllable, and the signs for each syllable have no systematic graphic similarity. The graphic similarity of most abugidas comes from the fact that they are derived from abjads, and the consonants make up the symbols with the inherent vowel and the new vowel symbols are markings added on to the base symbol.
In the Ge'ez script, for which the linguistic term abugida was named, the vowel modifications do not always appear systematic, although they originally were more so. Canadian Aboriginal syllabics can be considered abugidas, although they are rarely thought of in those terms. The largest single group of abugidas is the Brahmic family of scripts, however, which includes nearly all the scripts used in India and Southeast Asia.
The name abugida is derived from the first four characters of an order of the Ge'ez script used in some contexts. It was borrowed from Ethiopian languages as a linguistic term by Peter T. Daniels.
Featural systems[edit]
Main article: Featural writing system
A featural script represents finer detail than an alphabet. Here symbols do not represent whole phonemes, but rather the elements (features) that make up the phonemes, such as voicing or its place of articulation. Theoretically, each feature could be written with a separate letter; and abjads or abugidas, or indeed syllabaries, could be featural, but the only prominent system of this sort is Korean hangul. In hangul, the featural symbols are combined into alphabetic letters, and these letters are in turn joined into syllabic blocks, so that the system combines three levels of phonological representation.
Many scholars, e.g. John DeFrancis, reject this class or at least labeling hangul as such.[citation needed] The Korean script is a conscious script creation by literate experts, which Daniels calls a "sophisticated grammatogeny".[citation needed] These include stenographies and constructed scripts of hobbyists and fiction writers (such as Tengwar), many of which feature advanced graphic designs corresponding to phonologic properties. The basic unit of writing in these systems can map to anything from phonemes to words. It has been shown that even the Latin script has sub-character "features".[20]
Ambiguous systems[edit]
Most writing systems are not purely one type. The English writing system, for example, includes numerals and other logograms such as #, $, and &, and the written language often does not match well with the spoken one. As mentioned above, all logographic systems have phonetic components as well, whether along the lines of a syllabary, such as Chinese ("logo-syllabic"), or an abjad, as in Egyptian ("logo-consonantal").
Some scripts, however, are truly ambiguous. The semi-syllabaries of ancient Spain were syllabic for plosives such as p, t, k, but alphabetic for other consonants. In some versions, vowels were written redundantly after syllabic letters, conforming to an alphabetic orthography. Old Persian cuneiform was similar. Of 23 consonants (including null), seven were fully syllabic, thirteen were purely alphabetic, and for the other three, there was one letter for /Cu/ and another for both /Ca/ and /Ci/. However, all vowels were written overtly regardless; as in the Brahmic abugidas, the /Ca/ letter was used for a bare consonant.
The zhuyin phonetic glossing script for Chinese divides syllables in two or three, but into onset, medial, and rime rather than consonant and vowel. Pahawh Hmong is similar, but can be considered to divide syllables into either onset-rime or consonant-vowel (all consonant clusters and diphthongs are written with single letters); as the latter, it is equivalent to an abugida but with the roles of consonant and vowel reversed. Other scripts are intermediate between the categories of alphabet, abjad and abugida, so there may be disagreement on how they should be classified.
Graphic classification[edit]
Perhaps the primary graphic distinction made in classifications is that of linearity. Linear writing systems are those in which the characters are composed of lines, such as the Latin alphabet and Chinese characters. Chinese characters are considered linear whether they are written with a ball-point pen or a calligraphic brush, or cast in bronze. Similarly, Egyptian hieroglyphs and Maya glyphs were often painted in linear outline form, but in formal contexts they were carved in bas-relief. The earliest examples of writing are linear: the Sumerian script of c. 3300 BC was linear, though its cuneiform descendants were not. Non-linear systems, on the other hand, such as braille, are not composed of lines, no matter what instrument is used to write them.
Cuneiform was probably the earliest non-linear writing. Its glyphs were formed by pressing the end of a reed stylus into moist clay, not by tracing lines in the clay with the stylus as had been done previously. The result was a radical transformation of the appearance of the script.
Braille is a non-linear adaptation of the Latin alphabet that completely abandoned the Latin forms. The letters are composed of raised bumps on the writing substrate, which can be leather (Louis Braille's original material), stiff paper, plastic or metal.
There are also transient non-linear adaptations of the Latin alphabet, including Morse code, the manual alphabets of various sign languages, and semaphore, in which flags or bars are positioned at prescribed angles. However, if "writing" is defined as a potentially permanent means of recording information, then these systems do not qualify as writing at all, since the symbols disappear as soon as they are used. (Instead, these transient systems serve as signals.)
Directionality[edit]




Overview of the writing directions used in the world


See also: Right-to-left, Horizontal and vertical writing in East Asian scripts, Bi-directional text, and Mirror writing
Scripts are also graphically characterized by the direction in which they are written. Egyptian hieroglyphs were written either left to right or right to left, with the animal and human glyphs turned to face the beginning of the line. The early alphabet could be written in multiple directions:[21] horizontally (side to side), or vertically (up or down). Prior to standardization, alphabetical writing was done both left-to-right (LTR or sinistrodextrally) and right-to-left (RTL or dextrosinistrally). It was most commonly written boustrophedonically: starting in one (horizontal) direction, then turning at the end of the line and reversing direction.
The Greek alphabet and its successors settled on a left-to-right pattern, from the top to the bottom of the page. Other scripts, such as Arabic and Hebrew, came to be written right-to-left. Scripts that incorporate Chinese characters have traditionally been written vertically (top-to-bottom), from the right to the left of the page, but nowadays are frequently written left-to-right, top-to-bottom, due to Western influence, a growing need to accommodate terms in the Latin script, and technical limitations in popular electronic document formats. Chinese characters sometimes, as in signage, especially when signifying something old or traditional, may also be written from right to left. The Old Uyghur alphabet and its descendants are unique in being written top-to-bottom, left-to-right; this direction originated from an ancestral Semitic direction by rotating the page 90° counter-clockwise to conform to the appearance of vertical Chinese writing. Several scripts used in the Philippines and Indonesia, such as Hanunó'o, are traditionally written with lines moving away from the writer, from bottom to top, but are read horizontally left to right. While Ogham is written bottom to top and read vertically, commonly on the corner of a stone.
The direction of writing in the Semitic languages evolved throughout the years. Different findings show that in some past periods the Hebrew language was written from time to time from left to right and sometimes also one line left next line right and over again. This decision of writing from right to left is related in the physical way of writing the letters: in the ancient times, the writings were done on stone, thing that needed work with tools. since most people are right handed, it was more comfortable to "work" from right to left. when the writing developed into use of color on paper, which does not need physical power, the European systems that were developing also in that times, preferred to write from left to right and so to avoid "smearing" of the color and that in writing from left to right there is no hiding of the written sentence to the writer. That's the reason why most of the later script systems (Greek and it's derivatives- Cyrillic and Latin) were written from left to right, while the Semitic scripts just preserved the writing from right to left.
On computers[edit]
In computers and telecommunication systems, writing systems are generally not codified as such,[clarification needed] but graphemes and other grapheme-like units that are required for text processing are represented by "characters" that typically manifest in encoded form. There are many character encoding standards and related technologies, such as ISO/IEC 8859-1 (a character repertoire and encoding scheme oriented toward the Latin script), CJK (Chinese, Japanese, Korean) and bi-directional text. Today, many such standards are re-defined in a collective standard, the ISO/IEC 10646 "Universal Character Set", and a parallel, closely related expanded work, The Unicode Standard. Both are generally encompassed by the term Unicode. In Unicode, each character, in every language's writing system, is (simplifying slightly) given a unique identification number, known as its code point. Computer operating systems use code points to look up characters in the font file, so the characters can be displayed on the page or screen.
A keyboard is the device most commonly used for writing via computer. Each key is associated with a standard code which the keyboard sends to the computer when it is pressed. By using a combination of alphabetic keys with modifier keys such as Ctrl, Alt, Shift and AltGr, various character codes are generated and sent to the CPU. The operating system intercepts and converts those signals to the appropriate characters based on the keyboard layout and input method, and then delivers those converted codes and characters to the running application software, which in turn looks up the appropriate glyph in the currently used font file, and requests the operating system to draw these on the screen.
See also[edit]


Languages portal



Artificial script
Calligraphy
Digraphia
Epigraphy
Formal language
Grammatology
ISO 15924
Orthography
Pasigraphy
Penmanship
Paleography
Numeral system
Transliteration
Writing
Written language

References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ "Definitions of writing systems". Omniglot: The Online Encyclopedia of Writing Systems and Languages. www.omniglot.com. Retrieved 2013-06-29. 
^ Hessler, Peter (2006), "Artifact K: The Lost Alphabets", Oracle Bones: A Journey Between China's Past and Present, Harper Collins, pp. 401–417, ISBN 9780060826581. 
^ Coulmas, Florian. 2003. Writing systems. An introduction. Cambridge University Press. pg. 35.
^ David Crystal (2008), A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics, 6th Edition, p.481, Wiley
^ Hadumod Bußmann (1998), Routledge Dictionary of Language and Linguistics, p.1294, Taylor & Francis
^ Hadumod Bußmann (1998), Routledge Dictionary of Language and Linguistics, p.979, Taylor & Francis
^ Harriet Joseph Ottenheimer (2012), The Anthropology of Language: An Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology, p.194, Cengage Learning
^ StackExchange: Is it plausible to have two written forms of one spoken language that are so different as to be indecipherable?
^ Metaphor and Analogy in the Sciences, p.126, Springer Science & Business Media (2013)
^ David N. Keightley, Noel Barnard. The Origins of Chinese civilization. Page 415-416
^ Sex and Eroticism in Mesopotamian Literature. By Dr Gwendolyn Leick. Pg 3.
^ Coulmas, Florian (1996). The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Writing Systems. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Ltd. ISBN 0-631-21481-X. 
^ Millard 1986, p. 396
^ Haarmann 2004, p. 96
^ David Diringer (1962): Writing. London.
^ Archibald Hill (1967): The typology of Writing systems. In: William A. Austin (ed.), Papers in Linguistics in Honor of Leon Dostert. The Hague, 92–99.
^ John DeFrancis (1989): Visible speech. The diverse oneness of writing systems. Honolulu
^ Geoffrey Sampson (1986): Writing Systems. A Linguistic Approach. London
^ Alice Faber (1992): Phonemic segmentation as an epiphenomenon. Evidence from the history of alphabetic writing. In: Pamela Downing et al. (ed.): The Linguistics of Literacy. Amsterdam. 111–134.
^ See Primus, Beatrice (2004), "A featural analysis of the Modern Roman Alphabet" (PDF), Written Language and Literacy, 7 (2): 235–274, retrieved 2015-12-05 .
^ Threatte, Leslie (1980). The grammar of Attic inscriptions. W. de Gruyter. pp. 54–55. ISBN 3-11-007344-7. 


Sources[edit]


Cisse, Mamadou. 2006. "Ecrits et écritures en Afrique de l'Ouest". Sudlangues n°6, http://www.sudlangues.sn/spip.php?article101
Coulmas, Florian. 1996. The Blackwell encyclopedia of writing systems. Oxford: Blackwell.
Coulmas, Florian. 2003. Writing systems. An introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Daniels, Peter T, and William Bright, eds. 1996. The World's Writing Systems. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-507993-0.
DeFrancis, John. 1990. The Chinese Language: Fact and Fantasy. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1068-6
Haarmann, Harald (2004). Geschichte der Schrift [History of Writing] (in German) (2nd ed.). München: C. H. Beck. ISBN 3-406-47998-7. 
Hannas, William. C. 1997. Asia's Orthographic Dilemma. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1892-X (paperback); ISBN 0-8248-1842-3 (hardcover)
Millard, A. R. (1986). "The Infancy of the Alphabet". World Archaeology. 17 (3): 390–398. doi:10.1080/00438243.1986.9979978. 
Nishiyama, Yutaka. 2010. The Mathematics of Direction in Writing. International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, Vol.61, No.3, 347-356.
Rogers, Henry. 2005. Writing Systems: A Linguistic Approach. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 0-631-23463-2 (hardcover); ISBN 0-631-23464-0 (paperback)
Sampson, Geoffrey. 1985. Writing Systems. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-1756-7 (paper), ISBN 0-8047-1254-9 (cloth).
Smalley, W. A. (ed.) 1964. Orthography studies: articles on new writing systems. London: United Bible Society.


External links[edit]

Writing Systems Research Free first issue of a journal devoted to research on writing systems
Arch Chinese (Traditional & Simplified) Chinese character writing animations and native speaker pronunciations
Sensible Chinese A practical guide to approaching the Chinese writing system
decodeunicode Unicode Wiki with all 98,884 Unicode 5.0 characters as gifs in three sizes
African writing systems
Omniglot: The Online Encyclopedia of Writing Systems and Languages
Ancient Scripts Introduction to different writing systems
Alphabets of Europe
Elian script a writing system that combines the linearity of spelling with the free-form aspects of drawing.
(in Russian) Written of the World
(in Hungarian) Ultraweb.hu – főoldal







v
t
e


Writing systems



Overview



History of writing
History of the alphabet
Graphemes
Scripts in Unicode





Lists



Writing systems
Languages by writing system / by first written account
Undeciphered writing systems
Inventors of writing systems





Types



Featural
Alphabets
Abjads
Alphasyllabaries / Abugidas
Syllabaries
Semi-syllabaries
Ideogrammic
Pictographic
Logographic
Numeral












v
t
e


Types of writing systems







Overview



History of writing
Grapheme





Lists



Writing systems

undeciphered
inventors
constructed


Languages by writing system / by first written accounts













Types












Abjads






Numerals


Aramaic

Hatran


Arabic
Pitman shorthand
Hebrew

Ashuri
Cursive
Rashi
Solitreo


Tifinagh
Manichaean
Nabataean
Old North Arabian
Pahlavi
Pegon
Phoenician

Paleo-Hebrew


Proto-Sinaitic
Psalter
Punic
Samaritan
South Arabian

Zabur
Musnad


Sogdian
Syriac

ʾEsṭrangēlā
Serṭā
Maḏnḥāyā


Teeline Shorthand
Ugaritic













Abugidas







Brahmic




Northern



Asamiya (Ôxômiya)
Bānglā
Bhaikshuki
Bhujinmol
Brāhmī
Devanāgarī
Dogri
Gujarati
Gupta
Gurmukhī
Kaithi
Kalinga
Khojki
Khotanese
Khudawadi
Laṇḍā
Lepcha
Limbu
Mahajani
Meitei Mayek
Modi
Multani
Nāgarī
Nandinagari
Odia
'Phags-pa
Newar
Ranjana
Sharada
Saurashtra
Siddhaṃ
Soyombo
Sylheti Nagari
Takri
Tibetan

Uchen
Umê


Tirhuta
Tocharian
Zanabazar Square
Zhang-Zhung

Drusha
Marchen
Marchung
Pungs-chen
Pungs-chung







Southern



Ahom
Balinese
Batak
Baybayin
Bhattiprolu
Buhid
Burmese
Chakma
Cham
Grantha
Goykanadi
Hanunó'o
Javanese
Kadamba
Kannada
Kawi
Khmer
Kulitan
Lanna
Lao
Leke
Lontara
Malayalam
Maldivian

Dhives Akuru
Eveyla Akuru
Thaana


Mon
Old Makassarese
Old Sundanese
Pallava
Pyu
Rejang
Rencong
Sinhala
Sundanese
Tagbanwa
Tai Le
Tai Tham
Tai Viet
Tamil
Telugu
Thai
Tigalari
Vatteluttu

Kolezhuthu
Malayanma


Visayan








Others



Boyd's syllabic shorthand
Canadian syllabics

Blackfoot
Déné syllabics


Fox I
Ge'ez
Gunjala Gondi
Japanese Braille
Jenticha
Kayah Li
Kharosthi
Mandombe
Masaram Gondi
Meroitic
Miao
Mwangwego
Sorang Sompeng
Pahawh Hmong
Thomas Natural Shorthand
















Alphabets







Linear



Abkhaz
Adlam
Armenian
Avestan
Avoiuli
Bassa Vah
Borama
Carian
Caucasian Albanian
Coorgi–Cox alphabet
Coptic
Cyrillic
Deseret
Duployan shorthand

Chinook writing


Early Cyrillic
Eclectic shorthand
Elbasan
Etruscan
Evenki
Fox II
Fraser
Gabelsberger shorthand
Garay
Georgian

Asomtavruli
Nuskhuri
Mkhedruli


Glagolitic
Gothic
Gregg shorthand
Greek
Greco-Iberian alphabet
Hangul
Hanifi
IPA
Kaddare
Latin

Beneventan
Blackletter
Carolingian minuscule
Fraktur
Gaelic
Insular
Kurrent
Merovingian
Sigla
Sütterlin
Tironian notes
Visigothic


Luo
Lycian
Lydian
Manchu
Mandaic
Medefaidrin
Molodtsov
Mongolian
Mru
Neo-Tifinagh
New Tai Lue
N'Ko
Ogham
Oirat
Ol Chiki
Old Hungarian
Old Italic
Old Permic
Orkhon
Old Uyghur
Osage
Osmanya
Pau Cin Hau
Runic

Anglo-Saxon
Cipher
Dalecarlian
Elder Futhark
Younger Futhark
Gothic
Marcomannic
Medieval
Staveless


Sidetic
Shavian
Somali
Tifinagh
Vagindra
Visible Speech
Vithkuqi
Wancho
Zaghawa





Non-linear



Braille
Maritime flags
Morse code
New York Point
Semaphore line
Flag semaphore
Moon type
















Ideograms/Pictograms






Adinkra
Aztec
Blissymbol
Dongba
Ersu Shaba
Emoji
IConji
Isotype
Kaidā
Míkmaq
Mixtec
New Epoch Notation Painting
Nsibidi
Ojibwe Hieroglyphs
Siglas poveiras
Testerian
Yerkish
Zapotec













Logograms







Chinese family of scripts




Chinese Characters



Simplified
Traditional
Oracle bone script
Bronze Script
Seal Script

large
small
bird-worm


Hanja
Idu
Kanji
Chữ nôm
Zhuang





Chinese-influenced



Jurchen
Khitan large script
Sui
Tangut








Cuneiform



Akkadian
Assyrian
Elamite
Hittite
Luwian
Sumerian





Other logo-syllabic



Anatolian
Bagam
Cretan
Isthmian
Maya
Proto-Elamite
Yi (Classical)





Logo-consonantal



Demotic
Hieratic
Hieroglyphs





Numerals



Hindu-Arabic
Abjad
Attic (Greek)
Muisca
Roman
















Semi-syllabaries







Full



Celtiberian
Northeastern Iberian
Southeastern Iberian
Khom





Redundant



Espanca
Pahawh Hmong
Khitan small script
Southwest Paleohispanic
Zhuyin fuhao
















Somacheirograms






ASLwrite
SignWriting
si5s
Stokoe Notation













Syllabaries






Afaka
Bamum
Bété
Byblos
Cherokee
Cypriot
Cypro-Minoan
Ditema tsa Dinoko
Eskayan
Geba
Great Lakes Algonquian syllabics
Iban
Japanese

Hiragana
Katakana
Man'yōgana
Hentaigana
Sogana
Jindai moji


Kikakui
Kpelle
Linear B
Linear Elamite
Lisu
Loma
Nüshu
Nwagu Aneke script
Old Persian Cuneiform
Vai
Woleai
Yi (Modern)
Yugtun





















v
t
e


Braille  ⠃⠗⠁⠊⠇⠇⠑



Braille cell



1829 braille
International uniformity
ASCII braille
Unicode braille patterns





Braille scripts




French-ordered scripts
(see for more)



Albanian
Amharic
Arabic
Armenian
Azerbaijani
Belarusian
Bharati

Devanagari (Hindi  /  Marathi  /  Nepali)
Bengali
Punjabi
Sinhalese
Tamil
Urdu
etc.


Bulgarian
Burmese
Cambodian
Cantonese
Catalan
Chinese (Mandarin, mainland)
Czech
Dutch
Dzongkha (Bhutanese)
English (Unified English)
Esperanto
Estonian
Faroese
French
Georgian
German
Ghanaian
Greek
Guarani
Hawaiian
Hebrew
Hungarian
Icelandic
Inuktitut (reassigned vowels)
Iñupiaq
IPA
Irish
Italian
Kazakh
Kyrgyz
Latvian
Lithuanian
Maltese
Mongolian
Māori
Nigerian
Northern Sami
Persian
Philippine
Polish
Portuguese
Romanian
Russian
Samoan
Scandinavian
Slovak
South African
Spanish
Tatar
Taiwanese Mandarin (largely reassigned)
Thai & Lao (Japanese vowels)
Tibetan
Turkish
Ukrainian
Vietnamese
Welsh
Yugoslav





Reordered scripts



Algerian Braille (obsolete)





Frequency-based scripts



American Braille (obsolete)





Independent scripts



Japanese
Korean
Two-Cell Chinese





Eight-dot scripts



Luxembourgish
Kanji
Gardner–Salinas braille codes (GS8)








Symbols in braille



Braille music
Canadian currency marks
Computer Braille Code
Gardner–Salinas braille codes (GS8/GS6)
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)
Nemeth braille code





Braille technology



Braille e-book
Braille embosser
Braille translator
Braille watch
Mountbatten Brailler
Optical braille recognition
Perforation
Perkins Brailler
Refreshable braille display
Slate and stylus
Braigo





Persons



Louis Braille
Charles Barbier
Valentin Haüy
Thakur Vishva Narain Singh
Sabriye Tenberken
William Bell Wait





Organisations



Braille Institute of America
Braille Without Borders
Japan Braille Library
National Braille Association
Blindness organizations
Schools for the blind
American Printing House for the Blind





Other tactile alphabets



Decapoint
Moon type
New York Point
Night writing
Vibratese





Related topics



Accessible publishing
Braille literacy
RoboBraille















v
t
e


Systems science



Systems
types



Anatomical
Art
Biological
Complex
Complex adaptive
Conceptual
Coupled human–environment
Database
Dynamical
Ecological
Economic
Energy
Formal
Holarchic
Information
Legal
Measurement
Metric
Multi-agent
Nervous
Nonlinear
Operating
Physical
Planetary
Political
Sensory
Social
Star
Writing





Theoretical
fields







Chaos theory
Complex systems
Control theory
Cybernetics
Earth system science
Living systems
Sociotechnical system
Systemics
Urban metabolism
World-systems theory








analysis
biology
dynamics
ecology
engineering
neuroscience
pharmacology
psychology
theory
thinking








Systems
scientists



Alexander Bogdanov
Russell L. Ackoff
William Ross Ashby
Ruzena Bajcsy
Béla H. Bánáthy
Gregory Bateson
Anthony Stafford Beer
Richard E. Bellman
Ludwig von Bertalanffy
Margaret Boden
Kenneth E. Boulding
Murray Bowen
Kathleen Carley
Mary Cartwright
C. West Churchman
Manfred Clynes
George Dantzig
Edsger W. Dijkstra
Heinz von Foerster
Stephanie Forrest
Jay Wright Forrester
Barbara Grosz
Charles A S Hall
Lydia Kavraki
James J. Kay
Faina M. Kirillova
George Klir
Allenna Leonard
Edward Norton Lorenz
Niklas Luhmann
Humberto Maturana
Margaret Mead
Donella Meadows
Mihajlo D. Mesarovic
James Grier Miller
Radhika Nagpal
Howard T. Odum
Talcott Parsons
Ilya Prigogine
Qian Xuesen
Anatol Rapoport
Peter Senge
Claude Shannon
Katia Sycara
Francisco Varela
Manuela M. Veloso
Kevin Warwick
Norbert Wiener
Jennifer Wilby
Anthony Wilden





Applications



Systems theory in anthropology
Systems theory in archaeology
Systems theory in political science





Organizations



List
Principia Cybernetica








 Systems science portal












v
t
e


Literacy



Teaching literacy



Reading education in the US
Phonics
Whole language
Dick and Jane
National Council of Teachers of English
No Child Left Behind Act
Family literacy
Adolescent literacy





Defining literacy



Functional illiteracy
Critical literacy





Literacy internationally



International Literacy Association
List of countries by literacy rate
Literacy in India
International Literacy Day
List of Chinese administrative divisions by illiteracy rate





Major contributors to literacy



Frank Laubach
Ruth Johnson Colvin
Paulo Freire
Griffith Jones
Marie Clay
James Paul Gee





Related concepts



Agricultural literacy
Aliteracy
Asemic writing
Computer literacy
Cultural literacy
Data literacy
Dyslexia
Diaspora literacy
Early literacy
Ecological literacy
Electracy
Emergent literacy
Emotional literacy
Financial literacy
Graph literacy
Health literacy
Information literacy
Information and media literacy
Literacy test
Media consumption
Media literacy
Mental health literacy
New literacies
Numeracy
Oracy
Orality
Oral literature
Postliterate society
Racial literacy
Scientific literacy
Statistical literacy
Technological literacy
Transliteracy
Visual literacy
Writing system












v
t
e


Writing



Semi-permanent Writing material




Plant based



Palm-leaf manuscript (Borassus spp.)
Ola leaf (manuscript) (C. umbraculifera)
Birch bark manuscript
Papyrus
Paper
Wax tablet (wood)
Amate

Trema micrantha
Ficus aurea


Parabaik (S. asper)
Bamboo and wooden slips





Other



Clay tablet
Metals

Stamping (metalworking)
Intaglio (printmaking)


Stone inscription
animal skin
Samut khoi kraing (paper usu. Mulberry bark, metals, other)
Oracle bone
silk
E-ink
Textile printing
Geoglyph
Ink
Photographic film








Inherently impermanent material



Electronic visual display
Skywriting
Sand writing
Blood writing





Types



manuscript
inscription
book
sign
electronic storage
codex
bas-relief
high-relief





Misc



Writing systems









Authority control



GND: 4053297-5
HDS: 12801
NDL: 00567844











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Writing_system&oldid=818353458"					Categories: WritingWriting systemsTypographyHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2015All articles needing additional referencesAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from May 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2012Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2016CS1 German-language sources (de)Articles with Russian-language external linksArticles with Hungarian-language external linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers