"Xinhua" redirects here. For other uses, see Xinhua (disambiguation).

Xinhua News Agency
新华通讯社




Type
Broadcast radio, television and online


Country
China


Founded
1931; 87 years ago (1931)



Broadcast area

Mainland China, Satellite, Internet


Area
Worldwide


Owner
People's Republic of China (state-owned institution)



Key people


Cai Mingzhao
(President)
He Ping
(Editor-in-chief)
Liu Zhengrong
(Party Secretary)



Former names

Red China News Agency (1931–1937)


Affiliation
State Council of the People's Republic of China


Affiliates
Reference News
Xinhuanet.com
CNC World



Official website

Xinhua News Agency (in English)







Xinhua News Agency


Simplified Chinese
新华通讯社


Traditional Chinese
新華通訊社


Literal meaning
New China News Agency





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Xīnhuá Tōngxùnshè


IPA
ɕínxwǎ





Abbreviated name


Simplified Chinese
新华社


Traditional Chinese
新華社


Literal meaning
New China Agency





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Xīnhuá Shè












Xinhua head office in Beijing
39°53′55.55″N 116°21′54.83″E﻿ / ﻿39.8987639°N 116.3652306°E﻿ / 39.8987639; 116.3652306Coordinates: 39°53′55.55″N 116°21′54.83″E﻿ / ﻿39.8987639°N 116.3652306°E﻿ / 39.8987639; 116.3652306


Xinhua News Agency (English pronunciation: /ˌʃɪnˈhwɑː/[1]) or New China News Agency is the official press agency of the People's Republic of China. Xinhua is the biggest and most influential media organization in China, as well as the largest news agency in the world in terms of correspondents worldwide[2]. Xinhua is a ministry-level institution subordinate to the Chinese central government, and is the highest ranking state media organ in the country alongside the People's Daily. Its president is a member of the Central Committee of China's Communist Party.
Xinhua operates more than 170 foreign bureaus worldwide, and maintains 31 bureaus in China—one for each province, autonomous region and directly-administered municipality plus a military bureau. Xinhua is the sole channel for the distribution of important news related to the Communist Party and Chinese central government, and its headquarters in Beijing is strategically located within close proximity to Zhongnanhai, which houses the headquarters of the Communist Party of China, the State Council and the office of the President of the People's Republic of China.
Xinhua is a publisher as well as a news agency—it owns more than 20 newspapers and a dozen magazines, and it prints in eight languages: Chinese, English, Spanish, French, Russian, Portuguese, Arabic, and Japanese. Xinhua's online edition Xinhuanet provides news in six different languages.



Contents


1 History
2 Reach

2.1 Internal media


3 Headquarters and regional sectors

3.1 Hong Kong
3.2 Cairo
3.3 Vientiane


4 Controversies

4.1 Bias
4.2 1989 Beijing student movement
4.3 2017 Doklam standoff


5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]
Xinhua was founded in November 1931 as the Red China News Agency and changed to its current name in 1937.[3] During the Pacific War the agency developed overseas broadcasting capabilities and established its first overseas branches.[3] It began broadcasting to foreign countries in English from 1944. Following the conclusion of the Chinese Civil War, the agency represented the People's Republic of China in countries and territories with which it had no diplomatic representation, such as Hong Kong.[3]
The agency was described by media scholars as the "eyes and tongue" of the Party, observing what is important for the masses and passing on the information.[4] A former Xinhua director, Zheng Tao, noted that the agency was a bridge between the Party, the government and the people, communicating both the demands of the people and the policies of the Party.[5] People's Daily, for example, uses Xinhua material for approximately 25 percent of its stories.
Reach[edit]
Xinhua delivers its news across the world in eight languages: Chinese, English, Spanish, French, Russian, Portuguese, Arabic, and Japanese, as well as news pictures and other kinds of news. It has made contracts to exchange news and news pictures with more than eighty foreign news agencies or political news departments. Xinhua is also responsible for handling, and in some cases, censoring reports from foreign media destined to release in China.[6] The agency recently began to converge its news and electronic media coverage and has increased its English coverage through its wire service. Xinhua recently acquired commercial real estate on New York's Times Square and is developing a staff of top-tier English-language reporters. Xinhua has also started an English-language satellite news network.[7]
Internal media[edit]
The Chinese media's internal publication system, in which certain journals are published exclusively for government and party officials, provides information and analysis which are not generally available to the public. The State values these internal reports because they contain much of China's most sensitive, controversial, and high-quality investigative journalism.
Xinhua produces reports for the "internal" journals. Informed observers note that journalists generally like to write for the internal publications because they can write less polemical and more comprehensive stories without having to omit unwelcome details commonly done in the print media directed to the general public. The internal reports, written from a large number of countries, typically consist of in depth analyses of international situations and domestic attitudes towards regional issues and a certain country's perception of China.[8]
The Chinese government's internal media publication system follows a strict hierarchical pattern designed to facilitate party control. A publication called Reference News—which includes translated articles from abroad as well as news and commentary by Xinhua reporters—is delivered by Xinhua personnel, rather than by the national mail system, to officials at the working level and above. A three-to-ten-page report called Internal Reference (Neibu Cankao) is distributed to officials at the ministerial level and higher. One example was the first reports on the SARS outbreak by Xinhua which only government officials were allowed to see.[9] The most classified Xinhua internal reports are issued occasionally to the top dozen or so party and government officials.[citation needed]
Headquarters and regional sectors[edit]
The Xinhua headquarters is located in Beijing, strategically located within close proximity to Zhongnanhai, which houses the headquarters of the Communist Party of China, the State Council and the office of the President of the People's Republic of China.. The Xinhua News Agency established its first overseas affiliate in 1947 in London, with Samuel Chinque as publisher. Now it distributes its news in Asia, Middle East, Latin America, Africa through more than 150 affiliates,[10] with regional headquarters in Hong Kong, Moscow, Cairo, Brussels, New York City, Mexico City and Nairobi, plus a United Nations bureau.[11]
Hong Kong[edit]
Xinhua's branch in Hong Kong was not just a press office, but served as the de facto embassy of the PRC in the territory when it was under British administration. It was named a news agency under the special historic conditions before the territory's sovereignty was transferred from Britain to China, because the People's Republic did not recognise British sovereignty over the colony, and could not set up a consulate on what it considered to be its soil.[12]
Despite its unofficial status, the directors of the Xinhua Hong Kong Branch included high-ranking former diplomats such as Zhou Nan, former Ambassador to the United Nations and Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs, who later negotiated the Sino-British Joint Declaration on the future of Hong Kong.[13] His predecessor, Xu Jiatun, was also vice-chairman of the Hong Kong Basic Law Drafting Committee, before fleeing to the United States in response to the military crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protests, where he went into exile.[14]
It was authorized by the special administrative region government to continue to represent the central government after 1997, and it was renamed "The Liaison Office of the Central People's Government in the Hong Kong SAR" on January 18, 2000, retaining branch chief Jiang Enzhu as inaugural director.[15] The State Council appointed Gao Siren (高祀仁) as the director in August 2002. After the Liaison Office was established, Xinhua Agency was reconstituted as a bona fide press office.
Cairo[edit]
Xinhua opened its Middle East Regional Bureau in Cairo, Egypt in 1985. In November 2005, Xinhua News Agency opened a new office building alongside the Nile River in Cairo's Maadi district.[16]
Vientiane[edit]
Xinhua opened a bureau in Vientiane, the capital of Laos, in 2010. It is the only foreign news bureau permitted to permanently operate in the country.
Controversies[edit]
Bias[edit]
Western critics have routinely attacked Xinhua for its loyalty to the Chinese state. Reporters Sans Frontieres dubbed Xinhua as "The World's Biggest Propaganda Machine" in 2005, pointing out that Xinhua's president held the rank of a minister in the government. The report further asserted that the news agency was “at the heart of censorship and disinformation put in place” by the government.[17][18]
In a 2007 interview with the Times of India, then Xinhua president Tian Congming affirmed the problem of "historical setbacks and popular perceptions".[19] Newsweek slammed Xinhua as "being best known for its blind spots" regarding controversial news in China, although the article acknowledges that "Xinhua's spin diminishes when the news doesn't involve China".[20]
During the 2003 SARS outbreak, Xinhua was slow to release reports of the incident to the public. However, its reporting in the aftermath of the 2008 Sichuan earthquake was seen as more transparent and credible as Xinhua journalists operated more freely.[21][22] After the Beijing Television Cultural Center fire, cognizant of Xinhua's "tardy" reporting in contrast to bloggers, China announced the investment of 20 billion yuan to Xinhua. The vice president of the China International Publishing Group commented on this, saying that quantity of media exposure would not necessarily help perceptions of China. Rather, he said, media should focus on emphasizing Chinese culture and the Chinese way of life "to convey the message that China is a friend, not an enemy".[23]
Xinhua for its own part has criticized Western media bias and inaccurate reporting, citing an incident during the 2008 Tibetan unrest when Western media outlets used scenes of Nepalese police arresting Tibetan protesters as evidence of Chinese police brutality[24] with commentary from CNN's Jack Cafferty calling the Chinese "goons and thugs". CNN later apologized for the comments,[25] but Richard Spencer of The Sunday Telegraph defended what he conceded was "biased" Western media coverage of the riots, blaming Chinese authorities for not allowing foreign media access to Tibet during the conflict.[26]
1989 Beijing student movement[edit]
Xinhua staff struggled to find the "right line" to use in covering the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989. Although more cautious than People's Daily in its treatment of sensitive topics during that period – such as how to commemorate reformist Communist Party leader Hu Yaobang's April 1989 death and then ongoing demonstrations in Beijing and elsewhere – Xinhua gave some favorable coverage to demonstrators and intellectuals supportive of the movement. Conflict between journalists and top editors over the censorship of stories about the Tiananmen Square crackdown lasted for several days after the military's dispersal of demonstrators on June 4, with some journalists going on strike and demonstrating inside the agency's Beijing headquarters. Government oversight of the media increased after the protests – top editors at the agency's bureaus in Hong Kong and Macau were replaced with appointees who were pro-Beijing.[27]
2017 Doklam standoff[edit]
During the 2017 China–India border standoff, Xinhua's English-language new media program "The Spark" released a satirical video named the "Seven Sins of India" on 16 August 2017, where presenter Di'er Wang spoke of Indians having "thick skin" and "pretending to sleep" on the matter of the border dispute. Wang went on to claim India was physically threatening Bhutan, and compared India to a "robber who breaks into a house and does not leave". An actor in the video portraying "India" with a turban, beard and accent sparked allegations of racism. The video has received strong backlash on Twitter as well as from Indian and Western media.[28][29][30][31][32]
See also[edit]

Central News Agency (Taiwan)
China News Service
China Securities Journal
China Xinhua News Network Corporation
Media of the People's Republic of China

References[edit]


^ J. C. Wells: Longman Pronunciation Dictionary, 3rd ed., for both British and American English
^ International Media and Newspapers (2017-10-30). "Top 200 News Agencies Worldwide". Retrieved 2017-10-30. 
^ a b c Pares, Susan. (2005). A political and economic dictionary of East Asia. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-85743-258-9
^ Malek, Abbas & Kavoori, Ananadam. (1999). The global dynamics of news: studies in international news coverage and news agenda. p. 346. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-56750-462-0
^ Markham, James. (1967) Voices of the Red Giants. Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press.
^ Glasser, Chris & Winkler, Matthew. (2009). International Libel and Privacy Handbook: A Global Reference for Journalists, Publishers, Webmasters, and Lawyers. Bloomberg Press. ISBN 978-1-57660-324-6
^ Troianovski, Anton (June 30, 2010). "China Agency Nears Times Square". The Wall Street Journal. 
^ Lampton, David (2001). The Making of Chinese Foreign and Security Policy in the Era of Reform, 1978–2000: 1978–2000. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4056-2
^ The Economist, "Chinese whispers: Not believing what they read in the papers, China’s leaders commission their own ", June 19, 2010, p. 43.
^ Hong, Junhao 2011: From the World's Largest Propaganda Machine to a Multipurposed Global News Agency: Factors in and Implications of Xinhua's Transformation Since 1978 04 Aug 2011
^ Baidu Baike (2017-10-30). "Regional Headquarters of Xinhua". Retrieved 2017-10-30. 
^ The Long History of United Front Activity in Hong Kong, Hong Kong Journal, Cindy Yik-yi Chu, July 2011
^ 'Poet diplomat' Zhou Nan takes aim at Occupy Central, South China Morning Post, 16 June 2014
^ China's ex-proxy in Hong Kong fired for 'betrayal', UPI, February 22, 1991
^ "Jiang Enzhu on Renaming Xinhua Hong Kong Branch". People's Daily Online. Beijing: Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. January 17, 2000. Retrieved 15 May 2017. 
^ New office building of Xinhua Middle East regional bureau opens in Cairo 2005/11/26
^ Battistella, Gautier (October 2005). "Xinhua News Agency Report" (PDF). RSF – via Reporters Without Borders. 
^ "Xinhua, China's news agency and 'propaganda tool'". http://www.hindustantimes.com/. 2016-07-25. Retrieved 2017-08-17.  External link in |work= (help)
^ Q&A: 'Our credibility is doubted to a certain degree', Times of India, September 28, 2007.
^ Fish, Isaac Stone; Dokoupil, Tony (September 3, 2010). "Is China's Xinhua the Future of Journalism?". Newsweek. Retrieved September 5, 2010. 
^ Quake coverage 'testing China's media credibility', Radio Australia, May 16, 2008
^ Quake Moves Xinhua Past Propaganda, Newser, May 13, 2008
^ China to spend billions to boost media credibility Archived June 3, 2009, at the Wayback Machine., Radio86, March 10, 2009
^ Commentary: Biased Media Reports Reveal Credibility Crisis, Xinhua, March 26, 2008
^ Barboza, David (May 16, 2008). "China: CNN Apologizes Over Tibet Comments". New York Times. 
^ Spencer, Richard (March 28, 2008). "Bias over Tibet cuts both ways". London, England: The Sunday Telegraph. Retrieved September 5, 2010. 
^ Li, Jinquan & Lee, Chin-Chuan. (2000). Power, Money, and Media: Communication Patterns and Bureaucratic Control in Cultural China. p. 298. Northwestern University Press. ISBN 978-0-8101-1787-7
^ "7 Sins of India: China's bizarre video attack over border dispute". NewsComAu. Retrieved 2017-08-17. 
^ "Chinese media mocks India with racist video on Doklam standoff". Retrieved 2017-08-17. 
^ Linder, Alex. "WATCH: Xinhua attacks India with racist propaganda video on Doklam border dispute". Shanghaiist. Retrieved 2017-08-17. 
^ Chandran, Nyshka (2017-08-17). "Chinese media Xinhua mocks Indians and PM Narendra Modi's policies in racist video". Retrieved 2017-08-17. 
^ https://www.cnbc.com/2017/08/17/chinese-media-xinhua-mocks-indians-and-pm-narendra-modis-policies-in-racist-video.html


External links[edit]

Xinhua News in English
Xinhua News (in Chinese)
Archive Repository for Selective Xinhua Arabic News Feeds







v
t
e


News agencies




List of news agencies






Agence France-Presse (Paris)
Reuters (London)
Associated Press (New York)








Agencia Boliviana de Información (La Paz)
Agência Brasil (Brasília)
Agenzia Fides (Vatican City)
Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (Rome)
allAfrica.com (Mauritius)
Anadolu Agency (Ankara)
Austria Press Agency (Vienna)
Asian News International (New Delhi)
Asia News Network (Bangkok)
Athens-Macedonian News Agency (Athens)
Algeria Press Service (Algiers)
Belga (Brussels)
Bloomberg (New York)
Bolpress (La Paz)
CBC (Ottawa)
Catalan News Agency (Barcelona)
Canadian Press (Toronto)
Catholic News Agency (Denver)
Catholic News Service (America)
Central News Agency (Taipei)
Deutsche Presse-Agentur (Hamburg)
EFE (Madrid)
Kenya News Agency (Nairobi)
Kyodo News (Tokyo)
Integrated Regional Information Networks (Nairobi)
Interfax (Moscow)
Inter Press Service (Rome)
Islamic Republic News Agency (Tehran)
MTI (Budapest)
News Agency of Nigeria (Abuja)
Pakistan Television (Islamabad)
PAP (Warsaw)
Lusa (Lisbon)
Maghreb Arabe Press (Rabat)
PanaPress (Dakar)
Press Association (London)
Press Trust of India (Delhi)
RIA Novosti (Moscow)
Swiss Telegraphic Agency (Bern)
TASS (Moscow)
Tanjug (Belgrade)
Télam (Buenos Aires)
Tunis Afrique Presse (Tunis)
United Press International (Washington, DC)
United News of India (New Delhi)
Vietnam News Agency (Hanoi)
Xinhua (Beijing)
Zenit (Rome)
Zee Media Pvt (Mumbai)






European Alliance of News Agencies (Geneva)










v
t
e


 State Council of the People's Republic of China




Incumbent (12th): Li Keqiang Government



State Council (Cabinet)
(Plenary meeting) members




Executive meeting



Premier
Vice Premiers
State Councillors
Secretary-General







Ministers of Ministries and Commissions
Auditor-General








General Office



Secretary-General
Deputy Secretary-General





Cabinet-level departments
constituting the State Council



Agriculture
Audit
Civil Affairs
Commerce
Culture
Development and Reform
Education
Environmental Protection
Ethnic Affairs
Finance
Foreign Affairs
Health and Family Planning
Housing and Urban-Rural Development
Human Resources and Social Security
Industry and Information Technology
Justice
Land and Resources
National Defense
People's Bank
Public Security
Science and Technology
State Security
Supervision
Transport
Water Resources





Special organization



State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council





Organizations



China Food and Drug Administration
China National Tourism Administration
Counselor's Office of the State Council
General Administration of Customs
State Administration of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television
General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine
State Administration of Government Offices
National Bureau of Corruption Prevention
National Bureau of Statistics
State Administration for Industry and Commerce
State Administration for Religious Affairs
State Administration of Taxation
State Administration of Work Safety
State Forestry Administration
State General Administration of Sports
State Intellectual Property Office





Administrative offices



Hong Kong and Macau Affairs
Information
Internet
Legislative Affairs
Overseas Chinese Affairs
Research
Taiwan Affairs

Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits


Anti-cult





Institutions



Academy of Engineering
Academy of Sciences
Academy of Social Sciences
Banking Regulatory Commission
Development Research Center
Earthquake Administration
Insurance Regulatory Commission
Meteorological Administration
National Council for Social Security Fund
National Natural Science Foundation
National School of Administration
Securities Regulatory Commission
State Archives Administration
State Electricity Regulatory Commission
Xinhua News Agency





State administrations/bureaus
administrated by
Cabinet-level agencies



Atomic Energy Authority
Civil Aviation Administration
National Administration for the Protection of State Secrets
National Energy Administration
National Nuclear Safety Administration
National Space Administration
State Administration for Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence
State Administration of Coal Mine Safety
State Administration of Cultural Heritage
State Administration of Foreign Exchange
State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs
State Administration of Grain
State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine
State Bureau for Letters and Calls
State Bureau of Civil Servants
State Bureau of Surveying and Mapping
State Cryptography Administration
State Language Commission
State Oceanic Administration

China Coast Guard


State Post Bureau

China Post


State Tobacco Monopoly Administration

China National Tobacco Corporation







Special Commissions
and Steering Committees



State Commission for Public Sector Reform

Commission Office


Commission on Food Safety
National Energy Commission
National Defense Mobilization Commission
Leading Group for Coordinating the South-North Water Transfer Project
Leading Group for Coordinating the Three Gorges Dam Project
Leading Group for the Transformation of the State Council





Other agencies



Liaison Office in Hong Kong SAR
Liaison Office in Macau SAR
People's Armed Police






State Council is one in the same as the Central People's Government (constitutionally since 1954)







Authority control



ISNI: 0000 0004 1784 7363
GND: 1084057-6








People's Republic of China portal
Journalism portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xinhua_News_Agency&oldid=817245352"					Categories: Xinhua News AgencyHidden categories: CS1 errors: external linksWebarchive template wayback linksUse mdy dates from February 2012Articles containing Chinese-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxCoordinates not on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2014Articles with Chinese-language external linksWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers