
Yale University Press




Parent company
Yale University


Founded
1908


Founder
George Parmly Day


Country of origin
USA


Headquarters location
New Haven, Connecticut


Distribution
TriLiteral (United States)
Self-distributed (international)[1]


Nonfiction topics
Various


Fiction genres
Poetry, Literature in translation


Official website
yalebooks.com






George Parmly Day, founder of the Yale University Press


Yale University Press is a university press associated with Yale University. It was founded in 1908 by George Parmly Day,[2] and became an official department of Yale University in 1961, but it remains financially and operationally autonomous.
As of 2009[update], Yale University Press published approximately 300 new hardcover and 150 new paperback books annually and has more than 6,000 books in print. Its books have won five National Book Awards, two National Book Critics Circle Awards and eight Pulitzer Prizes.[3]
The press co-owns the distributor TriLiteral LLC with MIT Press and Harvard University Press.[4]



Contents


1 Series and publishing programs

1.1 Yale Series of Younger Poets
1.2 Yale Drama Series
1.3 Anchor Yale Bible Series
1.4 Future of American Democracy Series
1.5 The Lamar Series in Western History
1.6 Terry Lectures Series
1.7 Yale Nota Bene


2 Yale Publishing Course
3 Controversies

3.1 Mangling the Typesetting of Mises' "Human Action"
3.2 Muhammad cartoon controversy


4 References
5 External links



Series and publishing programs[edit]




The Yale University Press' original logo, designed by Paul Rand.






This section needs expansion with: Early years. You can help by adding to it. (January 2011)



Yale Series of Younger Poets[edit]
Main article: Yale Series of Younger Poets Competition
Since its inception in 1919, the Yale Series of Younger Poets Competition has published the first collection of poetry by new poets. The first winner was Howard Buck; the 2011 winner was Katherine Larson.
Yale Drama Series[edit]
Yale University Press and Yale Repertory Theatre jointly sponsor the Yale Drama Series, a playwriting competition. The winner of the annual competition is awarded the David C. Horn Prize of $10,000, publication of his/her manuscript by Yale University Press, and a staged reading at Yale Rep. The Yale Drama Series and David C. Horn Prize are funded by the David Charles Horn Foundation.[5]
Anchor Yale Bible Series[edit]
In 2007, Yale University Press acquired the Anchor Bible Series, a collection of more than 115 volumes of biblical scholarship, from the Doubleday Publishing Group.[6] New and backlist titles are now published under the Anchor Yale Bible Series name.
Future of American Democracy Series[edit]
Yale University Press is publishing the Future of American Democracy Series,[7] which "aims to examine, sustain, and renew the historic vision of American democracy in a series of books by some of America's foremost thinkers", in partnership with the Future of American Democracy Foundation.[8]
The Lamar Series in Western History[edit]
The Lamar Series in Western History (formerly the Yale Western Americana series)[9] was established in 1962 to publish works that enhance the understanding of human affairs in the American West and contribute to a wider understanding of why the West matters in the political, social, and cultural life of America.[10]
Terry Lectures Series[edit]
The Dwight H. Terry Lectureship was established in 1905 to encourage the consideration of religion in the context of modern science, psychology, and philosophy. Many of the lectures, which are hosted by Yale University, have been edited into book form by the Yale University Press.
Yale Nota Bene[edit]
On September 22, 2000, Yale University Press announced a new Yale Nota Bene imprint that would "feature reprints of best-selling and classic Yale Press titles encompassing works of history, religion, science, current affairs, reference and biography, in addition to fiction, poetry and drama."[11]
Yale Publishing Course[edit]
The Yale Publishing Course was founded in 2010 by former Publishing Director of the Yale University Press, Tina C. Weiner. It filled the gap created by the closing of the legendary Stanford Publishing Course. It operates under the aegis of the Office of International Affairs of Yale University.
The Course trains mid to senior-level publishing professionals to tackle the most compelling issues facing the publishing industry and concentrates on building leadership skills. The curriculum focuses on in-depth analyses of global trends, innovative business models, management strategies, and new advances in technology. Its immersive week-long programs, one devoted to book publishing and the other to magazine and digital publishing, combine lectures, discussion groups, and one-on-one counseling sessions. The faculty is made up of leading industry experts and members of the Yale School of Management, the Yale Library, and the Yale University Press.
Participants come from all over the world and represent all areas of publishing within organizations of all sizes and types of publications.
Controversies[edit]
Mangling the Typesetting of Mises' "Human Action"[edit]
In 1963, the Press published a revised edition of Ludwig von Mises's "Human Action". In the May 5, 1964 issue of National Review, Henry Hazlitt wrote the story "Mangling a Masterpiece", accusing Yale University Press of intentionally typesetting the new edition in an amateurish fashion, due to the Press's differing ideological beliefs.[12][13]
Muhammad cartoon controversy[edit]
In August, 2009, officials at the Press ignited a controversy when they decided to expunge reproductions of the cartoons involved in the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy, along with all other images of Muhammad, from a scholarly book entitled The Cartoons that Shook the World, by professor Jytte Klausen.[14]
References[edit]


^ Contact Us
^ Bradley, George (1998). "Introduction". The Yale Younger Poets Anthology. New Haven and London. p. 24. 
^ "Donatich Appointed New Director of Yale University Press". Press release. Yale University. December 11, 2002. Retrieved 2011-01-25. 
^ TriLiteral
^ Yale Drama Series: Prize for Emerging Playwrights from the Yale University Press website
^ "Yale University Press Acquires Anchor Bible Series from Doubleday". Yale Books Unbound. Yale University Press. 2007-09-25. Retrieved 2017-01-24. 
^ The Future of American Democracy Series from the Yale University Press official website
^ Official website of the Future of American Democracy Foundation
^ Basbanes, Nicholas A. A World of Letters: Yale University Press, 1908-2008, New Haven and London, 2008. p. 222, Centennial Highlights
^ The Lamar Series in Western History from the Yale University Press official website
^ "Yale Press launches new imprint with 'global bookstore appeal'". Yale Bulletin and Calendar. Yale University Press. 29 (3). September 22, 2000. 
^ ""Mangling a Masterpiece" by Henry Hazlitt, National Review, Tuesday, May 5th, 1964". UNZ.org. 
^ GaryNorth.com (2 May 2013). "Publishing Atrocity: The 1963 Edition of Human Action". 
^ Patricia Cohen (August 13, 2009). "Yale Press Bans Images of Muhammad in New Book". The New York Times. 


External links[edit]


Wikisource has original works published by or about:
Yale University Press



Official website
Yale University Press, London
Yale Publishing Course, New Haven, Connecticut







v
t
e


Yale University



People



Namesake: Elihu Yale
President: Peter Salovey (predecessors)
Provost: Ben Polak
Faculty
Sterling Professors
People list








Schools



Undergraduate: Yale College
Graduate: Graduate School of Arts & Sciences
Professional: Architecture
Art
Divinity
Drama
Engineering & Applied Science
Forestry & Environmental Studies
Law
Management
Medicine
Music
Nursing
Public Health
Institute of Sacred Music
Defunct: Sheffield Scientific School





Campus



Connecticut Hall
Old Campus
Memorial Quadrangle
Harkness Tower
Hewitt Quadrangle
Hillhouse Avenue
Science Hill
Yale-Myers Forest
Horchow Hall
Steinbach Hall
Edward P. Evans Hall





Residential colleges



Berkeley
Branford
Davenport
Ezra Stiles
Jonathan Edwards
Franklin
Hopper (formerly Calhoun)
Morse
Pauli Murray
Pierson
Saybrook
Silliman
Timothy Dwight
Trumbull





Library and museums



Yale University Library
Sterling Memorial Library
Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library
Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library
Lillian Goldman Law Library
Bass Library
Lewis Walpole Library
Peabody Museum of Natural History
Yale University Art Gallery
Yale Center for British Art
Collection of Musical Instruments





Research centers



Child Study Center
Cowles Foundation
Haskins Laboratories
Human Relations Area Files
MacMillan Center
Rudd Center
Yale Cancer Center





Athletics



Team: Yale Bulldogs
Mascot: Handsome Dan
Arenas: Yale Bowl (football)
Ingalls Rink (hockey)
Yale Golf Course
Yale Field (baseball)
Reese Stadium (soccer and lacrosse)
Payne Whitney Gymnasium
Rivalries: Harvard–Yale Regatta
Harvard–Yale football rivalry





International



Gruber Foundation
Jackson Institute for Global Affairs
Yale World Fellows
Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art
Yale-NUS College





Related



In popular culture






 Category  •   Commons  •   Wikinews







Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 121971897
LCCN: n92085293
ISNI: 0000 0001 0679 2262
GND: 5262965-X
SUDOC: 131202251
BNF: cb161892298 (data)
BIBSYS: 9045953
NLA: 47601606
NKC: kn20100329014
CiNii: DA14323744











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yale_University_Press&oldid=800701030"					Categories: Visual arts publishing companiesBook publishing companies based in ConnecticutPublishing companies established in 1908Yale University Press booksUniversity presses of the United StatesYale University1908 establishments in ConnecticutHidden categories: Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2009All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles to be expanded from January 2011All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers